GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has moved this Court for issuance of a writ of prohibition to the respondents from prematurely retiring him from the government service.
A prayer has also been made that record of the case be summoned and after perusing the same the order of premature retirement be quashed.
2.
The facts as unfolded in the petition, briefly are :-  The petitioner was appointed as a clerk in the Punjab Labour Department in the year 1956; he was promoted as Labour Inspector Grade II on ad hoc basis on January 25, 1974; he was promoted as Labour Inspector Grade II on regular basis on March 21, 1975; he was allowed to cross efficiency bar with effect from January 1, 1977 vide order dated October 6, 1980; he was conveyed adverse remarks in 1973-74 and imposed major punishment of 'Censure' in 1981; that in the succeeding year 1982, he was promoted Labour Inspector Grade I; he was promoted Labour Inspector Grade I on regular basis vide order dated July 15, 1988.
He was to superannuate on March 31, 1993 on attaining the age of 58 years.
He has come to know that order of his premature retirement has been issued by respondent No. 1.
He has questioned the validity of order of his premature retirement on the ground that it was issued in violation of the law laid down by the apex Court in Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 1948.
3.
The respondent filed written statement and stated thus :-  The petitioner was promoted as head clerk in March 1969 on the basis of seniority-cum-merit but he represented that he be promoted as Shop Inspector (now re-designated as Labour Inspector Grade-II).
The post of Head Clerk carried a higher scale of pay than that of the Shop Inspector.
He was promoted as Shop Inspector but was barred from promotion in the ministerial cadre permanently.
While working as Shop Inspector, the petitioner committed certain irregularities like making of wrong entries in certain cheques which delayed the payment of salary to the workers.
In 1974, he misused the money advanced to him for the purchase of a scooter and produced fictitious receipt.
He was proceeded against for this lapse and punishment of 'Censure' was awarded.
He was caught red-handed, while accepting bribe, by the Vigilance Inspector and was placed under suspension on August 22, 1977.
He remained under suspension till February 28, 1980.
He again remained suspended from November 6, 1980 to April 3, 1981.
While posted as Shop Inspector at Mansa, District Bhatinda, complaints were received against him for extracting money from the shopkeepers by coercive mothods.
He was proceeded against departmentally for charges of corruption and the proceedings culminated in his conduct being 'Censured'.
The Labour Commissioner, Punjab did not consider him fit for promotion as Labour Inspector Grade I and did not recommend him for promotion as such even on ad hoc basis.
The secretariat office and the then Secretary, Labour and Employment also did not recommend his promotion but the then Labour Minister, Punjab, disagreeing with the recommendations of the Labour Commissioner and Secretary, Labour and Employment, ordered his promotion as Inspector Grade I The then Secretary, Labour and Employment ventured to discuss the case with the Minister and pleaded against the promotion of the petitioner but the Minister did not agree to alter his decision and thereafter orders of promotion of the petitioner as Labour Inspector Grade I on ad hoc basis were issued.
Adverse remarks were recorded in the Annual Report of the petitioner for the year 1973-74.
The punishment of 'Censure' was again awarded to him in September, 1981 for harassing the shopkeepers, at every station where he was posted, who would not grease his palm.
It is, however, admitted that he was promoted as Labour Inspector Grade I, vide order dated July 15, 1988 and the order was issued since he was serving on ad hoc basis.
The order of pre-mature retirement was passed on March 7, 1990 and was issued on March 13, 1990 and was served upon the petitioner on March 14, 1990.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that if service record of the petitioner for the past five years is taken into consideration it will transpire that the order of pre-mature retirement was unjustified.
I summoned the service record of the petitioner to satisfy myself that the order of pre-mature retirement was issued after taking into consideration the relevant material.
The necessity to summon the record arose because it was submitted at the bar that after the punishment of 'Censure' was awarded to the petition vide letter dated September 29, 1981 he was promoted as Labour Inspector Grade I on ad hoc basis and thereafter as Labour Inspector Grade I on regular basis.
Since he was found fit for promotion on ad hoc basis and thereafter on regular basis ignoring the punishment awarded to him, the punishment could be taken into consideration for ordering pre-mature retirement.
The case of the petitioner for promotion as Labour Inspector Grade I was taken into consideration in 1982 along with others and he was not found fit for promotion and the following note was appended on his personal file :-  "O.P. Mahajan : He is BA and had been working as Labour Inspector Grade II since 26.1.74.
He was twice suspended in connection with corruption charges.
Once he was caught red-handed while accepting bribe on 22.8.1977 and remained under suspension.
On acquittal by the Court he was reinstated on 22.2.1980 and was posted at Mansa.
He was transferred to Ludhiana in June, 1980 and was placed under suspension on 6.11.80 in connection with corruption charges relating to Mansa.
On reinstatement, he was shifted from Ludhiana on the basis of complaints.
He was censured for misutilisation of scooter advance in the year 1978 and again in the year 1981, on account of his general reputation.
In view of LC he is not fit for promotion.
The summary of the ACR of Shri OP Mahajan may kindly be seen at flag 'G'.
From the persual of his ACR, it is evident that every Reporting Officer had recommended his promotion in an ordinary/routine way."
5.
The note was approved by the Labour Commissioner and Secretary of the Department.
But the Labour Minister desired that the petitioner be promoted.
Strong exception was taken by the Department and the Secretary of the Department attempted to persuade the Minister not to insist upon the promotion of the petitioner.
The petitioner was, however, promoted on ad hoc basis and the Labour Commissioner was asked to keep a watch on his work and conduct in view of his earlier doubtful integrity.
The Labour Commissioner represented to the Government to reconsider the decision to promote the petitioner but the respondent advised him to implement the orders passed by the Government in this behalf.
The case was again reconsidered by respondent No. 1 on the representation of one Mr. Sood who sought promotion on ad hoc basis on the precedence of the petitioner and Shri Inder Singh.
On the representation, the following note was appended by the Secretary on November 16, 1982 :-  "It will not be desirable to take a final decision to promote Sood in view of his record.
LC has in Mahajan's case already objected to our decision but since the decision had been taken, it had to be implemented.
We may await for the ACR of Sood for the year 1982-83 from Labour Commissioner and take up the case in April/May, 1983."
6.
Despite this note by the Secretary of the Department the Minister, Labour and Welfare promoted Mr. Sood and his enquiry file ordered to be consigned.
The facts unfolded from the file indicate that the promotion of the petitioner was ordered by Minister despite opposition by the department.
The petitioner was to complete 55 years of age on March 3, 1990.
His case was processed in the department whether to allow him to continue in service after the age of 55 years.
The Secretary of the Department keeping in view the service record of the petitioner passed following order on March 7, 1990 :-  "In pursuance of the provisions of Rule 3(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, the President of India is pleased to retire Shri OP Mahajan, Labour Inspector Grade-I (Rural) Ludhiana, prematurely on attaining the age of 55 years in public interest with immediate effect."
7.
On the basis of this order, order of premature retirement of the petitioner was issued on the same day, the order is issued in exercise of power under Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 (for short, the Rules).
The rule does not lay down any criteria, guidelines for the exercise of power, although public interest is specified in the rule, which means power has to be exercised in the public interest only.
The public interest in relation to public administration envisages retention of honest and efficient employees in service and dispense with the services of those who are inefficient, dead-wood, corrupt or dishonest.
The State Government issued a Government order on September 26, 1975 laying down the guidelines and the procedure necessary to be followed in exercising power under Rule 3 of the Rules.
The order stated that the competent authority will form an opinion for premature retirement of a Government employee by scrutinising of his confidential reports and by taking into consideration any other substantial material.
The Government issued another order on August 4, 1978 pointing out that while exercising power under Rule 3 the service of an employee as a whole determine the merit of each case but if there was a single entry describing the employee concerned as a person of doubtful integrity, that would justify the premature retirement under the Rules.
The executive instructions contained in these two Government orders provide sufficient guidance for the exercise of power under Rule 3.
These instructions provide that the service record of an employee has to be considered while taking decision for the premature retirement of an employee and if there was a single entry casting doubt on the integrity of an employee, the pre-mature retirement of such an employee would be in public interest.
It was laid down in Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1987 SC 948 that the instructions issued as contained in the aforesaid government orders have binding character.
Rule 3 of the Rules reads thus :-  "3.
The primary anxiety of the government, in the interest of administrative efficiency is to ensure that dead-wood, or more precisely, the inefficient and the corrupt elements should be weeded out from the services.
It is with this end in view that absolute right to retire a Government employee prematurely has been acquired through the Rules notified on 28th July, 1975."
8.
The rule gives absolute right to the appropriate authority to retire an employee prematurely on his completion of 25 years of qualifying service or 50 years of age.
The purpose and object of premature or compulsory retirement of a government employee is to weed out the inefficient, corrupt or dead-wood from the Government service.
The right of the Government is well established which is general exercise in accordance with rule.
The appropriate authority after taking into consideration the executive instructions as contained in the orders dated September 26, 1975 and August 4, 1978 issued the order of premature retirement dated March 7, 1990.
It took note of the fact that in the last 10 years the petitioner's service record contained an entry regarding his doubtful integrity and for that lapse he was awarded punishment of 'Censure'.
Subsequent promotion of the petitioner does not wash off the past adverse entry in his service record where he was awarded the punishment of 'Cesure'.
The English translation of the said order dated 25.9.81 reads thus :  "While posted at Mansa there were allegations against you that you take bribe from the shop-keepers.
Those shopkeepers who did not grease your palm were falsely challaned.
Such allegations of corruption were against you wherever you remained posted.
You were given an opportunity to clarify your position and personal hearing was also given to you.
You could not prove yourself innocent and as such you are hereby awarded the punishment of Censure.
You are also advised to discharge your duties in future properly.
A copy of this order is being kept in your A.C.R.
file."
9.
The order of compulsory retirement was absolutely justified on the proved and admitted facts on record.
The same is upheld.
It will be relevant to mention here that after the order of compulsory retirement was passed by the competent authority, the petitioner got the matter reopened by extraneous pressure.
The matter was again examined on various levels by the Government and ultimately the Governor approved the order of compulsory retirement.
However, I have not given the details how the matter was got reopened.
10.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition is devoid of any merit and is dismissed.
It is a fit case where exemplary costs should be imposed on the petitioner.
However, since he is out of job, I refrain from passing any order with regards to costs.
Petition dismissed.