MF Saldanha, J - Petitioner No. 2 in this case is the Director of M/s Militant Security Bureau Pvt Ltd., which is a Company and which is the Petitioner No. 1 herein.
Respondent No. 1, who is a Government Labour Officer and Inspector under the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, instituted a prosecution against the petitioners in the Court of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Court No. 13, Dadar Bombay, being Case No. 489/SL/1986, alleging infringement of the various provisions of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 and the rules framed thereunder.
Admittedly, the petitioners were the contractors of the Executive Engineer, South Bombay Electric Division, Public Works Department, and were required to contract for the services of liftmen in various Government buildings.
The petitioners have, both in the petition as also in the annexures thereto, set out a list of the buildings and the number of employees that are supplied to each of them.
From this it is evident that on an average one or two or at the most three employees are being provided for by the petitioners at these buildings for the purpose of manning the lifts.
The Respondents, obviously without examining the facts of the case, straightway proceeded to file the compliant before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate against the petitioners on the assumption that the provisions of the Act are applicable to them.
2.
On behalf of the Petitioners, Miss Raut, the learned Advocate, has submitted that the institution of the prosecution is unjustified and that the proceedings will have to be quashed because the provisions of the Act are not applicable to the case of the present Petitioner.
It is undisputed that under section 1(4) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, it has been clarified that the Act shall apply to every establishment in which twenty or more workmen are employed.
Section 2(e) of the Act defines the term "establishment".
It is clear from that definition that the deployment of personnel at the buildings which are under the control and maintenance of the State Public Works Department would not bring them within the ambit and definition of the term "establishment".
Under these circumstances, there can be no dispute with regard to the correctness of the submission advanced by the learned Advocate that the provisions of this Act do not apply to the present Petitioners.
3.
It was sought to be argued on behalf of the Respondents that the bifurcation done by the Petitioners to the effect that the number of employees in each building should not be separately computed, but the entire cluster of buildings should be treated as one; and, furthermore, that the Public Works Department being the Department of the State Government, the buildings in question would come within the definition of Section 2(e) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, which defines the term "establishment".
It is not possible to uphold either of these contentions because admittedly each of the buildings is situated at a different geographic location in the city and it is not as though that they are interconnected to form one cluster or one colony.
Secondly, the employees manning the lifts in those buildings cannot by any stretch of imagination, come within the definition of "establishment" as contemplated under Section 2(e) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act.
The exercise of prosecuting the present Petitioners on the ground that they have committed various breaches of the provisions of the Act is, therefore, unjustified.
4.
The second ground of challenge advanced by Miss Raut on behalf of the petitioners is to the effect that the charge against the Petitioners relating to non-registration is also unsustainable.
As rightly pointed out by the learned advocate, the averments in the Petition and the correspondence annexed to the Petition clearly establish the undisputed position that the principal employer in this case is the Executive Engineer and that the petitioners are only the contractors.
It is also brought on record that the petitioner did apply to the Executive Engineer for grant of the requisite certificate without which it is not permissible for them to apply for registration and that the Executive Engineer himself contended, and to my mind rightly, that the provisions of the Act did not apply and, consequently, the question of issuing such a certificate did not arise.
In this view of the matter, to blame the present Petitioners and, furthermore, to prosecute them is something that cannot be sanctioned.
5.
In the light of the above position since the provisions of the Act do not apply to the Petitioners, the criminal proceedings instituted against them before the trial Court are liable to be quashed.
Accordingly, Criminal Case No. 489/SL/1986, pending before the Court of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Court No. 13, Dadar, Bombay, is quashed.
The rule is made absolute in terms of prayer (a).
The interim orders to stand vacated.
Order accordingly.