RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The Petitioner was appointed as a regular J.BT teacher with effect from 21st August, 1967 in the Education Department of the Punjab Government.
During his service in the Education Department, he had obtained BA, BEd.
degree from the Kameshwar Singh Darbhanga Sanskrit University, in Darbhanga on August 25, 1971, which according to the averments made in the petition is a recognized degree by the state of Haryana equivalent to BT/BEd.
2.
The petitioner is claiming higher scale of pay on the basis of the acquisition of higher qualification during the service on the basis of instructions which have been the subject matter of judicial consideration by this Court.
The Full Bench of this Court in Bhagwan Dutt Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and another (I.L.R.
1988(2) Pun Punjab & Haryana 246) held, "that the teachers acquired the BT or BEd.
qualification would be entitled to the higher scale of pay as soon as they acquired the qualification irrespective of the dates when they were adjusted against the post of Masters.
The adjustment against the posts of Masters was relevant only for the purpose of seniority in the posts of Masters and for further promotion from that post.
So far as the scale of pay was concerned, irrespective of adjustment against the post of Master, a teacher was always held to be entitled to the Higher scale of pay from the date of acquisition of the BT or BEd.
qualification."
The judgment of the Full Bench was in fact based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal and others v. State of Haryana (AIR 1987 SC 1621).
3.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, his case is fully covered by the dictum of the Supreme Court and the Full Bench of this Court referred to above.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents could not successfully distinguish the facts of this case from the facts of the case before the Full Bench.
5.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is held entitled to the revised scale of pay with effect from the date he acquired the BEd.
qualifications.
However, the arrears of the revised scale of pay would be restricted to three years and two months prior to the date of filing of the writ petition.
The arrears be calculated and paid to the petitioner within a period of four months from the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.