RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed to the post of Matron in the Central Jail, Patiala, on ad hoc basis from 17th April, 1983 to 4th August, 1983 and again from 5th November, 1983 to 30th November, 1983.
The petitioner was again appointed as such on 18th July, 1986, for 89 days and this appointment was being extended from time to time till 31st October, 1988, when her services were dispensed with by the Inspector General of Prisons, Punjab, Chandigarh (respondent No. 2).
The copy of the order has been appended as Annexure P-3.
It has been further averred in the petition that though the appointment of the petitioner was on ad hoc basis, yet it was against a regular vacancy and there are number of posts of Matrons still available.
This fact was sought to be substantiated from advertisement for the posts of 31 Matrons in the Punjabi Daily Ajit.
The petitioner is said to have made a representation on 4th November, 1988 to the respondents bringing the above-mentioned facts to their notice, wherein she also mentioned that she was Middle pass and belonged to Balmiki Community, which has been notified as Scheduled Caste.
2.
The petitioner impugned the action of the respondents terminating her services on 31st October, 1988 (Annexure P-3), when she had completed more than two years' of service.
She claimed regularisation in view of the judgment of this Court in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana.
1988(4) S.L.R.
739.
The respondents in their reply to the writ petition, had taken the stand that vide letter dated 14th February, 1989, the Government of Punjab in the Department of Home Affairs and Justice (Jail Branch) had approved the qualifications etc. as suggested by the Inspector General of Prisons vide his letter dated 6th January, 1989 and the educational qualifications were Matric/Higher Secondary Part I and since the petitioner was under-Matriculate, she could not be regularised.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in fact the qualifications of Matriculation for the post of Matron were laid down on 14th February, 1989 by the State Government, whereas petitioner's services had been terminated on 31st October, 1988.
For regularising the petitioner, her qualifications had to be seen on the date when her services were sought to be terminated and not the qualifications which were laid down after that date.
The learned counsel further submitted that in any case once the petitioner had worked for a pretty long time as a Matron, though on ad hoc basis, she had gained sufficient experience and even if she was lacking the minimum qualifications at the time of initial entry into the service, it would be illegal not to regularise her on the ground that she did not have the requisite qualifications.
For this proposition, he relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 371.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under in para 6 of the report :-  "The main controversy centres round the question whether some petitioners are possessed of the requisite qualifications to hold the posts so as to entitle them to be confirmed in the respective posts held by them.
The indisputable facts are that the petitioners were appointed between the period 1983 and 1986 and ever since, they have been working and have gained sufficient experience in the actual discharge of duties attached to the posts held by them.
Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitiability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
In our view, three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the respondent, in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
4.
There is force in both the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The qualifications of Matriculation for the post of Matron were laid down on 14th February, 1989.
These qualifications could not have been applied in the case of the petitioner, when her services were terminated on 31st October, 1988.
Admittedly, on that date, she had the requisite qualifications and had completed more than two years of service.
On that date, the regular post of Matron was also available.
Consequently, she was entitled to be regularised in view of Piara Singh's case (supra).
The qualifications, which were prescribed later than 31st October, 1988, could not have been made applicable in the case of the petitioner.
Even otherwise in view of the dictum of the Apex Court in Bhagwati Prasad's case (supra), even if a person lacks the requisite qualifications at the time of entry into service, but has been allowed to continue in service, cannot be denied regularisation/confirmation on the ground that the individual lacks the requisite qualifications.
Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure test to judge the suitability.
It has not been suggested in the written statement that there was anything wrong with the work and conduct of the petitioner.
The learned counsel for the respondents could not raise any meaningful argument to counter the contentions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed, order Annexure P-3 is quashed and it is held that the petitioner is entitled to be regularised from the date her services were terminated.
This would entitle her to all the benefits flowing from the regularisation of service.
However, the petitioner's counsel submits that the petitioner would forgo half of the arrears of salary if the balance half is paid within one month from the date of receipt of this order by the respondents.
I order accordingly.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.