PLN Sarma, J - The point that arises in this writ petition is short but very interesting and both the learned counsel admitted that it is bereft of authority.
2.
This writ petition is filed to quash the decision of the second respondent herein dated 7121987 which was communicated by the third respondent in his letter dated 30.12.1987 that the petitioner has not completed the qualifying service for being eligible to be considered for promotion and for a consequential direction declaring the petitioner that he is eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer by 1121987.
3.
The relevant facts are as follows : The petitioner joined the services of the first respondent as Assistant on 17.2.1958 and reported to duty on 2821958.
He successfully completed the probation period of six months by 2881958.
Subsequently, he was promoted as section head by an order dated 2091977 after going through the interview etc., in accordance with the rules.
He was posted as section head to Hanumakonda Branch Office in Warangal District.
He reported to duty on 3091977 and worked at the said place till 221978.
4.
It is stated in the affidavit that at Hanumakonda, his health deteriorated and on medical check-up, it was found that his liver was enlarged and developed esenophila, amebiasis and he was put under medical treatment On 29121977 he made a representation to the third respondent stating all the above facts and requested for a transfer to the Divisional Office, Hyderabad as section head.
The transfer was sought on the ground that he will have better medical facilities.
The third respondent in his proceedings dated 3011978 informed the petitioner that it is not possible to accept his request for transfer to Hyderabad as section head.
Alternatively, the petitioner requested that if his transfer is not possible as section head from Hanumakonda to Hyderabad, for posting as an Assistant on reversion.
The respondent had no objection and on 321978 the petitioner was posted as Assistant in Personnel and Establishment Department in the Zonal Office at Hyderabad.
On the same date, he reported to duty as Assistant in the said Department.
In the meanwhile, several call letters were sent to the petitioner for promotion to the post of section head.
Though, as per the counter, he was promoted as section head and posted to Bidar and other places, he did not accept the same.
Ultimately on 1211982 the petitioner was interviewed and promoted to the post of section head by a letter dated 221982 and posted to District Branch Office, Hyderabad where he took charge on 2521982.
He was confirmed as section head with effect from 2521982.
The respondents issued a notification inviting applications for consideration of promotion to the cadre of Assistant Administrative Officer.
The next part of promotion for section head is the Assistant Administrative Officer.
Pursuant to the notification inviting applications for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer, the petitioner applied for the same on 7121987.
He was informed that his date of promotion to the post of section head being 2521982, he was not eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer as he had not put in minimum qualifying service of six years in the category of section head.
The petitioner preferred an appeal to the first respondent against he said action of the third respondent.
In his appeal, the petitioner stated that he had put in service as section head for six years one month and eight days, which includes the service rendered in the post of section head from 3091977 to 221978 and from 2521982 to 1121987.
The appeal was rejected on the ground that the qualifying service of 'six' years must be continuous service.
The authorities stated that the petitioner does not possess six years of continuous service.
Therefore, he is not eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer.
Questioning the said action, this writ petition is filed contending that if the service rendered by him as section head from 3091977 to 221978 is also taken into consideration and tagged on to the service rendered by him a section head from 2521982 to 1121987, he will have the requisite qualifying service of six years and therefore, he is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer.
5.
The point that has to be considered now is whether the petitioner is entitled to tag on the service rendered by him as section head from 3091977 to 221978 to the service rendered from 2521982 to 1121987.
In other words, six years' qualifying service mentioned in the rule is a continuous service or service rendered with break also can be taken into consideration.
6.
For appreciating this point, we have to see the relevant rules of L.I.C.
of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960 to find out the eligibility for promotion to the cadre of Assistant Administrative Officer.
In this connection, it is necessary to refer to L.I.C.
of India Class 3 and 4 (Employees Promotion) Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
The schedule to the aforesaid Rules is as follows :  THE SCHEDULE (See Rules 2(c), 5, 6 and 7) Conditions of Eligibility for Promotion to various cadres Sl.
No. For Promotion to cadre of Categories eligible Conditions of eligibility Marks to be allotted 1 2 3 4  1.
Assistant Administrative Officer.
(a)(i) Superintendents.
(a) x x x or (a) Qualification and seniority (ii) Higher Grade Assistants x x x (maximum of 10 marks for qualification and 20 marks for seniority).
(iii) Section Heads 6 years' service in the scale of Section Head Or Maximum for both -25 x x x Work record - 25 Interview - 25 The word 'service' occurring in 'the Rules' is not defined.
However, Rule 2(h) of the said 'Rules' is as follows :  "All other words and expressions used in these rules and not defined but defined in the Staff Regulations shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Staff regulations."
Therefore, we have to the definition of 'Service' contained in the L.I.C.
of India Staff Regulations, 1960.
Regulation 3(j) defines 'service' which is as follows :  "Service shall include the period spent on duty as well as leave including extraordinary leave."
7.
Therefore, qualifying service for being eligible to be considered for promotion from the post of Section Head to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer is said to be six years' service in the category of Section Head.
Service is defined as including the period spent on duty as well as leave including extraordinary leave.
Therefore, service includes period spent on duty as well as leave including extraordinary leave.
If a person spent the period on duty or on leave for a period of six years, he will be satisfying the qualifying service for being eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer.
The rule does not say that the service of six years should be a continuous service.
8.
The contention of Sri YL Suryanarayana, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the qualifying service is only for the purposes of experience and it cannot be said that the petitioner has not gained experience during the first period of promotion from 3091977 to 221978.
Therefore, that period also must be reckoned along with the period between 2521982 to 1121987 for the purpose of qualifying service of six years.
The earned counsel for the petitioner further submits that if the rules is read as 'continuous service' it will be reading words into the rule which are not there and it is not permissible for Court to do so in law.
9.
On the other hand, Sri JV Suryanarayana Rao, learned counsel for the respondent contended that the 'service' means 'continuous service.'
10.
In Service Jurisprudence, the basis for qualifying service is experience.
The relevant provision extracted above indicated that service includes period spent on duty as well as leave including extraordinary leave is taken as service.
The emphasis is not even on duty.
Therefore, where one person is on duty or on leave, he is deemed to be in service.
The entire emphasis while considering the qualifying service is on the experience gained in the said post.
A person who is on duty gains experience; it is not possible to hold that gaining experiences should also be continuous.
(Vide State of M.P. v. Laxmishanker, AIR 1979 SC 979).
It cannot be said that the petitioner has not gained experience when he worked as Section Head between 3091977 to 221978.
As stated earlier, in making promotion to a higher post, it is the experience of the person concerned which is material.
It is not possible to say that the petitioner has not gained experience during the earlier period.
Six years service is not further qualified by the word "continuous".
Therefore, in my opinion, on a construction of the rule and the regulation, extracted above, the period spent on duty need not necessarily be continuous.
We arrive at the same conclusion by the interpretation of the rule as well.
The words contained in the rule are clear, plain, and unambiguous.
When the words of the rule are precise and unambiguous, then no more can be necessary than to expound those words in their natural and ordinary sense.
The words themselves do alone in such cases best declare the intent of the law giver.
If we were to interpret the rule as saying that it is continuous service of six years, then it will amount to adding words which are not there in the rule.
This Court is bound to accept the expressed intention of the legislature and give effect to the same.
It is well settled that it is contrary to all rules of construction to read words into an Act unless it is absolutely necessary to do so.
If we were to construe six years' service as "six years continuous service; we will be reframing the legislation for which the Court has no power.
It is not for the Court to reframe the legislation for the very good reason that the powers to 'legislate' have not been conferred on the Court.
(Vide State of Kerala v. Methai Verghese, AIR 1987 SC 33 : 1987(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 520).
Therefore, in my opinion for computing six years service (qualifying service) for being eligible to be considered for promotion from the post of Section Head to Assistant Administrative Officer, the petitioner is entitled to tag on the service rendered by him in the said post from 3091977 to 221978 to the period from 2521982 to 1121987.
Qualifying service of six years contemplated by the rule need not be continuous.
The petitioner is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant.
Administrative Officer by 1121987.
Therefore, not considering his application pursuant to the notification dated 7121987 inviting applications for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer is wholly unsustainable.
11.
Sri JV Suryanarayana Rao, learned counsel for the respondents contended that this is not a case where I should interpret the rule as the petitioner himself requested for demotion and sought for transfer and therefore, should be treated to have given up his service from 30-9.1977 to 2.2.78 as section head.
The learned counsel also contended that when the probation is declared without taking into consideration the earlier period, the petitioner did not protest.
He had an opportunity to protest, but he did not do so.
Therefore, he cannot claim now the benefit after seven years.
Both the submissions, according to me, are baseless.
It is true that he requested for demotion.
But that does not mean that he had given up the service rendered between 3091977 to 221978.
No documentary evidence is placed before me to show that he gave up the benefit of service rendered by him as section head between 3091977 to 221978.
The probation of the petitioner in the post of section bead was declared after his second promotion on 25.8.1982.
But that has nothing to do with reckoning the qualifying service for eligibility to be considered for promotion.
It is only when his application submitted pursuant to the notification dated 7121987, for promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer was rejected, he became aggrieved.
The cause of action arose only in December, 1987 when his application was not considered and his appeal was also rejected by the second respondent.
Therefore, there is no delay whatsoever in filing the writ petition or in agitating his right.
I am not inclined to accept the submission made by the learned counsel for the respondents.
12.
On the fact and circumstances arising in this case, I have already held that the service rendered prior to the break between 3091977 to 221978 should be taken into consideration for the purpose of counting the qualifying service.
I am not, in this case, considering the breaks that occur due to variety of reasons under the service laws.
This should not be construed as laying down that every service tendered between the breaks should be counted for the purpose of qualifying service.
In view of the fact that the petitioner, on his own request, was reverted to the lower post and that he never gave up the service rendered prior to 321978.
I have held that the said service also should be counted for the purpose of determining the qualifying service for being considered for promotion to the next higher post.
I am not also considering in this case whether the said service can be counted for any other purpose.
13.
Not it is stated across the Bar that the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Administrative Officer in the year 1989 after he had put in a continuous period of six years of service with effect from 2521982.
In view of what is stated in the foregoing paragraphs, the petitioner became eligible for being considered for promotion to the cadre of Assistant Administrative Officer by 1121987.
He was not considered only because of the fact that the eligibility Rule was misconstrued by the respondents.
14.
For all the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.