VK Bali, J - The petitioner claims that the promotion of eight Patwaris vide order dated 3rd August, 1981, which excluded him for promotion for the post of Kanungo, is totally vitiated.
The case of the petitioner is that the respondents had reserved five vacancies of Kanungos to be filled up from the Patwaris belonging to the Scheduled Castes working in the district and out of eight Patwaris promoted vide order dated 3rd August, 1981, only respondents No. 3 and 4 were junior to him and, therefore, they could not be promoted in preference to the petitioner who also belongs to the category of Scheduled Caste and was admittedly senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
He has even gone to the extent of saying that while making promotion, as mentioned above, his case was not considered.
The action of the respondents in not promoting him and instead promoting the juniors is styled by him to be wholly illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The respondents while opposing the claim of the petitioner have relied upon the record of the petitioner which has been categorised as unsatisfactory.
Although it is admitted that the petitioner was senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 and that he belonged to the category of Scheduled Castes but his case was considered for promotion and he was ignored on account of the fact that his record was highly unsatisfactory and that he had adverse entries recorded against him, some of which were also on account of corruption.
He was given warnings and censures.
The respondents also relied upon Rule 9(2) of the Punjab Kanungo Service (State Service Class III) Rules, 1976, which is reproduced as under :-  "All appointments to the posts in the service by promotion shall be made on the basis of Seniority-cum-Merit and no member of the service will have any right for promotion on the basis of seniority alone."
3.
Thus in the written statement, the relief claimed by the petitioner was opposed on two grounds, that is, unsatisfactory record of the petitioner and the other Patwaris who were promoted, that is, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 being better in merit than the petitioner irrespective of the seniority of the petitioner.
4.
When the matter came up for motion hearing before the Division Bench of the Court, Mr. PC Mehta, learned senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner with reference to the averments made in the replication, contended that adverse entries made in the service record of the petitioner were not given notice of to the petitioner and the same having been taken into consideration non-promotion of respondents is vitiated.
Mr. DS Brar, who appeared for the State, mentioned that noting is on the file that the adverse entries were conveyed to the concerned revenue officer under whom the petitioner was working, but there was nothing on the record to show that the petitioner was actually served with a notice communicating those adverse entries.
The respondents were given an opportunity vide order dated 17.11.1981 at the time of admission of the petition to file reply to the replication to show if the petitioner was conveyed the adverse entries.
The record shows that the respondents did file rejoinder to the replication.
In the reply to the rejoinder aforesaid, it has been mentioned that during the service tenure of the petitioner, he earned as may as ten adverse entries.
In three cases the adverse remarks had duly been communicated to the petitioner.
Although it is not specified in the written statement as to which three adverse entries were communicated to the petitioner yet during the course of arguments, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has pointed out that such adverse entries which were actually communicated to the petitioner were Annexure R1 to R3.
In so far as Annexure R1 is concerned, the same pertains to the year 1967-68.
Annexure R2 is a censure given to the petitioner and the same is dated 14.6.1971.
The subject-matter of censure is absence of the petitioner and non-performing of the Girdawari of Circle Chaharka for Kharif, 1969.
Annexure R3 is of course confidential report for the year 1970-71.
Annexure R1 contains a foot-note which mentions that it was communicated vide No. 6763/SK, dated 2661968 through S.D.O.
(C) Jullundur and the aforesaid footnote is dated 571968.
The censure contained in Annexure R2 also contains a footnote which mentions that it was communicated vide No. 95/SK, dated 14.6.1971 whereas Annexure R3 does not contain even a note making mention of the same that it was communicated to the petitioner even through the S.D.O.
(C) or some one else.
5.
After conclusion of arguments, the judgment was reserved, the petitioner filed Civil Miscellaneous No. 2222 of 1991 with a prayer to bring on record order passed by the Collector, Jalandhar, dated 31st January, 1986.
The aforesaid order came into being on representation dated 9th January, 1986 which was filed by the petitioner and wherein he had complained that annual confidential reports for the years 1962-63, 1967-68 and 1974-75 were never communicated to him.
In so far as the communication of adverse entries in the confidential report for the year 1982-83 was concerned, he had already filed a representation.
The Collector vide order aforesaid, had accepted the representation and, in fact, while dealing with the matter, he had noticed that no adverse inference should have been drawn against the petitioner with regard to the adverse entries contained in confidential report for the period 1982-83 inasmuch as the representation against the same was admittedly pending.
He also observed in the order aforesaid, which order came into being after hearing the other side, that the adverse entries recorded in the confidential report of the petitioner for the period 1962-63, 1967-68 and 1974-75 were not communicated and, therefore, no adverse inference should have been drawn against the official concerned.
Bringing on record of the order aforesaid was not opposed by the respondent-State nor the same could have been opposed on any meaningful ground as the same came into being during the pendency of the petition.
6.
On the basis of record of the petitioner fully detailed above, the contention of Mr. PC Mehta, learned senior Advocate for the petitioner is that in so far as the report for the year 1967-68 is concerned, it is established now by order dated 31st January, 1986 that the adverse remarks contained were not conveyed to the petitioner and in so far as warning is concerned, the same is censure given to the petitioner and the same is dated 14th June, 1971.
The subject-matter of censure is absence of the petitioner and non-performing of the Girdawari of Circle Chaharke for Kharif, 1969.
Annexure R3 is confidential report for the period 1970-71 which only rates the petitioner to be an average one and there is absolutely nothing in the said report to show that integrity of the petitioner was doubtful.
The report for the year 1967-68 is thus not communicated and on the basis of censure Annexure R2, an average report of the petitioner for the period 1970-71 Annexure R1, the petitioner could not be ignored for the promotion of Kanungo, contends the counsel.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties it emerges that the only adverse entry communicated to the petitioner was for the period 1970-71, that is, Annexure R-3 and also censure conveyed to the petitioner during the same period.
The order Annexure R2 and confidential report in Annexure R3 even though may be adverse in nature, are absolutely stale and could not become the basis for ignoring the petitioner for promotion to the post of Kanungo.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, 1987(2) S.L.R.
54 clearly held that unless the adverse reports are conveyed and representation made by the employee concerned is considered and disposed of, such report cannot be acted upon to deny the promotion.
It has also been authoritatively held in a number of judgments rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that records for purpose of promotion or premature retirement should be seen only from last 5 to 10 years and the stale entries that came into being ten years or more cannot become the basis for ignoring the person for promotion.
Learned counsel for the respondent-State, however, contends that whereas it may be true to totally ignore the stale adverse entry recorded in the confidential report or to ignore such entries which were not communicated or if communicated, representations against the same were still pending, yet the same would be true only if it is a case of premature retirement and this would not be applicable when a case of promotion is in question.
In Brij Mohan Singh Chopra's case (supra), the Supreme Court while dealing with the case of premature retirement clearly relied upon the decision of Gurdial Singh Fiji v. State of Punjab, 1979(3) S.C.R. 518 which was a case of promotion.
Another case titled Amar Kant Chaudhary v. State of Bihar, 1984(2) S.C.R. 299, was also relied upon which too was a case of promotion.
In paragraph 10 of the judgment in Brij Mohan Singh Chopra's case (supra), it has been observed that unless the adverse report is conveyed and representation made by the employee concerned is considered and disposed of, it cannot be acted upon to deny the promotion.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held in the said paragraph that same considerations must apply to a case where the adverse entries are taken into account for retiring an employee prematurely from service.
It would thus be apparent that the principles that govern promotion shall also apply in the case of premature retirement.
For the reason that the other adverse entries relied upon to deny promotion to the petitioners were not communicated to him as also for the reason that the censure recorded in 1971 and adverse entries recorded also for the same period, that is, 1970-71 are absolutely stale, in my considered view the respondents were not at all justified in ignoring the claim of the petitioner for promotion.
If the record for the last ten years of the petitioner is unblemished, then it is obvious that the case of the petitioner was prejudged while considering his case vis-a-vis respondent Noa.
3 and 4.
It is obvious that the said respondents were found to have better record only because the adverse record of the petitioner which was considered, could not form basis of any consideration whatsoever.
In this view of the matter, there will no useful purpose to be served by examining the validity of the contention raised by the respondents based upon Rule 9(2) of the Punjab Kanungo Service (State Service Class III) Rules, 1976.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the petition succeeds and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion from the post of Patwari to that of Kanungo with effect from 3rd August, 1981 when admittedly respondent Nos. 3 and 4, who were juniors to him, were promoted to the posts of Kanungo.
The aforesaid exercise shall be done by the respondents within three months from today.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential reliefs, that is difference of pay of Kanungo and that of Patwari with effect from 3rd August, 1981, and all other benefits that might accrue to him under the law.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.