GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1679, 1521 and 1568 of 1985 since common questions of law and facts arise for determination therein.
In these writ petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners have impugned the order of reversion passed by respondent No. 1 reverting them from the post of Training Officers (Female) H.A.S.
Class-II in the Agriculture Department to the post of Mukhya Sevika Class-III and then promoting them as Lady Circle Supervisors in the Development and Panchayats Department of the State of Haryana.
2.
Reference to relevant facts has been made from the pleadings in C.W.P.
No. 1679 of 1985.
The petitioners originally joined the Government service as Mukhya Sevika Class-III in the Development Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab on October 1, 1956 and July 3, 1956, respectively.
They were confirmed on these posts in the year 1964.
On the reorganization of the erstwhile State of Punjab, they were allocated to the State of Haryana.
Posts of Training Officers (Female) were created in Haryana Agriculture Service Class-II (for short, HAS Class-II).
These posts were administrative posts under the statutory rules known as Punjab Agriculture Service (Class-II) Rules, 1974, as applicable to State of Haryana (for short, the Rules).
There are two categories of posts under these Rules.
Under one head, the posts of research, teaching and engineering fall while under the other category, administrative posts fall.
The petitioners and some other Mukhya Sevikas were selected by Respondent No. 1 for appointment as Training Officers (Female) by transfer on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the posts are filled by the candidates recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short, the Commission), whichever is earlier, vide order dated May 24, 1971.
The petitioners were appointed Training Officers (Female), HAS Class II, in the Agriculture Department on regular basis by respondent No.1 by an order No. 714-Agr.
I (I)-80/5078, dated April 9, 1980.
The decision to appoint them as Training Officer (Female) in HAS Class II by transfer was taken by the Council of Ministers, after consulting the Commission.
The petitioners qualified the departmental examination of accounts with credit as required under rule 10 of the Rules and notification to this effect was issued by the Agriculture Department of September 15, 1975.
The Governor of Haryana framed the rules known as Haryana Agriculture Service (Group 'B') Rules, 1982 (for short, the 1982 Rules).
The purpose of farming these Ruled was to fill up the gaps created by 1947 Rules.
1982 Rules have not yet been published in the Haryana Government's Official Gazette, but these are being followed by the department.
Under these 1982 Rules, there are specific posts of Training Officers (Female) and 36 other categories of posts in the administrative cadre.
The petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualification prescribed for the post of Training Officers (Female) in 1982 Rules.
The Agriculture Department passed orders reverting the petitioners and others to the Development Department.
The Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Development and Panchayat Department, Chandigarh by an order dated February 22, 1985, promoted the petitioners and others as Lady Circle Supervisors.
The post of Lady Circle Supervisor is not a Class II post.
The pay scale of Mukhya Sevika is Rs. 525-800, whereas that of Lady Circle Supervisor is Rs. 750-1450 and that of Training Officers (Female) HAS Class II is Rs. 800-1600.
As observed earlier, the petitioners have impugned their reversion as Training Officers (Female), HAS Class II, from the Agriculture Department to the post of Mukhya Sevikas in the Development Department and thereafter their promotion as Lady Circle Supervisors in the latter Department in these writ petitions.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
The principal defence taken is that in the year 1969-70, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme titled "Scheme for Integrated Training and Education of Farmers" (hereinafter referred to as the Scheme) was introduced in the State of Haryana and certain temporary posts of Training Officers (Female) with specific duties and qualifications were sanctioned under that Scheme.
As per Item No. III of Appendix 'A' to the Rules, Government has the powers to classify any post in connection with the scheme sanctioned by the State Government/Central Government/Commodity Committees, etc.
The posts of Training Officers (Female) were ex-Cadre posts with separate set of qualifications and experience, which were prescribed by the State Government vide its Memo No. 2969-Agri.
I(1)-76/10031, dated May 7, 1976.
The posts of Training Officers (Female) were not filled from the existing HAS Class-II Officers because the latter were not eligible on account of specific nature of duties requiring specific qualifications for the post of Training Officers (Female).
The posts of Training Officers (Female) were ex-Cadre posts and were not interchangeable with the existing administrative posts in H.A.S.
Class II.
The posts of Training Officers (Female) were declared by the Government vide memo No. 2570-Agri.
1(2)-83/7400, dated May 18, 1983, as administrative posts in terms of item No. III of Appendix 'A' to the Rules.
Mere declaration of the posts of Training Officers (Female) as administrative will not mean that the incumbents of the posts of Training Officers (Female) can claim that their posts were inter-changeable with other administrative posts in H.A.S.
Class II.
The petitioners cannot claim that they were given seniority over and above other HAS Class II officers who joined or were promoted to HAS Class II after the date shown against the names of the petitioners in the government order dated May 6, 1982.
The order of seniority given to the petitioner and other Training officers (Female) in the government order dated May 6, 1982 has no bearing on the inter se seniority of other HAS Class II officers.
The posts of Training Officers (Female) being ex-Cadre posts, this order determines the inter se seniority of the petitioners and other Training Officers (Female) alone.
1982 Rules have not been notified and the government is not following these Rules.
When the draft rules of 1982 were prepared, the Scheme was in operation.
The Scheme had been abolished with effect from March 31, 1985 and there are no other posts in other schemes of the Agriculture Department with these sets of qualifications for which the petitioners would be eligible.
The petitioner do not fulfil the qualification for other administrative posts in HAS Class II even in the proposed 1982 Rules.
Since the petitioners had a lien on the post of Mukhya Sevikas in the Development Department, they were rightly reverted to their parent Department on the closure of the Scheme.
4.
The precise question which arises for determination is whether the petitioners who have been appointed as Training Officers (Female) in HAS Class II on regular basis acquired a lien against those posts.
Indisputably, the petitioners were appointed as Training Officers (Female) in HAS Class II by transfer on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the incumbents recommended by the Commission join the post against the said posts (created under the Central Scheme) vide order dated May 24, 1971.
They were appointed as such on regular basis by an order dated April 9, 1980 passed by respondent No. 1.
The decision to fill the posts by transfer was taken by the Council of Ministers in consultation with the Commission and the formal order of appointment was issued vide Memo No. 714-Agri.
I(1)-80/5078, dated April 9, 1980.
5.
In the light of these proved facts, the defence taken by the respondents that the petitioners were appointed as Training Officers (Female) created on temporary basis under the Scheme and on the closure of that scheme, they could be reverted to their parent department, cannot be sustained.
The Rules which are still applicable to the H.A.S.
Class officers of Haryana State regulate the appointment to and the conditions of service of the members of Punjab Agricultural Service, Class II.
In Appendix 'A' to the rules, list of posts in P.A.S.
Class II is given.
In item (III) under the head 'Administrative posts', it is stated that temporary posts in connection with the schemes sanctioned from time to time by the Central Government, State Government, ICAR and the Commodity Committees such as Indian Central Cotton Committee, Central Indian Oilseeds Committee, Indian Central Sugarcane Committee, etc.
Classification is to be made according to the nature of the post to be declared by the Government, viz, Research, Teaching, Engineering and Administrative.
The State Government vide Memo No. 797-Agri.
I (V)71/2158, dated February 17, 1971, sanctioned the Scheme for Training and Education of Farmers in Rohtak, Gurgaon, Hansi (Hisar), Ambala and Karnal districts during the year 1971-72.
Although the petitioners were initially appointed on temporary basis as Training Officers (Female) under this Scheme in HAS Class II, but on successful completion of probation period, they were appointed as such on regular basis by respondent No. 1 after consultation with the Commission.
The decision to absorb them in H.A.S.
Class II was in fact taken by the Council of Ministers in consultation with the Commission.
After this decision, it is not open to the respondents to urge that the petitioners were not the members of H.A.S.
Class II and that they could be reverted to their parent Department.
A person is said to hold a post in a substantive capacity when he holds it for an indefinite period especially of long duration.
The term 'substantive capacity' was explained by the apex Court in Baleshwar Dass and others v. State of UP and others 1981(1) S.L.J 223, as under :-  "XXX XXX XXX XXX We may describe a capacity as substantive if it has 'independent existence' or is of 'considerable amount or quantity'.
What is independent in a substantial measure may reasonably be described as substantive.
Therefore, when a post is vacant, however designated in officialese, the capacity in which the person holds the post has to be ascertained by the State.
Substantive capacity refers to the capacity in which a person holds the post and not necessarily to the nature or character of the post.
To approximate to the official diction used in this connection, we may well say that a person is said to hold a post in a substantive capacity when he holds it for an indefinite period especially of long duration in contradistinction to a person who holds it for a definite or temporary period or holds it on probation subject to confirmation.
Once we understand 'substantive capacity' in the above sense, we may be able to rationalise the situation.
If the appointment is to a post and the capacity in which the appointment is made is of indefinite duration, if the Public Service Commission has been consulted and has approved, if the tests prescribed have been taken and passed, if probation has been approved, one may well say that the post was held by the incumbent in a substantive capacity."
The petitioners fulfilled the qualifications for the posts of Training Officers (Female) as laid down in 1982 Rules.
These Rules have not been notified in the official Gazette and do not attain statutory character.
However, these can be treated as executive instructions and for filling the posts in HAS Class II qualifications can be prescribed in the Rules.
The posts of Training Officers (Female) created under the Scheme approved by the Central or State Government have been included in H.A.S.
Class II as mentioned in Appendix 'A' to the Rules.
The case of the petitioners for appointment as Training Officers (Female) H.A.S.
Class II was sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission for approval only when they fulfilled the qualifications prescribed in the draft rules of 1982, and thereafter final decision for their regular appointment was taken by the Council of Ministers.
6.
There is yet another aspect of the case which needs to be examined although not urged at the Bar : whether the petitioners acquired lien against the post of Training Officers (Female) in H.A.S.
Class II on their having been appointed on regular basis after complying with all the pre-requisites required for substantive appointment.
Rule 314 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, provides that a competent authority shall suspend the lien of a Government servant when he is appointed in a substantive capacity to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne.
In the instant case, the lien of the petitioners against the posts of Mukhya Sevikas was not suspended.
On their appointment in substantive capacity as Training Officers (Female), they acquired the lien against these posts.
Rules 314 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I is for the benefit of a Government servant, who intends to return to his parent department, but it cannot be used to his prejudice.
It will be useful to refer to the principal of law as laid down in Ram Lal Khurana (dead) by L.Rs.
V. State of Punjab and others, 1989 (4) S.L.R.
243, wherein an identical question arose for consideration in the following circumstances : The appellant therein entered into service as a Clerk in the Police Department.
When he was working in the office of Inspector General of Police, he appeared for selection to the post of Excise Sub-Inspector in the Excise Department of the State.
He was selected and appointed as Excise Sub-Inspector.
He continued in the post for a number of years.
In October, 1963, he was repatriated to his parent Department.
He successfully challenged the order of repatriation in the civil Court.
The resultant effect of the civil Court's decree was that the appellant was held to be holding the post of Excise Sub-Inspector in the Excise Department in his substantive capacity.
The appellant was allowed to continue in the service of the Excise Department and he was compulsorily retired from service under the order of the Excise Commissioner.
This order of the Excise Commissioner was principally challenged on the ground that he had a lien in the Police Department and he could only be removed under the orders of the Inspector General of Police.
It was in this context that the apex Court observed thus :-  "The other contention urged for the appellant that he was not confirmed in the Excise Department and unless confirmed, he acquired no lien cannot also be accepted.
Lien is not a word of art.
It just connotes the right of civil servant to hold the post substantively to which he is appointed.
Generally when a person with a lien against a post is appointed substantively to another post, he acquires a lien against the latter post.
Then the lien against his previous post automatically disappears.
The principal being that no Government servant can have simultaneously two liens against two posts in two different cadres.
It is a well accepted principle of service jurisprudence."
In the light of this authoritative pronouncement, there is no escape from the conclusion that although the lien of the petitioner against the posts of Mukhya Sevika was not terminated, nevertheless they acquired the lien against the post of Training Officers (Female) on their substantive appointment against those posts.
The petitioners, thus, could not be reverted to their parent department against their wishes.
The order of reversion of the petitioners to their parent department, thus, cannot be sustained.
7.
For the reasons stated above, these writ petitions succeed and the orders of reversion from the Agriculture Department to their parent Department and their posting as Mukhya Sevikas vide orders dated February 22, 1985 (in CWP No. 1679 of 1985) March 1, 1985 (in CWP No. 1521 of 1985) and March 8, 1985 (in CWP No. 1568 of 1985) are quashed with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.