Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - A soldier's widow who is stated to be more than 100 years old seeks crumbs of family pension.
The thumb impression on the petition is symbolic of her being illiterate.
Undaunted she has gone from pillar to post trying to persuade Army authorities to give her the family pension.
Having failed, she has approached this Court through the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner claims that her husband, Prabhu Singh, joined the State Forces in the erstwhile Princely State of Patiala as a Sepoy in the year 1904.
He was allotted Service No. 447 and was allocated to Company No. 3 of Ist Patiala Infantry, Prabhu Singh fought as an active combatant during the First World War which started in the year 1914.
In the year 1917 he was injured.
He was discharged from the Service and given pension.
Initially he was paid pension in the erstwhile State of Patiala from the Treasury at Bassi.
In the year 1944, it is stated by the petitioner that the liability of pension was taken over by the Government and he was allotted pension payment order No. 32 by the Deputy Accountant General, Patiala.
He was paid pension at the rate of Rs. 6/- per month.
On July 6, 1950, Prabhu Singh died.
A copy of the Death Certificate is at Annexure P1 to the petition.
The, petitioner claims that after the death of her husband, she deposited the pension book of her husband in the treasury at Bassi, District Patiala.
She also claims to have drawn the last payment of the pension.
Thereafter, according to the petitioner, no pension was given to her.
3.
In the year 1985, the Supreme Court of India noticed with "approbation and commendation" that the "promise of socio-economic justice depicted in rosy language in Articles 38, 39 and 41 is being translated into a real action-oriented programme by the stand taken by the Union of India and the Ministry of Finance in this group of petitions and application for special leave .......", the Government of India had given certain undertakings before the Court which were recorded by their Lordships in Smt. Poonamal v. Union of India, 1985(2) SLR 537 (SC).
Para Nos. 8 and 9 may be instructively reproduced :-  "8.
On the next hearing Mr. B Dutta made a statement on behalf of Union of India, the relevant portion of which maybe extracted :-  "Government have examined the matter.
As the Family Pension Scheme was made non contributory from 2291977.
Government would agree to extend the benefit of the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 to all the living widows.
Payment to such widows may be made from 2291977 of the date of death of the pensioner whichever is later till the date of the death of the widow.
The Benefits will also be available in cases where the death of the facilitate identification of widows of Government pensioner occurs hereafter.
Administrative procedures are being evolved to pensioners and to lay down the guidelines for the determination of family pensions.
The benefit of family pension mentioned above will not apply to the widows of deceased Government servants who would not have been covered by the scheme even if the scheme had been given retrospective effect."
While examining the statement it transpired that certain clarifications were necessary.
'Common Cause' a Society which is a petitioner is one petition pointed out certain aspects of the statement which needed clarification.
The Court directed the 'Common Cause' society to send a letter to the Ministry of Finance indicating the points on which clarifications were required by them.
The issues raised by the Society may be summed up as under :-  (i) Whether the orders will apply to the widow in minor son/unmarried daughter as defined in the relevant provisions of family pension scheme;  (ii) Whether the scales of pension as prescribed with effect from 111973 will be made uniformly applicable to all the eligible persons in the family pension scheme; and (iii) Whether the benefits of family pension scheme will be made available to all pensioners irrespective of the fact whether they had or had not contributed two months' emoluments in terms of the original family pension scheme which contribution was subsequently deleted with effect from 2291977."
9.
Today when the matter was taken up for final hearing another statement was submitted by Mr. B Dutta on behalf of the Union of India.
The Government of India submitted its clarifications on the aforementioned three points which read as under : "(i) Government are prepared to grant to the dependents i.e. minor sons, etc. of the pensioners governed under pre-1964 scheme the same pensionary benefits as are admissible to the dependents under the current pension rules.
(ii) It is clarified that Government are agreeable to apply the increased pension rates introduced from 111973 to all the eligible persons including dependents.
This will, however, be subject to the condition that the total amount admissible (excluding dearness relief) under the liberalised provision now being agreed to, will not be more than what is admissible to a person covered under the current Rules.
(iii) Government have already agreed to the grant of arrears of family pension with effect from 22.9.77 - the date on which contribution of two months' emoluments by pensioners was dispensed with.
Pension who are now to be granted the benefits of family pension will not be required to contribute two months' emoluments.
Similarly, no demand for refund of contribution already made by pensioners will be entertained."
4.
The petitions were disposed of in terms of the undertaking given on behalf of the Govt. of India.
On coming to know of this judgment, the petitioner wrote to the Army authorities for the supply of a duplicate copy of the discharge book of her husband to enable her to claim pension.
The Army authorities asked her to supply the requisite information which was furnished by the petitioner vide her letter of January 30, 1988.
Reply to this letter was received from the Officer in-Charge Records vide letter dated February 8, 1988.
It read as under :-  "ISSUE OF DUPLICATE DISCHARGE CERTIFICATE  1.
Refer to your letter No. IESL/UT/CH/2A/96 dated 30 January 88.
2.
It is submitted that the service documents in respect of No. 447 Late Sep Prabhu Singh have since been destroyed by burning being time expired.
However, as per long roll of Ist Patiala Infantry (State Forces) held by this office, it is observed that no more information is available except his army number and name.
Hence, this office is unable to issue service particulars to the widow of the deceased.
It is also added that family pension was granted to Smt. Inder Kaur, widow of the abovenamed deceased soldier vide PPO No.
32."
In response to this letter, the petitioner sent a reply vide her letter of March 2, 1988, pointing out that P.P.O.
No. 32 had been allotted to her husband and not to her.
Copy of this letter is at Annexure P-5 with the petition.
On March 21, 1988, the petitioner submitted yet another application alongwith the necessary documents requesting the authorities to expeditiously decide her case for the grant of family pension.
Vide letter of April 22, 1988, the petitioner was advised by the authorities to send an affidavit sworn before Magistrate stating that she was the legally wedded wife of the deceased soldier Prabhu Singh showing the exact date of marriage.
She was also asked to furnish a certificate from the Treasury Officer to the effect that her husband was drawing pension and the arrears of pension were paid to her after his death.
The petitioner furnished the requisite affidavit.
So far as the certificate from the Treasury was concerned her application was returned with the remarks that the old record relating to the year 1950 was not available since it had been destroyed.
She then conveyed the requisite information to the Army authorities.
Vide letter of August 8, 1988, the petitioner was informed that her case had been forwarded to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad vide letter dated June 20, 1988.
Considerable correspondence that ensued thereafter between the petitioner and the authorities proved of no avail.
Finally, the petitioner filed this writ petition on August 3, 1990 claiming that a suitable order or direction be issued to the respondents to release her pension with effect from September 22, 1977, with interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
5.
A complete somersault has been taken in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents while it has been admitted that Shri Prabhu Singh was enrolled in the First Patiala Infantry and allotted Army No. 447, it is stated that he was not a pensioner.
It has been further averred that P.P.O.
No. 32 quoted in the writ petition appears to be a bogus number as no such record is held with the authorities.
It has been further averred that the letter at Annexure P-4 which has been quoted above contained clerical errors in respect of the P.P.O.
number as also the factum of grant of pension.
It has been stated that by mistake the letter recorded the words "was granted" instead of "was not granted".
The other averments in the writ petition have also been controverted and it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
6.
I have heard Mr. SD Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. AS Tewatia for the respondents.
Mr. Sharma has contended that from a perusal of the facts on record it is unrebuttably established that the petitioner's husband Prabhu Singh was a Sepoy in the Army.
However, as the authorities had destroyed the documents on account of the lapse of time, the claim of the petitioner for family pension was being arbitrarily declined.
As against this, Mr. Tewatia has contended that the statements in the letter at Annexure P-4 (supra) were made by way of clerical errors and that the petitioner's claim could not be entertained.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the matter.
The facts clearly established on record are that the petitioner's husband was a member of the Armed Forces and had been allotted No. 447.
The said Prabhu Singh had died on July 6, 1950.
This fact is clearly borne out from the death- certificate issued by the Chief Registrar (Births and Deaths) Punjab, Chandigarh.
The information regarding death had been given on July 19, 1950.
The Army authorities have acknowledged that pension was paid vide P.P.O.
No. 32.
The letter at Annexure P-4 suggests that the P.P.O.
No. 32 related to the petitioner.
The petitioner states that it related to her husband.
It has not been disputed before me that Prabhu Singh was a Member of the Armed Forces and had died.
It has also not been seriously disputed that the petitioner is his widow.
Once the factum of Prabhu Singh having served the Armed Forces is acknowledged, the petitioner is entitled to the grant of family pension in accordance with the undertaking given on behalf of the Govt. of India before their lordships of the Supreme Court.
In view of that undertaking, the petitioner is entitled to the payment of pension with effect from September 22, 1977.
The action of the authorities is not paying the petitioner the requisite amount of pension is contrary to its undertaking and cannot be sustained.
8.
I cannot commend the manner in which a complete somersault has been taken by the authorities while filing the written statement.
The suggestion that P.P.O.
No. 32 quoted in the writ petition appears to be bogus number "appears to be false."
It has not been shown that P.P.O.
No. 32 related to some other person.
It is most unlikely that a soldier would not have got any pension at all.
Surely, this is not the way the authorities should treat a person whose husband fought for the nation, suffered injuries and ultimately died in the year 1950.
9.
During the course of hearing, suggestion had been made for the payment of a lumpsum amount of money to the petitioner, and, thereafter, period of more than two weeks elapsed a cheque for the amount of Rs. 750/- was offered to the petitioner.
This was obviously a cruel joke which only added insult to injury.
10.
The whole problem has arisen in the present case on account of the records having destroyed.
The petitioner is not to blame.
She must get her due.
In any case even on the basis of the record that is available, it is established that Prabhu Singh was a member of the Armed forces and was getting pension before his death in the year 1950.
11.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be paid the requisite amount of pension at the rates fixed by the Government from time to time with effect from September 22, 1977 along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
Since the petitioner has already crossed the age of 100 years, it is necessary to ensure that the payment does not become a posthumous award.
It is accordingly directed that the payment shall be made within one month from today.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to her costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition accordingly allowed.