GR Majithia, J - The defendant has come up in second appeal against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court reversing on appeal those of the trial Court and decreeing the plaintiff's suit for declaration that the order terminating his services was illegal and ultra vires.
2.
The facts :-  3.
The plaintiff was posted as Nursing Orderly.
He was on leave on August 30, 1973.
He was summoned and served with an order of termination from service on August 30, 1973.
The plaintiff challenged the order of termination in the suit giving rise to this second appeal.
4.
The principle challenge was on the ground that the plaintiff had successfully completed the probation period of two years on 14th February, 1973 and he could not be discharged from service.
The order of termination of his services is punitive.
It was issued on the basis of some enquiry which was held at his back.
The defendant denied the allegations made in the plaint and, inter alia, pleaded that the plaintiff was appointed on temporary basis and his services were terminated strictly in accordance with the conditions of his appointment order.
5.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in its present form ?
OPD.
2.
Whether the impugned order dated 30873 of the Senior Superintendent of Post Offices is illegal etc. as alleged ?
OPP  3.
Relief  6.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the defendant and issue No. 2 was decided against the plaintiff and the suit was dismissed.
7.
The plaintiff challenged the order of the trial Judge in first appeal.
The first appellate Court, on the basis of the evidence, found that the order of termination from service although innocuously worded but was passed after the conclusion of the enquiry which was held against the plaintiff at his back.
The first appellate Court relied upon the statement of P.W.1 Dharma Vir Sharma and came to the conclusion that the order of termination was passed in view of the enquiry held against the plaintiff and on this evidence found that the order of termination from service although innocuously worded, but was punitive and was issued without holding a regular departmental enquiry against the plaintiff.
8.
I do not find any infirmity in the reasoning and conclusions arrived at by the first appellate Court.
The appeal is devoid of merit and is dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.