IS Tiwana, J (Oral) - This petition is directed against the order of the Executing Court dated February 17, 1990 whereby the petitioner has been disentitled to certain amount of claim decreed in his favour on November 3, 1988, on the ground that subsequent to the passing of the decree, a case of corruption under sections 5(1)(b) and 52 of the Provisions of the Corruption Act 1947, read with certain provisions of the Indian Penal Code, had been registered against him and this entitled the State Government to withhold the payment of the decretal amount.
For recording this conclusion, the learned Sub Judge has referred to the provisions of Rule 22(c) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II.
This rule only lays down that in case any departmental or judicial proceedings are instituted under clause (b) of rule 22 against an officer who has retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement or otherwise, he shall be paid during the period commencing from the date of his retirement to the date on which, on conclusion of such proceedings, final orders are passed, a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of his qualifying service up to the date of retirement.
A bare reading of this rule indicates that it is attracted only where some departmental or judicial proceedings are pending against a retiree at the time of his retirement.
That situation did not exist in the instant case.
Otherwise also it is not the implication of the rule that any decree passed in favour of a retired Government servants stands in any way altered with the institution or registration of a case against him subsequent to the passing of the decree.
It is by now well laid down that the executing Court cannot possibly go behind the decree and has to execute the same as such.
In other words, the pre-decree matters cannot be gone into by the Court, I, therefore, find it difficult to sustain the impugned order and set aside the same.
The net result is that the executing Court would now realise the full decretal amount as envisaged by the decree.
2.
This revision petition stands disposed of as indicated above.
No costs.
Petition allowed.