R Dayal, A.C.J.
- This petition challenges the order dated 22nd March, 1988 whereby, the request of the petitioner who was working as a Junior Engineer in the Irrigation Department of the State of Sikkam on contract basis for regularisation on his service was rejected, and makes a claim for a declaration that he is a regular employee under the State Government.
2.
The petitioner joined as Surveyor under the temporary regular establishment in the Irrigation Department of the Government of Sikkim vide dated 9.11.1979.
He resigned from that post in June, 1979 and stopped working there from 12th July, 1979.
However, after sometime, he again applied for employment in the regular establishment in the Irrigation Department in pursuance of an advertisement for two posts of Surveyors in that Department.
The Selection Committee selected three candidates including the petitioner whose name was at serial No. 3 in the order of merit.
It appears from extract from the relevant file concerning the appointment that the requirement of intimating the vacancy to the Establishment Department before the advertisement had not been fulfilled.
It also appears that the petitioner could not be appointed on regular basis for the reason that only two posts had been advertised and the name of the petitioner was at serial No. 3 in the order of merit.
Ultimately, the Cabinet decided in a meeting held on 11.8.1980 not to give regular appointment to any of them and approved the proposal of appointment of all the three candidates on contract basis for a period of two years.
Accordingly, vide order dated 9th September, 1980, the petitioner was appointed Surveyor in the Irrigation Department on contract basis for a period of two years and the petitioner joined his duties from the forenoon of 10th September, 1980.
Thereafter, he was again appointed on contract basis for three years to the post of Junior Engineer w.e.f.
10th September, 1982.
Again the contract service of the petitioner was extended for two years w.e.f.
10th September, 1985 to 10th September, 1987 and thereafter from 10th September, 1987 to 9th March, 1988.
It is not disputed that the petitioner made several representations for regularisation of his service but his request was not accepted to by the Government and the same was rejected vide the impugned order dated 22nd March, 1988.
And thus the service of the petitioner came to an end w.e.f.
9th March, 1988.
The grievance of the petitioner is that his request for regularisation should not have been rejected, firstly, because there was clear vacancy in the Irrigation Department and, therefore, there was no hindrance or bar for his absorption in the regular establishment and, secondly, because there were instances where employees who had once resigned had ultimately been absorbed into the regular establishment and, therefore, he could, instead of being appointed on contract basis, be appointed on a regular basis.
None of these pleas, however, has any merit.
The fact that there was a vacancy did not confer a right on a government employee on contract basis to get regular employment.
The fact that in some instances, some regular employees were after resigning again given regular employment did not confer any right on all who chose to resign, to be absorbed at will.
The fact that all the three candidates were given employment on contract basis in the year 1980 showed that there was no discrimination against the petitioner who was at serial No. 3 in the order of merit.
3.
The petitioner also pleaded that he did not sign any contract agreement regarding his employment "since 1091985 onwards".
However, the respondents have filed a copy of Form No. 1 dated 29121987 regarding offer of contract appointment to the petitioner whereby, he was offered contract employment w.e.f.
1091987 to 931988.
A copy of Form No. 2 indicating the petitioner's acceptance on 411988 to the offer of employment is also filed.
This clearly shows that in respect of the last spell of contract employment, offer and acceptance in writing were there.
The petitioner says that his signature was obtained by misrepresentation of fact.
However, there is absolutely no reason to doubt about the authentically of these two documents.
In any case, the various orders by which the petitioner was given extension made it clear that he was being offered employment only on contract basis.
Thus there having been no doubt either to the Government or to the petitioner that the petitioner that the petitioner was being given contract employment, even if there were no contract in writing, unquestionably, the petitioner was serving only under contract employment.
The very fact that he made several requests for regularisation also makes it clear that he knew that he needed regularisation because he had not been given regular employment.
4.
It is true that vide Notification No. J(14)20/Gen/Est.
dated 16th April, 1987, the Government of Sikkim in the Establishment Department laid down the terms and conditions governing all appointments on contract basis, Paragraph 7 thereof provides that upon selection of a candidate, the appointing authority shall offer appointment in Form No. 1 appended to the notification.
Paragraph 8 provides that on receipt of the offer the candidate so selected shall sign the acceptance letter indicating his acceptance of the contract of employment in Form No. 2 appended to the Notification.
Paragraph 10 provides that the candidate after accepting the offer shall execute an agreement in Form No. 3 appended to the Notification.
Prior to this notification the terms and conditions had been provided for by Notification No. 250/Gen./Est.
dated 421981 para 12 of which provided that no formal appointment order shall be issued unless and until terms and conditions as indicated in the offer letter were accepted by the candidate in writing.
On receipt of the acceptance letter, the appointment order was to be issued.
The question is if there was no offer or acceptance in the prescribed form or no formal agreement as provided in the notification of the year 1987, did the absence thereof have the effect of converting a contractual employment into a regular one ?
Even if the two notifications were statuary, the requirement as to the formal offer or acceptance or formal agreement could be only directory and not mandatory, since no intention could be inferred that the rule making authorities postulated that non-complaince of such a rule would have the serious consequence of converting the contractual employment into a regular one.
However, in the present case these two notifications were not issued under the proviso to At.
309 of the Constitution and had no statutory force.
They were only in the nature of administrative instructions non-observance of which could not confer any legal right on the contractual employees, though exposed the government servant who did not follow the instructions to disciplinary action.
In GJ Fernandez v. State of Mysore, AIR 1967 SC 1753 one of the questions before the Supreme Court was whether the rules in the Mysore Public Works Department Code were not followed.
While dealing with that question the Supreme Court observed :  12..........Before however we consider the question whether instructions in the Code have been followed or not, we have too decide whether instructions have any statutory force.
If they have no statutory force, they confer no right on anybody and a tenderer cannot claim any right on the basis of these administrative instructions.
If these are mere administrative instructions it may be open to Government to take disciplinary action against its servants who do not follow these instructions but non-observance of such administrative instructions does not in our opinion confer any right on any member of the public like a tenderer to ask for a writ against Government by a petition under Article 226.
The matter may be different if the instructions contained in the Code are statutory rules.
Learned counsel for the appellant is unable to point out any statue under which these instructions in the Code were framed.
He also admits that they are administrative instructions by Government to its servants relating to the Public Works Department.
But his contentions is that they are rules issued under Article 162 of the Constitution Now Article 162 provides that "executive power of a State shall extend to the matters with respect to which the legislature of the State have power to make laws."
This Article in our opinion merely indicates the scope of the executive power on the State; it does not confer any power on the State Government to issue rules thereunder.
As a matter of fact wherever the Constitution envisages issue of rules it has so provided in specific terms.
We may, for example, refer to Article 309, the proviso to which lays down in specific terms that the President or the Governor of State may make rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of person appointed to services and posts under the Union or the State.
We are therefore of opinion that Article 162 does not confer any power on the State Government to frame rules and it only indicates the scope of the executive power of the State.
Of course, under such executive power, the State can give administrative instructions to its servants how to act in certain circumstances, but that will not make such instructions statutory rules which are justifiable in certain circumstances.
In order that such executive instructions have the force of statutory rules it must be shown that they have been issued either under the authority conferred on the State Government by some statute or under some provision of the Constitution providing therefore.......... We are therefore of opinion that instructions contained in the Code are mere administrative instructions and are not statutory rules.
Therefore even if there has been any breach of such executive instructions that does not confer any right on the appellant to apply to the Court for quashing orders in breach of such instructions.
It is unnecessary for us to decide whether there has been in fact a breach of any instruction contained in the Code with respect to tenders and we do not therefore so decide.
But assuming that there has been any breach that is a matter between the State Government and its servant, and the State Government may take disciplinary action against the servant concerned who disobeyed these instructions.
But such disobedience did not confer any right on a person like the appellant to come to court for any relief based on the breach of these instructions."
Thus a breach of the administrative instructions does not confer any right on a person to come to court for relief based on such a breach.
Had the notification been clothed with statutory force, there would be no necessity of incorporating expressly or by reference the terms and conditions mentioned therein a formal agreement because the terms and conditions provided in the statutory rules would per se be binding on the concerned government servant.
It is because the notification did not have any statutory force, it was provided that a formal agreement would be executed so as to make the terms and conditions binding on the government servant concerned.
But the failure to do so did not have the effect of obliterating the contractual nature of the employment, which was otherwise clear from the orders of appointment and extensions given from time to time.
Thus even if Forms Nos. 1 and 2 were not there as alleged by the petitioner this would have no beneficial effect on the petitioner.
5.
The petitioner has also alleged that the respondents were trying to replace him by a junior employee.
There is no dispute that one Phu Tshering Bhutia has been appointed in his place during the pendency of the petition.
Naturally, a vacancy arose after the petitioner ceased to be an employee after 9th March, 1988 and that vacancy had to be filled one way or the other.
If there had been any discrimination against the petitioner regarding the consideration of his case for filling up that vacancy, or the appointment of Phu Tshering Bhutia suffered from any illegality, the proper course for the petitioner would have been to challenge the appointment after impleading the illegally appointed person and claim absorption as of right.
The mere fact that Phu Tshering Bhutia fresh from the college was appointed in preference to the petitioner who had served on contract for a number of years is not in itself sufficient to prove the appointment to be illegal.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner cited three authorities, but none is of any help to the petitioner on the facts of the present case.
One is Rattanlal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1978 SC 478.
In that case the policy of appointment of teachers on ad hoc basis at the commencement of the year and terminating their services before the summer vacation was held to be violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution and, therefore, the government was directed to take immediate steps to fill up in accordance with the relevant rules the vacancies in which the teachers appointed on ad hoc basis were working and to allow all of them to remain in those posts till the vacancies were duly filled up.
There is nothing in the Judgment to support the case of the petitioner.
In fact the government has acted in accordance with the law laid down in the judgment in as much a post which had been filled up for a long time on contract basis was at last filled up on a regular basis by the appointment of Phu Tshering Bhutia.
The other decision is General Manager, Beas Project v. Mohan Singh (1983) 1 LJ 291.
That case concerned the employees engaged on contract basis on Beas Project and effect on them of the reorganisation of Punjab and the extension of their services by the Chairman of the Project.
It was held in paragraph 21 of the Judgement that after the petitioners became Central Government servants on the reorganisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab, their services could be said to be contractual in terms of Rule 1(4)(c) of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965 only if a contract as envisaged under Article 229 of the Constitution had been entered into by the President of India with the petitioners or their existing contracts were extended in terms of the contract by the President of India.
Admittedly, this had not been done and, therefore, they would be deemed to be temporary government servants.
The facts of the present case are entirely different and no rule of law was laid down in that judgment to support the case of the petitioner.
The other decision relied on behalf of the petitioner is Sarat Chandra v. State, AIR 1981 Orissa 70 where the petitioners had been employed for specific periods and the termination had been after the end of the period and not before it.
It was held that the petitioners were not entitled to issue of mandamus for continuing their employment.
It was further observed that similarly situated persons could not be treated with discrimination in the matter of retention of their services.
The judgment is also of no help to petitioner since no discrimination could be shown against the petitioner in the matter of retention.
It is not a case where some of the contractual employees were retained and other discharged.
In fact, the case concerned only one contractual employee, namely the petitioner where the petitioner claimed regularisation of his service as of right.
In the result, the petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.