RS Mongia, J - This is a Letters Patent Appeal by the Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation'), against the judgment of the learned Single Judge, by which he had allowed the writ petition of Mandeep Singh, writ petitioner (now respondent) and quashed the order dated 6th August, 1987 (Annexure P.1) passed by the Corporation, terminating the services of the writ petitioner Mandeep Singh.
2.
It was alleged in the writ petition that the writ petitioner did his B Com.
and LL.B.
with 666 per cent marks.
He took six months' training with M/s Toshiba Anand Batteries Limited, Cochin and also worked as Marketing Officer with M/s Peters and Smith (India) Private Limited, Calcutta for about two years, i.e. from April 1983 to March, 1985.
Thereafter, he applied for the post of Management Trainee with the appellant-Corporation and having been selected, was so appointed vide letter of appointment dated 11th March, 1985 (Annexure P.2).
After the completion of the training period, Mandeep Singh, writ petitioner, was informed by the Corporation vide letter dated 13th April, 1987 (Annexure P.3) that he was being offered the post of Manager Grade III, with the basic pay of Rs. 940/-, with effect from 3rd October, 1986.
Vide this appointment letter, the writ petitioner had been put on probation for a period of one year with effect from 3rd October, 1986.
According to the further allegation in the writ petition, in June 1987, there was a change of the Managing Director of the Corporation and as a matter of policy he took a decision to extend the period of probation or terminate the services of the employees like the writ petitioner who had not done M.B.A. or Engineering.
An order dated 6th August, 1987 (Annexure P.1) was passed relieving the petitioner with immediate effect from the post of Manager Grade-III.
3.
The Corporation terminated the services of one Tarun Sadana on 3rd December, 1987, who was also appointed as Manager Grade-III.
Said Mr. Sadana filed C.P.W.
No. 9233 of 1987 in this Court which was allowed on 4th August, 1988 and the order terminating his services was quashed and the Corporation was directed to reinstate him with continuity of service and salary with interest @ 12 per cent per annum.
According to the writ petitioner, he and his father had been meeting the Chairman of the Corporation as well as the Managing Director and they were assuring that the petitioner's case would be reconsidered.
After Shri Tarun Sadana's judgment, a legal notice dated 17th August, 1988 was served on the Corporation on behalf of the writ petitioner.
Since no action was taken by the Corporation on the legal notice, the petitioner approached this Court by way of writ petition, which, as stated above, was allowed by the learned Single Judge.
4.
The main thrust of the learned counsel for the appellant was that the work and conduct of Mandeep Singh, writ petitioner (now respondent) during the period of probation was not found satisfactory and, therefore, his services were terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions as contained in the order of appointment (Annexure P.3).
The appellant's counsel further tried to distinguish the case of Shri Tarun Sadana by submitting that in his case the appointment was under a Scheme; whereas the writ petitioner's appointment was not under a particular Scheme and further in the case of Tarun Sadana it was admitted by the Corporation that the work and conduct of Shri Tarun Sadana was satisfactory and his services had been terminated on account of his being not a Graduate in Engineering or M.B.A.
The learned counsel submitted that these facts were non-existent in the present case.
In paras 5 and 6 of the written statement by the Corporation, it has been averred as under :-  "5.
--------Since the petitioner had not completed the period of Management Trainee, to the satisfaction of the respondent-Corporation, his training period was extended upto 30.11.86 vide Officer Order dated 3091986.
In order to give more opportunities to the petitioner, the Respondent Corporation put the petitioner on Operation and Maintenance of Community and Biogas Plants in different villages and his work during that period was to form the basis for his performance appraisal.
A copy of the Note dated 10th June, 1986 is attached herewith as Annexure R/2.
A copy of the Order dated 3091986 extending the period as Management Trainee is attached as Annexure R/3.
Order dated 3101986 is attached as Annexure R/4.
6.
-------- However, it may be stated that the petitioner was attached with Shri DS Sangwan, Manager Gr.
II but the petitioner did not show any interest in the assignments given to him.
Mr. Sangwan further informed the General Manager (RE) that the petitioner is in the habit of creating problems at the eleventh hour and is in the habit of insulting his seniors whenever he was asked to do some assignment.
The petitioner did not show any knowledge of functions given to him.
A performance report was called for from the General Manager (RE) regarding the performance of the petitioner.
The performance report was received by the Respondent Corporation on 581987.
A perusal of the performance of the petitioner was very poor, knowledge of work was nil, sense of responsibility was poor, follow up instructions was poor, behaviour with superiors was very bad.
It was categorically stated by the General Manager (RE) that the petitioner did not deserve absorption as permanent Manager in view of his poor performance.
A true copy of the performance report is attached herewith as Annexure R/5.
The note dated 31787 is attached as Annexure R-6.
Hence, the Respondent Corporation after going through the overall performance and work and conduct of the petitioner discharged the petitioner from service vide order dated 681987.
5.
In the replication filed by the writ petitioner before the learned Single Judge, it was alleged that the reports Annexures R-5 and R-6 attached with the written statement, were subsequently created to justify the discharge of the petitioner from the service.
These reports refer to petitioner's knowledge of work as 'nil'.
6.
It is now well settled that even if the order of termination of service of a probationer is wholly innocuous, but from the attendant circumstances or from the material with the employer, the Court comes to the conclusion that in fact the order of termination was by way of punishment or mala fide, the order of termination would be unsustainable though couched in innocuous words.
Reference may be made to Raj Kumar Kalia and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLR 35; Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, (1984) 2 SCR 453 : 1984(1) SLR 426 (SC), and the Manager, Govt Branch Press and another v. DB Beelappa, AIR 1979 Supreme Court 429.
After applying the ratio culled out of the judgments referred to above, the learned Single Judge came to be conclusion on the facts of the present case that the order of termination was by way of punishment.
The learned Single Judge referred to the allegations regarding the conduct of the writ petitioner in the reports, Annexures R-5 and R-6 dated 21st July, 1987 and 31st July, 1987 respectively, and entirely a black picture was painted in Anneuxre R-5 with regard to the work performance, knowledge of work, sense of responsibility, follow up instructions, which were described as 'very poor', 'nil' and 'poor'.
Behaviour with the superiors was described as 'very bad' and with the colleagues and subordinates as 'average'.
An opinion was expressed that the writ petitioner did not deserve absorption as permanent Manager.
Apart from other things, in this report it is mentioned that the writ petitioner is in the habit of creating problems at the eleventh hour and is in the habit of insulting his seniors whenever he was asked to do some assignment.
On the basis of all this material, it was concluded by the learned Single Judge was that the order of termination was by way of punishment.
The leaned Single Judge was further of the view that in fact the petitioner's services had been terminated because of the reason that he was not Graduate in Engineering or M.B.A., as it was done in Shri Tarun Sadan's case.
7.
The learned counsel for the appellant cited before us a recent judgment of the Apex Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, 1991(1) SLR 606 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
760(SC), to contend that the employer had a right to terminate the services of a temporarly employee if his work and conduct is not found satisfactory on the basis of adverse reports or even on the basis of preliminary enquiry held into the work and conduct of the employee.
He drew our attention to the following observations in the judgment :-  "Under the service jurisprudence a temporary employee has no right to hold the post and his services are liable to be terminated in accordance with the relevant service rules and the terms of contract of service.
If on the perusal of the character roll entries or on the basis of preliminary inquiry on the allegations made against an employee, the competent authority is satisfied that the employee is not suitable for the service whereupon the services of the temporary employee are terminated, no exception can be taken to such an order of termination.
A temporary Government servant has no right to hold the post, his services are liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary Government Servants.
A temporary government servant can however, be dismissed from service by way of punishment.
Whenever, the competent authority is satisfied that the work and conduct of a temporary servant is not satisfactory or that his continuance in service is not in public interest on account of his unsuitability, misconduct or inefficiency, it may either terminate his services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service or the relevant rules or it may decide to take punitive action against the temporary Government servant."
8.
There is no quarrel with the proposition that if the work and conduct of a temporary employee or a probationer are not upto the mark, his services can be terminated.
However, it has to be seen whether the termination is simpliciter or it is based on the allegation of misconduct for which no opportunity is given to the probationer.
If the order is founded on allegations of misconduct, the order will certainly be by way of punishment.
It would be interesting to note here that as a matter of fact on 13th April, 1987 (Annexure P.3) an order was issued appointing the petitioner as Manager Grade-III with effect from 3rd October, 1986.
In fact, the petitioner had been working as Manager Grade III with effect from 3rd October, 1986 and nothing wrong had been found upto 13th April, 1987, otherwise, there was no idea of issuing an appointment letter with retrospective effect.
This would lead to a conclusion that upto 13th April, 1987 there was nothing wrong with the work and conduct of the writ petitioner.
However, in the reports Annexures R-5 and R-6, it is being said that as if the writ petitioner knew nothing.
Obviously, the conclusion is that the order of termination was by way of punishment, which was passed after about four months of the issuance of letter Annexure P.3.
We find no ground to differ with the findings of the learned Single Judge on this point.
9.
Consequently, we find no merit in this appeal, which is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
10.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that the admitting Bench on 22nd August, 1989, had stayed the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge, subject to the appellant's paying Rs. 1000/- per month as subsistence allowance to the respondent-writ petitioner, during the pendency of the appeal.
Since, we are dismissing the appeal, the respondent-writ petitioner would be reinstated forthwith into service and will be entitled to all consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
Appeal dismissed.