RS Mongia, J - This appeal by the State of Punjab has arisen on the following facts :-  2.
Ravinder Kumar, writ-petitioner (now respondent) was appointed as a Clerk in the P.W.D.
(B&R), on 12th November, 1958.
He continued working as such till 11th March, 1968, when he was promoted as Sub-Divisional Clerk.
On 1st February, 1972, an Officer Order was issued relieving from the post of Sub-Divisional Clerk by appointing one Miss Kamlesh Kumari in his place.
In the remarks column of this order it was recorded that she is being promoted as Sub-Divisional Clerk vice Shri Ravinder Kumar promoted.
However, no orders of promotion of the Civil writ petitioner were passed but he allegedly started working as Accounts Clerk with effect from 8th March, 1972.
It was the case of the writ-petitioner that he had been promoted as Accounts Clerk for which he relied upon the office order dated 1st February, 1972, referred to above the note given in the remarks column.
The case of the respondents-State (now appellants) before the learned Single Judge was that the writ-petitioner had never been promoted as Accounts Clerk, but as a vacancy was available, he was given a chance to work against that post in order to enable him to show his worth so that if he obtains good reports, he could be considered for promotion to that post.
It was also mentioned in the return that after the promotion of the writ-petitioner as Sub-Divisional Clerk, his case for promotion as Accounts Clerk was sent to the Advisory Board of the Superintending Engineers on six occasions between 11th February, 1972 and April 30, 1973, but having regard to his service record he was not considered fit for promotion.
It was also stated that his performance against the post of Accounts Clerk was not found to be satisfactory to merit promotion to that post.
As regards the entry in the office order dated 1st February, 1972, in the remarks column that the writ petitioner had been promoted, it was stated in the return by the state that the word "promoted" had been mistyped therein.
It was stated that this order pertained to appointments and postings of 19 Clerks and if the writ-petitioner had been promoted, his name too would have figured in the list showing his appointment as Accounts Clerk.
3.
The argument of the writ-petitioner, which found favour with the learned Single Judge, was that his case for promotion had been considered by the Committee of Superintending Engineers and this Committee has no jurisdiction to decide such matters, as according to the Service Rules by which the writ-petitioner was governed i.e. the Punjab Public Works Subordinate Service (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1934, it was the Superintending Engineer concerned who was the competent authority for ordering appointments and promotions to the post of Clerks, Sub-Divisional Clerks and Accounts Clerks.
The learned Single Judge held that the case of the writ-petitioner had to be considered by the Superintending Engineer concerned himself independently by applying his own mind to the record of the petitioner without being influenced by the recommendation of the Committee of the Superintending Engineers.
In the concluding para of the judgment of the learned Single Judge, it has been observed as under:-  "The petitioner had a right to be considered for promotion by the competent authority namely the Superintending Engineers concerned and in the circumstances therefore, the petitioners must be deemed to have been promoted to the post of Accounts Clerk with effect from the date when the persons junior to him were promoted to his post.
A writ is accordingly hereby issued granting this relief to which he would be entitled.
This writ petition is accordingly hereby accepted with costs.
Counsel's fee Rs.
300/-."
Aggrieved by the above-said judgment, the State has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
4.
The learned counsel for the Appellants submitted that the learned Single Judge could have only directed the case of the writ-petitioner to be considered by the Superintending Engineer, but the learned Single Judge could not have held that the petitioner would be deemed to have been promoted to the post of Accounts Clerk with effect from the date when the persons junior to him were promoted to the post.
He further submitted that there was nothing wrong to constitute a committee of the Superintending Engineers, whose recommendations were just advisory and recommendatory and not binding on the Superintending Engineer.
We do not find any force in this argument that the Appointing Authority could rely on the advice of the Committee.
No rule has been cited under which this committee was provided advice of the Committee.
The concerned authority has to apply its independent mind without being influenced by any advice of the Committing in the matters of promotion.
However, there is force in the argument of the learned counsel for the appellants that the writ-petitioner had only a right of consideration for promotion under Article 16 of the Constitution of India and the Court could not order that the petitioner would be deemed to have been promoted from a particular date.
Reliance was placed on a Supreme Court judgment is State of Mysore and another v. Syed Mahmood and another, 1968 S.L.R.
333.
This argument could not be dispelled by the learned counsel for the writ-petitioner.
5.
Consequently, we allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge by holding that the petitioner had a right to be considered for promotion by the concerned Superintending Engineer and direct that his case for promotion as Accounts Clerk be considered from the date when his juniors were promoted and if he is found fit for promotion, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits.
There will be no order as to costs.
6.
Before parting with the judgment, we may, however, observe that the parties' counsel have not been able to tell us as to whether the writ petitioner stood deemingly, promoted in pursuance of the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 23rd November, 1982.
If by virtue of the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the petitioner has deemingly been promoted as Accounts Clerk from the date his juniors were promoted, then the writ-petitioner would not be reverted.
Appeal allowed.