MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of CWP Nos. 1080 of 1980 (JL Gera and another v. State of Haryana etc.), 2238 of 1980 (KC Bansal v. State of Haryana etc.) and 8305 of 1987 (DK Chadha v. State of Haryana and another), in which a common question of law is involved for the determination by this Court, that is, Once an officer has been promoted by the competent authority by exercising powers under the statutory service rules after ascertaining his eligibility and suitability with proper application of mind, and that promotion having been approved later on by the Public Service Commission as a consequence whereof the officer got confirmed and promoted to the higher rank, it is still open to the successors-in-office to review and reconsider the original decision to undo the entire process by holding that the earlier decision was not in conformity with the rules or the power had not been properly exercised, and as to whether the officer having officiated in the higher rank for more than fifteen years followed by confirmation and further promotion, can be asked to step down and deprived of the benefit of his continuous officiation for the purposes of seniority and promotion.
2.
Briefly stated, petitioners JL Gera and KC Bansal passed Diploma in Electrical Engineering and joined service as Sectional Officer on 5th/7th February, 1959, in P.W.D.
(B&R Branch) in the erstwhile State of Punjab.
After qualifying AMIE examination, which is considered equivalent to degree in Engineering and has been so recoginsed by the Punjab Service of Engineers and has been so recognised by the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II, P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965, they were appointed as Assistant Directors (Electrical in June, 1966.
3.
With effect form 1st November, 1966, the composite State of Punjab was reorganised and as a result thereof the petitioners were allocated to the new State of Haryana.
Soon thereafter, the petitioners were declared suitable for appointment to the Punjab/Haryana Service of Engineers II P.W.D.
(B & R Branch) by the State of Haryana by their order dated 19th July, 1967.
Five years later, on 19th September, 1972, they were confirmed in Class II Service with effect from 11th May, 1970.
In the meantime, petitioner No. 2 was promoted as officiating Executive Engineer on 22nd October/2nd November, 1971, whereas petitioner No. 1 was so promoted on 13th December, 1975.
During this period, respondent Nos. 3 to 6 were also recruited to Class II Service by direct appointment on 6th January, 1970, 28th February, 1970, 8th May, 1970 and 2nd February, 1973 respectively.
A tentative seniority list of members of Class II Service-promotees as well as direct recruits, was issued by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana P.W.D.
(B & R Branch), respondent No. 2, on 13th October, 1978, inviting objections from the affected persons.
Since the petitioners were placed below respondent Nos. 3 to 6, they represented against the same but the representations were rejected and final seniority list was issued on 12th March, 1980, maintaining the original position of respondent Nos. 3 to 6 higher than the petitioners.
This seniority list has been challenged by the petitioners mainly on the ground, that the petitioners having been appointed to Class II Service in the joint State of Punjab, prior to 1st November, 1966, by a duly constituted Selection Committee under the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II, P.W.D.
(B & R Branch) Rules, 1965, and having been confirmed in Class II Service by the State of Haryana in 1970, that is, prior to respondent Nos. 3 to 6, they could not be placed junior to the respondents.
4.
Separate written statements have been filed by the State of Haryana through the Secretary, Public Works Department (B & R Branch) and the Engineer-in-Chief, and by respondent Nos. 3 to 6 - direct recruits to Class II Service.
Though in both the written statements the respondents have admitted the factual position, yet efforts have been made to justify the impugned action by pleading that the promotion of the petitioners in joint Punjab in June, 1966, was not in accordance with the rules, inasmuch as necessary procedure for considering the Sectional Officers for purposes of promotion to Class II Service by constituting Selection Committee strictly in accordance with Rule 6 of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II, P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965, was not followed.
On that basis, it is pleaded that the petitioners could not draw any benefit out of their long continuous officiation and, therefore, the State of Haryana did not find any illegality in undoing, what had been done by the composite State of Punjab prior to 1st November, 1966.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length and having considered the relevant record, I find that the stand taken by the respondents is neither factually correct nor legally tenable.
For the proper appreciation of the controversy, a scrutiny of then extant, relevant statutory rules, namely, the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II, Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965 is necessary, Rule 6 deals with the recruitment to Service and it reads as under :-  "6.
Recruitment to Service :- (1) Recruitment to the Service for cadre and ex-cadre post shall be made in the following manner, only from the sources laid down in the proportions and the order indicated against a lot of every 40 vacancies :- Method of recruitment Proportion Allocation of each source in a lot of 40 vacancies.
Direct Recruitment 26 5 6 5 5 5 Promotion from the members of the Punjab PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engg.)
Service : 8 2 1 2 1 2 Promotion from draftsmen members of the Draftsmen and Tracers Services : 2 1 - - 1 - 4.
Promotion from members of the Punjab PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engg.)
Service and the Draftsmen and Tracers Service, possessing qualifications prescribed in App.
'B' : - 1 1 1 1 ___________________________________________________________________________ 40 8 8 8 8 8 (2) In case suitable candidates are not available from source No. (4) the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment.
(3) In case a candidate is not available from sources 1 and 3 and a person has, to be appointed, in public interest, as a stop-gap arrangement, from other than the allotted source; such a person shall be liable to be reverted to his original cadre when a candidate from the allotted source is available and the period of service rendered by such person will not be reckoned for the peruse of seniority.
(4) The Government may fill a short term vacancy, in the exigencies of public service, after recording specific reasons, for a period not exceeding six months in each case by local arrangment from among the memebrs of the Punjab P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service, without resorting to the select list prepared under Rule 9.
(5) No person, except to the extent provided under sub-rule (4)(a) who is not a substantive memebr of the P.W.D.
(Budildings and Roads Branch), Class II Service or members of P.S.E.
(B&R) Class I Service in the Junior Scale on the date of enforcment of these rules; or (b) who is not considered suitable for appointment to the service as provided in Rule 7 read with Appendix 'G' shall hold the post of a Sub-Divisional Officer, even in an officiating capacity, unless he is declared, within a period of six months from the date of enforcement of these rules, as suitable for appointment of the Service under the provions of these rules."
Since there is no dispute with regard to the manner of recruitment of respondent Nos. 3 to 6 by direct recruitment to the Service, the reproduction of Rules 7 and 8 dealing with the same is unnecessary.
Rule 9, which lays down the method of appointment to the service reads as under :-  "9.
Appointing by promotion - (1) A Committee consisting of Chairman of the Punjab Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend, any other member of the Commission representing it, Secretary, P.W.D.
Building and Roads Branch, and Chief Engineers of P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads), shall be constituted.
(2).
The Chairman or the member of the Commission as the case may be, shall preside over the meeting of this Committee.
(3).
The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year and consider the cases of all eligible officials for promotion to the Service, as on the first day of January of that year.
(4).
The Committee shall prepare a list of officials suitable for promotion to the Service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
(5).
The names of the officers included in this list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Punjab PWD (B&R), Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and members of Draftsmen and Tracers Service : Provided that any Junior Officer, who, in the opinion of the Committee, is of exceptional merit and suitability may be assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him in his own class.
(6).
The list so prepared shall be revised every year.
(7).
If in the process of preparing the list or its revision, it is porposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the Committee shall draw up a list of such officials and may record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
(8).
The list prepared or revised in accordance with sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by Government alongwith :- (i) The records of all officials included in the list; (ii) records of all officials proposed to be superseded as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee; (iii) The reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any official; and (iv) The observations, if any, of the State Government on the recommendations of the Committee.
(9).
The Commission shall consider the list prepared by the Committee along with other documents received from the State Government and unless it considers any change necessary, approve the list.
(10).
If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from Government, the Commission shall make the changes it proposes and forward the list it considers suitable to the State Government.
Rule 11 provides for the period of probation and confirmation after satisfactory completion thereof.
Rule 12, which deals with the determination of seniority reads as under :-  "12.
Seniority.
- (1) Except as provided in sub-rule (5), of this rule relating to officers appointed by transfer, the seniority of the members of the Service shall be determined by the order of their appointment in service according to Rules 6 and 9 irrespective of their date of joining.
(2).
The inter se seniority of the members of the Service shall be in the order of recruitment provided under Rule 6 : Provided that in case an officer does not join his appointment within six months of the date of order of appointment his seniority shall be determined by Government on an ad hoc basis after taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case.
(3).
The inter se seniority within the group of direct recruitment shall be as in the merit grading under rule 8.
(4) The inter se seniority within the group of promoted officers (from a particular source) shall be as in the list approved under Rule 9.
(5).
In the case of an officer appointed by transfer as an Assistant Engineer, while normally he would be placed junior to all the officers appointed directly or by promotion as Assistant Engineers in a particular year, the Government may, in the interest of the public service and taking into consideration all the circumstances of the cases, fix his seniority on an ad hoc basis : Provided that the seniority thus fixed shall, in no case, be more favourable than the seniority determined after allowing him credit for the period of service rendered by him in previous appointment as Assistant Engineer or on a post the duties of which, in the opinion of Government, are of equivalent or greater responsibility.
The decision of Government on this point shall be final : Provided further that the provisions of proviso to sub-rule (1) shall apply to such an officer if his period of probation is extended."
Even though a perusal of sub-rule (4) of rule 6 as reproduced above, would show that the State Government was competent to fill a short term vacancy for a period not exceeding six months by local arrangement, from amongst the members of Sectional Officers (Engineering Service) and while doing so the select list prepared for the purpose of appointment to the Service by promotion under Rule 9 need not have been resorted to, yet this was purposely not done in the case of the petitioners and they were promoted in a regular manner under rule of the Rules.
In the composite State of Punjab, prior to 1st November, 1966, admittedly, vacancies in Class II Service to be filled up by appointment by promotion, were available and it was against those vacancies that the petitioners were promoted on officiating basis in June, 1966.
Thereafter, when the meeting of the Selection Committee constituted under rule 9 ibid was held in the office of the Punjab Public Service Commission on 14th September, 1966, the Selection Committee, considered the petitioners fit for promotion and made its recommendations with which the State Government agreed.
As a result thereof, necessary communication for approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission with regard to the suitability of the officers recommended by the Selection Committee and duly approved by the State Government for appointment to the Punjab Engineer's Service Class II, as required under rule 9 of the service rules, was sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, PWD (B&R), vide letter No. 7910-BRII(4)-66, dated 7th October, 1966.
According to the minutes enclosed with the communication, both the petitioners, namely, JL Gera and KC Bansal, were considered suitable for promotion to P.S.E.
Class II.
The minutes were signed by (1) Shri Sampuran Singh, Secretary to Government Punjab, PWD (B&R), (2) Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala (3) Shri NC Malhotra, CE (North), Patiala, (4) Shri Kulbir Singh, Chief Engineer, and (5) Shri JS.
Marya, SE(S), B&R Branch, Patiala.
6.
It is quite surprising that though the petitioners had specifically made a categorical assertion in para 6 of the writ petition that in the parent State of Punjab (that is, before 1st November, 1966), certain posts had fallen vacant in Punjab Service of Engineers Class II and the Committee constituted under the provisions of Rule 9 had actually met and considered the claims of various eligible persons on 14th September, 1966, wherein both the petitioners were considered and found suitable by the Committee, which meeting was attended by the Chairman of the Punjab Public Service Commission and Secretary to Government, Punjab PWD (B&R), with three Chief Engineers, yet the State Government in its written statement has not admitted or denied the same.
Even a passing reference has not been made to this assertion of the petitioners, though the factual statement made by the petitioners does find mention in the letter issued by the Haryana Government on 6th June, 1967 (Annexure P.4).
Obviously, the private respondents who are direct recruits and might have been studying in Engineering Colleges at that time, could not be attributed knowledge about the meeting of the Selection Committee, but ignorance on the part of the State Government is wholly unpardonable.
It was only during the course of arguments that the petitioners had to produce the aforesaid communication dated 7th October, 1966, on record (marked as 'A').
Thus, the petitioners having been approved for appointment by promotion to Class II by Selection Committee duly constituted under the statutory rules, were rightly promoted by the competent authority under Rule 9(4) of the statutory rules.
Their officiation of service under Rule 6(4) could not be ignored for the purposes of seniority, as it is only under sub-rule (3) of Rule 6 where a person has to be appointed in public interest as a stop-gap arrangement from other than the allotted source, that the period of service rendered by such persons is not reckoned for the purposes of seniority.
This is not the position under sub-rule (4) of Rule 9.
In any case, according to Rule 12, the seniority of members of the service has to be determined "by the order of their appointment in service" according to Rules 6 and 9, irrespective of the date of joining.
Since the petitioners had actually joined service in P.S.E.
Class II earlier to respondent Nos. 3 to 6, they were entitled to rank senior to them.
7.
Assuming for the sake of argument that promotion to the petitioners made in June, 1966, was to start with, only on ad hoc or local arrangement having been ordered on stop-gap basis, but the fact that it has been allowed to continue for a number of years is indicative of and consistent with only one proposition, that the intention of the Government was to permit the arrangement to continue for an indefinite period on regular basis.
Obviously, this being the necessary conclusion, the officer so promoted could not be deprived of the benefit of that officiation in the higher rank for the purpose of seniority.
In the case of DR Nim v Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1301, it was found that the petitioner has been promoted and allowed to continue for eight years and still the Union of India was treating him as having been promoted against the stop-gap arrangement.
Repelling the contention of the Union of India, it was held that the stop-gap arrangement could not last for eight years and consequently petitioner DR Nim was held entitled to the benefit of entire period of officiation for the purpose of seniority.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the original promotion of the petitioners made on 19th June, 1966, in joint Punjab, that is, prior to 1st November, 1966, when the present State of Haryana came into existence, was not strictly in accordance with the rules, and as a result thereof, the petitioners should not be permitted to derive any benefit out of that promotion and their continuous officiation on that basis.
9.
In spite of my best efforts, I have not been able to detect any legal infirmity or non-compliance of any procedural requirements of statutory rules, by the former State of Punjab at the time of initial promotion of the petitioners.
Assuming that there did exist any non-compliance of any procedure or non-observance of any provision of the statutory rules, the fact stands that with efflux of time, the infirmity, if any, stood condoned and the State Government cannot today plead, that its own action was wrong.
Otherwise also, since the power of relaxation existed in the statutory rules of Punjab/Haryana Service of Engineers Class II, P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads) Rules, 1965, it shall be presumed that the State Government had exercised that power of relaxation in favour of the petitioners to the extent required, as has been so held by the Supreme Court in Narender Chadha and ors. v. Union of India and ors., AIR 1986 SC 638.
10.
It was precisely for such like cases, that S.M Sikri, J, speaking for the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Rabindranath Bose and ors. v. The Union of India and ors., 1970 Services Law Reporter, 339, held that "it would be unjust to deprive the respondents of the rights which have accrued to them.
Each person ought to be entitled to sit back and consider that his appointment and promotion effected a long time ago would not be set aside after the lapse of a number of years".
In any case, more than a half century ago, it was laid down by the Privy Council in their celebrated judgment in RT Rangachari v. Secretary of State, AIR 1937 Privy Council 27, that :-  "In a case in which after Government officials, duly competent and duly authorised in that behalf, have arrived honestly at one decision, their successors in office, after the decision has been acted upon and is in effective operation, cannot purport to enter upon a reconsideration of the matter and to arrive at another and totally different decision."
11.
Following this very consistent view and reiterating with greater emphasis, the Supreme Court in its recent judgment reported as The Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association and ors v. State of Maharashtra and ors., AIR 1990 SC 1607, after thorough analysis of the law on the subject, summed up the entire position by laying down ten principles (from A to J) for determining the inter se seniority of promotees vis-a-vis direct recruits.
Principle (B) clinches the issue in favour of the present petitioners and is reproduced below :-  "(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his services in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted."
In view of the aforesaid legal position, the claim of the petitioners for maintaining their higher seniority on the basis of their total length of service commencing from June, 1966, deserves to be accepted.
12.
Consequently, C.W.P.
No. 1080 of 1980 is allowed and the respondent State of Haryana is directed to consider the service rendered by the petitioners from June, 1966, against the post of Assistant Engineer as continuous officiation in Punjab/Haryana Service of Engineers Class II and to reckon the same for the purpose of seniority under Rule 12 of the Service rules.
Since none of the respondents had joined service at that time, obviously the petitioners are to rank senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 6 in the seniority list.
Resultantly, the impugned seniority list is quashed and the respondent State of Haryana is directed to revise the seniority list accordingly, forthwith.
As such, the reversion of the petitioners from the post of Executive Engineer to that of Sub-Divisional Engineer, which has been ordered only on the basis of reshuffling of seniority, is also held by quashed.
Thus, the petitioners shall be entitled to continue as Executive Engineers from the date of their reversion and shall also be entitled to all the benefits of arrears of salary, seniority and consequential promotion to higher ranks, to which they would have been entitled, had the impugned seniority list, followed by the orders of reversion, not been issued.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
13.
As already noticed in C.W.P.
No. 1080 of 1980, when on 12th March, 1980, the State Government rejected the representations and finalised the seniority list by placing respondent Nos. 3 to 6 senior to the promotee officers (JL Gera and KC Bansal), it also ordered their reversion from the post of Executive Engineer Class I to that of Assistant Engineer Class II.
This reversion has been challenged by KC Bansal petitioner in this writ petition, mainly on the ground that the State Government had acted in violation of the principles of natural justice and in a mechanical manner i.e. only on the basis of reshuffling of seniority.
14.
In the written statement, factual position has been admitted and the solitary plea taken in support of the impugned action is, that as the seniority list had been finalised, reversion was necessary to be made to reflect the seniority position in promotion to Class I Service also.
For that reason, according to the State Government, it was not necessary to afford an opportunity of being heard before ordering reversion from Class I to Class II post.
15.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the impugned action of the respondents is not sustainable in the eyes of law, as it is wholly violative of the principles of natural justice.
Assuming that the impugned reversion was to be ordered as a consequence of reshuffling of the seniority positions between the promotees and respondent Nos. 3 to 6 by accepting their representations, it was nevertheless necessary to afford to the promotees an opportunity of being heard before ordering reversion from Class I to Class II.
Obviously, it was not a routine promotion from one rank to another rank in the same Service, but it was appointment to Class I Service from Class II in the promotion quota.
A number of factors were to be considered before ordering reversion e.g. availability of posts in the promotion quota of Class I against which the promotees could be adjusted; effect of the completion of the maximum period of probation in class I Service on the basis of continuous officiation in that class, right from 2nd November, 1971 to 17th July, 1980, when the impugned order of reversion was issued, etc.
Therefore, the reversion could not be ordered in a routine manner treating it as a consequential formality following reshuffling of the seniority list.
Thus, before ordering the reversion, it was the minimum requirement of the principles of natural justice that the promotee officers who were affected by the order should have been afforded an opportunity of being heard.
Since this was not done, the impugned order of reversion is liable to be set aside and is hereby quashed.
Resultantly, the promotee-officers shall be entitled to continue as Executive Engineers from the date of their reversion and shall also be entitled to all the benefits of arrears of salary, seniority and consequential promotion to higher ranks, to which they would have been entitled had the impugned seniority list followed by the order of reversion, not been issued.
16.
With the above direction C.W.P.
No. 2238 of 1980 stands allowed.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this writ petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
17.
Dr. DK Chadha, petitioner in this case joined service as Sectional Officer in the PWD (B&R Branch) in the erstwhile State of Punjab.
In 1963, he qualified the AMIE examination, which is considered equivalent to a Degree in Engineering of a recognised University, as provided in Appendix 'B' of Rule 7 of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965.
Later on, he was selected as Temporary Engineer - a post equivalent to Assistant Engineer in P.W.D.
(B&R Branch), on 1st September, 1964.
Thereafter, with effect from 1st November, 1966, the petitioner came to be allocated to the present State of Haryana and was promoted as Executive Engineer in Haryana Service of Engineers Class I, with effect from 3rd July, 1972, on completion of his eight years' service as Assistant Engineer.
Later on, by notification dated 18th June, 1975, the Governor of Haryana, in consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission, declared the petitioner suitable for appointment to Haryana Service of Engineers Class I Senior Scale with effect from 3rd July, 1972.
After serving as Executive Engineer for about fifteen years, the petitioner was promoted as Superintending Engineer by order dated 2nd March, 1987.
A number of other persons, who were also promoted as Executive Engineers, though later than the petitioner, with effect from 8th October, 1973, and 10th December, 1975, were also promoted as Superintending Engineers.
Since the petitioner had about eight years' experience as Assistant Engineer, commencing from 1st September, 1964, when he was originally promoted to a post equivalent to Assistant Engineer - a post in Class II Service, and had about fifteen years' service as Executive Engineer in Class I commencing from 3rd July, 1972 and had also qualified the departmental examination as required under the service rules, he claimed to be placed senior to all persons who joined Class II Service later than him, as also senior to all those persons who even though were appointed to Class II Service earlier to him, but were superseded by him at the time of his promotion to Class I Service in 1972.
Despite that, on 7th May, 1987, a tentative seniority list of Haryana Engineers Class I was circulated in which the name of the petitioner was placed at number 40, whereas persons who were appointed/promoted as Executive Engineers later than him, that is, between 1973 and 1976, were placed senior to him.
Aggrieved against the same, the petitioner made a detailed representation on 18th May, 1987, Annexure P.6 with the writ petition, for the re-determination of his seniority and for correct allotment of the year in Haryana Service of Engineers Class I, by taking into consideration his length of service in Class II right from 1964 to 1972 and in Class I from 1972 to 1987.
This representation was still pending consideration with the respondents when the impugned order dated 4th November, 1987, was issued reverting the petitioner from Superintending Engineer to the post of Executive Engineer.
This order of reversion has been challenged in the present petition, mainly on the ground of violation of Article 16 of the Constitution, as persons, junior to the petitioner have been allowed to continue, and that it is based on wrong assumption that the petitioner's date of promotion to Class I Service should have been 21st September, 1976, and not 3rd July, 1972 - on which date he was actually promoted.
That is why one of the prayers made by the petitioner in the writ petition is, for a direction to the respondents to decide his detailed representation made on 18th May, 1987.
18.
While admitting the writ petition, the Motion Bench had stayed the operation of the impugned order dated 4th November, 1987 (Annexure P.9), which stay order has been continuing till today.
19.
In the return filed by the respondents, though factual position has been admitted, yet attempt has been made to justify the impugned action on the ground, that as the petitioner had been promoted without prejudice to the seniority claims of the other officers, the reversion of the petitioner was not illegal, since it had been made as a result of the chance in his seniority position.
It has further been pleaded that no doubt the petitioner was working as temporary Assistant Engineer with effect from 1st September, 1964 but as the petitioner was on deputation to the Irrigation Department, his service could not be counted towards the service rendered as Sub-Divisional Engineer in the Haryana P.W.D.
(B&R Branch).
On that basis, the respondents had counted the experience against the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer-Class II Service only from 4th January, 1968, instead of 1st September, 1964 - the date on which he was initially appointed as Assistant Engineer/Sub-Divisional Engineer.
It has also been pleaded that his selection for promotion to Haryana Service of Engineers Class I was not in accordance with the rules, as a result whereof the seniority assigned to him before 7th May, 1971, was not in order.
20.
I have gone through the record of the case and, after hearing the learned counsel, find that the impugned action of the respondents cannot be sustained at all.
As already held in C.W.P.
No. 1080 of 1980 (supra), it is too late in the day to accept that the promotion of the petitioner who had put in eight years' service as Assistant Engineer from 1964 to 1972 and was promoted as Executive Engineer in 1972, which promotion was approved and the petitioner had been found suitable for appointment to Class I Service, by the Haryana Public Service Commission, and later on the promotion was also duly notified by the Governor of Haryana on 18th June, 1975 (Annexure P.3) on the basis whereof twelve years later he was promoted as Superintending Engineer on 2nd March, 1987 was not in accordance with the rules and the State Government was today at liberty to undo everything by putting the clock back by almost quarter of a century.
21.
Even otherwise, on the merits of the case, the stand taken by the respondents is wholly misconceived and devoid of merit.
Firstly, no promotee officer senior to the petitioner has approached this Court claiming seniority or promotion over the petitioner and for that reason, at the time of promoting the petitioner if it had also been mentioned in the order that the promotion shall be without prejudice to the claims of his seniors, if any, it does not authorise the respondent State Government or the direct recruits, to treat that the promotion of the petitioner was irregular in any manner.
This note was only by way of abundant caution, lest rights of any senior promotee should be adversely affected.
Further, the order of reversion could not be justified on the ground that it was done as a necessary consequence of reshuffling of the inter se seniority of the members of Class II and Class I Service consisting of promotees as well as direct recruits.
It needs to be reiterated, that even if the reversions are necessitated as a consequence of reshuffling of the seniority position between the promotees and direct recruits, it is still necessary as a minimum requirement of the rules of natural justice to afford to the promotee officers an opportunity of being heard before ordering their reversion from the higher post.
Obviously, the reversions are not routine in nature but are generally made either due to shrinkage of cadre strength as an austerity drive from one service to another, or from one rank to another in the same service or due to unsuitability of the officers officiating against the higher post, or due to such other exigencies of administration.
The petitioner having been promoted to the rank of Superintending Engineer after fifteen years' service as Executive Engineer in Class I, could not be reverted unceremoniously, treating the reversion as a consequential formality necessitated by the reshuffling of the seniority list against which representation of the petitioner made on 18th May, 1987, was still under consideration.
If the representation of the petitioner had been considered on merits in accordance with the service rules before taking any decision with regard to his reversion, the authorities were bound to hold that the period of deputation of the petitioner to the Irrigation Department for eight years from 1st September, 1964 to 2nd July, 1972, deserved to be counted towards total length of service rendered by the petitioner in Class II Service of the Punjab P.W.D.
(B&R Branch).
It is a matter of common knowledge that Public Works Department has three Branches, that is, Irrigation Branch, Buildings and Roads Branch and Public Health Branch.
The designations, pay scales and nature of duties discharged by the Officers manning the various posts in the three Branches are almost common.
Even the academic qualifications for recruitment to service in these Branches - Degree in Engineering, Diploma in Engineering, AMIE, etc., are almost same.
At a number of times it has been seen that the Public Service Commissions are holding common recruitment of Engineers in the Public Works Department and it is only after selection and at the time of appointment that either options are invited from the selected candidates to choose their respective Branches of the Department or the Government is left with the discretion to allot one or the other Branch to the selected candidates.
In this situation, the service rendered by the petitioner for eight years from 1964 to 1972 on deputation to the P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) has necessarily to be counted as service rendered by him as Assistant Engineers in P.W.D.
(B&R Branch).
On that basis, he was entitled to the higher seniority in the Haryana Service Engineer Class I, P.W.D.
(B&R Branch) and promotion as Superintending Engineer from which rank he has been illegally reverted.
22.
In view of the aforesaid factual and legal position, I allow C.W.P.
No. 8305 of 1987, and -  (i) quash the impugned order of reversion of the petitioner dated 4th November, 1987 (Annexure P.9); (ii) direct the respondents to treat the service rendered by the petitioner against the post of Assistant Engineer/Sub-Divisional Engineer as regular Class II Service from 1964, and from 3rd July, 1972 as regular Class I Service, for the purpose of re-determination of his seniority and retrospective promotion to the higher ranks, with effect from the date persons junior to him were promoted; and (iii) further direct that the representation of the petitioner dated 18th May, 1987 be decided in accordance with the directions made above, within a period of three months.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to costs of this petition, which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.