Pratap Kumar Ray, J - Heard the learned Advocates for the parties.
2.
Assailing the judgment and order dated 12th April, 2002 passed by the learned trial Judge in WP No. 11317 (W) of 1999 whereby and whereunder the learned trial Judge disposed of the writ application by quashing setting aside the order of dismissal from service as passed by the Disciplinary Authority and subsequently confirmed by the Appellate Authority under Service Regulation of the Central Reserve Police Force and thereby allowed the joining of the writ petitioner in service with all back wages, this appeal arises.
The reason assigned by the learned Trial Judge to pass such an order interfering with the punishment imposed by the Disciplinary Authority is that the punishment is shocking to the conscience of the Court as only for the absence from the camp without prior permission and consumption of liquor outside, should not have invited the penalty to dismissal.
The relevant fact of the writ application is as follows :  3.
A disciplinary proceeding was initiated on two articles of charge, which reads such :  ARTICLE-1 "No. 850832773 LNK Akhilesh Kumar of B/94 CRPF while Functioning as LNK committed an offence of remissness in discharge of his duty and disobedience of order in his capacity as a member of the force under Section 11 (1) of CRPF Act 1949 in that above said LNK has left the camp on 6598 at about 0930 hrs.
Without proper permission of competent authority and consumed country liquor foreign liquor.
ARTICLE-II No. 850832773 LNK Akhilesh Kumar of B/94 CRPF while functioning as LNK has committed an offence of misconduct in his capacity as a member of the force under Section 11 (1) of CRPF Act 1949 in that No. 850832773 LNK Akhilesh Kumar left the camp on 6598 at about 0930 hrs.
without proper permission of competent authority and molested a lady named Smt. Manoda Chakraborty wife if Shri Sasti Chakraborty at Baxirhat Bazar under influence of liquor and tarnished the image of CRPF."
4.
The delinquent was holding the post of Lance Nayak who was provided with all opportunities of hearing and there is no dispute to that effect.
The Disciplinary Authority on the basis of the departmental enquiry report wherein the delinquent appeared, passed an order of dismissal from service with effect from 1st September, 1998.
This order was challenged before the Appellate Authority who confirmed the views of the Disciplinary Authority.
The writ application was moved assailing the said decision.
5.
The learned trial Judge held that as charge under Article No. 2 on the charge of molestation was not proved and, as such only on the basis of charge under Article No. 1 as was proved, the punishment of dismissal was not justified inasmuch as under Clause 623 of CRPF Manual such short absence without leave or permission does not invite the departmental proceeding as the delinquent at the material time was not on duty.
On the aforesaid factual matrix hence a short question is required to be considered whether on the basis of the finding of the Disciplinary Authority that the charge of Article No. 1 was proved, the allegation of the charge as has not been denied even by the delinquent, whether the dismissal order as passed was justified and as to whether the High Court in exercise of power of judicial review when admittedly cannot exercise the jurisdiction of primary review amplitude but to exercise secondary review principle, may set aside the entire order of dismissal.
It is an admitted position that a delinquent left the camp without permission and consumed liquor and thereafter returned to the camp.
The discipline as to be followed and to be maintained while any CRPF personnel is posted in a camp is required to be considered in this case.
Chapter VII of Group Centre and Battalion Officers Manual, the Central Reserve Police Force under Clause 72 provides that the Officers and Constables should not leave the camp without permission of the Company Commander and serious notice should be taken for such event.
Clause 72 reads such :-  72 Under Officers and Constables must not leave the lines without permission of their Coy Commander.
Absence from lines during roll call and reveille is strictly forbidden.
Serious notice shall be taken of any such absence.
Procedure and orders for issue of out passes for visiting cinema, bazaar or relatives will be published in the Unit orders from time to time."
6.
Clause 623 of said manual provides the consequence due to short absence without leave or permission as it appears from Chapter VI under the heading "Discipline" of the said Manual.
There is a provision for a judicial trial of the delinquent for an offence under Section 10(m) of the CRPF Act if the graveness of the situation requires initiation of such proceeding or alternatively initiation of departmental enquiry if the situation is not so grave or serious due to the effect of such short absence from the camp.
Clause 623 as has been discussed by the learned Trial Judge to hold that the said provision has no applicability as the delinquent was not on duty at the relevant time.
Clause 623 reads such :  "623 Short absence without leave or permission may normally be dealt with departmentally or in Orderly Room but it is left to the discretion of the Commandant to decide whether the lapse is so serious or grave that its requires judicial Trial of the delinquent or an offence under Section 10(m) of CRPF Act.
If the lapse is not serious/grave or the delinquent is able to convince the Commandant or Asstt.
Commandant that his absence was not entirely wilful or that it was due to causes beyond his control, no judicial trial will be justified and it is left to the discretion of the Commandant and other officers to deal with same suitably either in OR or by DE and if the case calls for no action, the delinquent may also be let off after warning.
Where a summon or a warrant has already been issued by Commandant/Assistant Commandant Magistrate and it is decided that the case against the defaulter be dropped, the proper course is that the complainant filed by an officer be withdrawn and the same may be permitted to be withdrawn by the Magistrate."
7.
It is an admitted position from the factual matrix of the departmental proceeding that the writ petitioner/delinquent was posted in a camp.
As per rule of such posting in a camp/lines the concerned personnel is not free to move as per his choice even during the period when he is not on actual duty.
The discipline of a camp is completely different in comparison with the posting of an individual in an office and or in other places outside of the camp.
It is true, by rotation of 8 hours duty is allotted to the respective personnel who are attached to the camp and staying in the camp but that does not mean that when he will not be in active duty, he would be allowed to go outside of the camp without prior permission.
From the relevant provision of Clauses 72 and 623 as already quoted it appears that absence without leave or permission from the camp would invite initiation of judicial trial of the delinquent if there is a serious and grave situation or otherwise a departmental enquiry.
Hence, finding of the learned trial Judge that as the delinquent/writ petitioner was not on active duty, the aforesaid clauses got no effect, is not appealing us for its applicability to quash the order of dismissal.
However, from the aforesaid provision of maintaining discipline while a personnel is posted in a camp which requires a prior permission to leave the camp even for a short period from the Company Commander, we are of the view that the charge under Article No. 1 was proved.
Now, on the question of quantum of punishment namely, dismissal from service as imposed on such charge, we are of the view that as under clause 623 there is a provision for initiation of the departmental enquiry and as per decision only a minor punishment could be imposed and as Section 10(m) of CRPF Act provides the minor punishment issue in that field, we are of the view that dismissal being a major punishment should not have been passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
8.
Considering all the issues, we are quashing the order of dismissal as well as the order of confirmation of such by the Appellate Authority and remanding the matter back to the Disciplinary Authority under the service regulation of the delinquent to decide the quantum of punishment as would be commensurating with the charge of misconduct as admitted, which invites only minor punishment.
9.
The writ application and the appeal both stand disposed of with the aforesaid findings.
10.
Let Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the learned Advocates appearing for the parties expeditiously.
Prasenjit Mandal, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.