Pratap Kr.
Ray, J - In the instant writ petition, the grievance of the writ petitioner who is the headmaster of the school in that three vacancies; one being the post of clerk and other two post under the category of Group-D, though are lying vacant but the District Inspector of Schools did not accord prior permission to fill Up the vacancies following the recruitment procedure issued by the Director of Education, West Bengal under Memo 1736(21) GA dated Calcutta 1st November, 1999.
2.
An opposition has been filed by the State respondents being duly affirmed by one Assistant Inspector of Schools (S.E.).
In the opposition, it is stated that due to financial stringency of State of West Bengal, the Chief Secretary of the West Bengal had issued circular letters dated 13th December, 2000, restraining any appointment without prior approval of Appointment Committee of Cabinet.
The learned Advocate for the State respondent has referred to clause 2(f) of the circular letter, which reads thus : -  "2(f).
No casual appointments be made, except in rare cases with prior approval of Finance Department.
No reemployment would be allowed on any grounds.
Except for the posts where recruitment is through Public Service Commission, no vacant post irrespective of the duration of vacancy, can be filled without prior approval of the Appointment Committee of the Cabinet.
Treasury would not pass the salary bill of any new employee, if along with his first salary bill of Government Order clearly stating that clearance of Finance Department has been taken for filling up vacant post is enclosed.
This will not apply to promotional posts."
In this case, only point is to be considered whether in the said circular there is any restriction to fill up the vacancy and if so, to what extent.
From the circular letter 2(f) it appears that no vacant post could be filled up without prior approval of the Appointment Committee of Cabinet.
Filling up the vacancy by appointment and finalization of the recruitment issue following the recruitment rules, are not synonymous.
It is settled law by the judgment of the Apex Court passed in the case Prafulla Kr.
Swain v. Prakash Chandra Misra & Ors, reported in 1993 Supp.
(3) SCC 181, that the word `recruitment' connotes empanelment, enlistment, approval before appointment etc. whereas the word `appointment' means actual posting in a post.
Relevant observations from the said report reads thus : -  "29.
At this stage, we will proceed to decide as to the meaning and effect of the words 'recruitment' and 'appointment'.
The term "recruitment" connotes and clearly signifies enlistment, acceptance, selection or approval for appointment.
Certainly, this is not actual appointment or posting in service.
In contradistinction the word "appointment" means an actual act of posting a person to a particular office.
30.
Recruitment is just an initial process.
That may lead to eventual appointment in the service.
But, that cannot tantamount to an appointment.
Under the said circular letter 2(f), there is an embargo on actual posting that is to appoint a candidate but there is no embargo to complete the selection process for finalizing the panel under the Recruitment Rules issued by the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
The question of appointment will arise when panel would be finally approved by District Inspector of Schools.
At this juncture, the circular letter issued by the Chief Secretary would be its effective for consideration.
Prior to that the circular letter has no effective force.
3.
In that view, this Court feels that there is no embargo to complete the selection process following the Recruitment Rules issued by the Director of School Education, West Bengal.
But it is made clear that after the final approval and before issuing any appointment letter, the Managing Committee will refer the matter to the Appointment Committee through the Secretary, Education Department by processing the papers through the District Inspector of Schools concerned.
4.
Having regard to Such position, the writ application is allowed directing the District Inspector of Schools concerned to accord necessary prior permission to fill up the vacancies within two weeks from the date of communication of this order and the Managing Committee is directed to complete the recruitment process following the direction issued by the Director of School Education, West Bengal and thereby to send panels to the office of the District Inspector of Schools concerned, who in turn will take steps for according approval of the panel and thereafter will refer the matter that is the approved panel to the School Authority.
The School Authority will approach the Education Secretary through the District Inspector of Schools concerned for placing the matter to the Appointment Committee of Cabinet for necessary approval so that appointment letters could be issued to the persons who would be selected and empanelled after their clearance if any.
5.
The writ application in the aforesaid terms is accordingly allowed.
6.
The learned Advocate for the State respondent will communicate this order to the other respondents for compliance.
7.
Urgent xerox copy of the order be given to the petitioner, if applied for, on usual basis.
Petition allowed.