SS Nijjar J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper book with the assistance of counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Professor in the Department of Humanities and Management in the Dr. BR Ambedkar Regional Engineering College (hereinafter referred to as "the College"), on 26-11-1996.
On 28-1- 1997, he was appointed as Acting Head of Department.
He was appointed for a period of three years.
Thereafter the same was extended.
Dr. BR Ambedkar Regional Engineering College was made a deemed University by Government of India Notification dated 17-10-2002 (Annexure R1/1).
It was given the name of Dr. BR Ambedkar National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar.
The Board of Governors of the deemed University considered Agenda Item 6.21 for laying down a criteria in relation to the appointment of Head of the Department.
The relevant part of the aforesaid Agenda proposed was as under :  "1.
Each Department of the Institute shall be placed in charge of a head who shall be selected by the Director from amongst the Professors, Associate Professors and Assistant Professors : Provided that when in the opinion of the Director the situation so demands, the Director may himself take temporary charge of a Department or place under charge of the Deputy Director or a Professor from another Department for a period not exceeding six months.
xxx xxx xxx xxx Further, it is proposed that in case of any department having an effective faculty strength of less than three, the work of the Head of the Department be entrusted to any other Department at the discretion of the Director.
Further, if there is no Professor and only one Assistant Professor, he may be rotated after three years and the Director may give the charge either to any other Head of the Department or may take the charge himself."
3.
On the aforesaid Agenda a decision was taken by the Board of Governors on 28-12-2004 which is as under :-  "6.21 Appointment of Head of the Department.
The members approved that the Head of the Department will be appointed at the discretion of the Director from amongst Professors of the Department.
Wherever a Professor is not available, the Head of the Department can also be appointed by the Director from amongst the Assistant Professors.
The period of headship shall be at the discretion of the Director.
The Director may assume the charge of any department or make suitable arrangements with any other Heads of the Departments wherever the Director considers it proper."
4.
Pursuant to the aforesaid decision, the respondents passed the order dated 3-2-2005 (Annexure P-5).
By this order, Heads of Department in 5 Departments were changed.
Department of Humanities and Management where the petitioner was one such department.
In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has challenged the aforesaid decision of the respondent-University on various grounds.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that according to Rule 312 of Chapter 31 of the Bye-laws, in the absence of a Professor, an Assistant Professor is to be appointed as Head of Department/Coordinator.
The tenure of the Head of Department is for 3 years.
The appointment is normally to the made on the basis of seniority.
It is also provided that the headship of the Department can be taken over with the approval of the Chairman in case the Principal is not satisfied with the performance of any of the Head of Department.
In such circumstances the headship may be assigned to any other Professor also.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that since the petitioner had been appointed Head of Department under the aforesaid Rules, the respondent could not have withdrawn the charge of Head of Department on the basis of the subsequent decision taken by the Board of Governors on 28-12-2004.
We are unable to accept the aforesaid submissions.
As noticed earlier, the aforesaid College was given the status of deemed University w.e.f.
17-10-2002.
Thereafter the respondents were governed by the University Statutes and the Rules, Regulations made thereunder.
The decisions of Board of Governors are recorded in the resolutions passed by the Board of Governors.
In the order dated 28122004 the Board of Governors has given a clear discretion to the Director to appoint the Head of Department from amongst the Professors of the Department.
In case Professor is not available, the Head of Department can also be appointed from amongst the Assistant Professors.
Even the period of headship is at the discretion of the Director.
Director can assume the charge of any Department or make suitable arrangements with any other Head of Department.
In exercise of the aforesaid discretion, the respondents have decided not to continue the petitioner as Head of Department by order dated 3-2-2005 (Annexure P-5).
We are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid decision cannot be said to either arbitrary or whimsical.
It is not disputed that in the Humanities and Management Department, there are only two teachers, namely, the petitioner who holds the post of Assistant Professor and one Lecturer.
In such circumstances it was perfectly permissible for the respondents to effect a change in the Head of Department who was holding the post since 28-1-1997.
The decision taken by the Director on 3-2-2005 has been specifically considered by the Board of Governors at Table Item No. 714 of the Meeting held on 5-3-2005.
In the aforesaid meeting, the Board of Governors have taken the following decision :-  "Table Item No. 714 The Hon'ble Members of the Board considered the Agenda regarding appointment of Dr. Rakesh Chandra, Head of Department of Humanities and Management in place of Shri Sarabjeet Singh Bedi, Assistant Professor.
It was unanimously resolved that action taken by the Director in replacing Mr. Bedi as Head of Department is in accordance with the powers vested in him by the Board of Governors in its 6th meeting held on 28122004 in the interest of growth of the Institute.
The writ petition of Shri Bedi has no force or merit.
The Board further resolved that the Director should contest the writ petition filed by Shri Bedi in the Punjab and Haryana High Court, apprising of factual position in this regard.
Sd/- 5-3-05, Sd/- (Professor Avtar Singh) (Dr. TKK Reddy) Sd/- (Dr. TS Banerjee) Sd/-, Sd/- 5-3-05 (BK Ray) (Mr. Tarmay Mukherjee) Sd/- 5-3-05 (Dr. Rakesh Chandera) Sd/- 5-3-05, Sd/- (A.L.
Singal) (Pramod S Mehta) Sd/- 5-3-05 (Dr. Hari Gautam) Note : The writ petition of Shri Bedi is going to be heard on 15-3-2005.
It was resolved by the Board of Governors to approve and endorse the above decision on 5-3-2005 i.e.
Date of the meeting of the Board."
6.
A perusal of the aforesaid shows that in the note to the decision it is specifically mentioned that the decision taken by the Director on 5-3-2005 is approved and endorsed.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argues that the decision taken by respondent No. 2 on 3-2-2005 is actuated by malice.
The Director by ignoring the petitioner had constituted a Selection Committee and selected a candidate on the post of Lecturer in the Department.
Consequently, the petitioner had protested at being bypassed.
Therefore, respondent No. 2 has become vindictive against the petitioner.
These assertions made by the petitioner have specifically been denied by the respondents in the written statement.
It is not necessary for us to express any opinion on the mala fide, as the decision taken by the Director on 3-2-2005 has been specifically approved by the Board of Governors in the decision taken on 5-3-2005.
In our opinion, it would be wholly inappropriate for this Court to interfere in the decisions taken by the respondents which, in our opinion, are based on the relevant rules and do not suffer from the vise of mala fide or arbitrariness.
8.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.