HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The appellant was the unsuccessful writ petitioner who has since and now represented by his widow Bhagwani Devi who has been impleaded as an appellant vide order dated 2312004.
2.
The facts of the case are that the appellant-Lal Chand was enrolled in the Army on 18.7.1940 and was discharged from military service on 21.2.1954 as his services were no longer required being surplus to the establishment.
He thereafter submitted several documents before the authorities claiming his right to pension.
His claim was, however, rejected though certain amounts towards gratuity were paid to him.
The appellant continued to make requests for the grant of service pension including one vide letter dated 3151978, Annexure P-2, to which the authorities replied that his claim was untenable as he had not put in the requisite 15 years qualifying service.
The appellant thereupon submitted another representation claiming that as per instructions dated 30th October, 1987, Annexure P-6, Armed Forces Personnel were entitled to pensionary benefits on discharge from the Army service as being surplus.
Having failed in getting any relief from the authorities, the appellant filed a civil writ petition in this Court basing his claim on Annexure P-6.
In the reply filed by the respondents, they reiterated the ground that as the appellant had not put in 15 years service, he was not entitled to any pension and as the appellant had retired from service in the year 1954, he was in any case not entitled to the payment of pension under the instructions dated 30101987, Annexure P-6 as they could not be retrospectively applied.
The learned Single Judge in his judgment dated 1212001 held that as the appellant had retired prior to the issuance of the instructions, Annexure P-6 which could not be applied retrospectively, no benefit could be given to the appellant under those instructions.
The plea of the appellant that his case was covered by Regulation 198 of the Pension Regulations for Army, 1961 was also rejected with the observation that this Regulation was applicable only to such army personnel who had been discharged on account of having been rendered invalid for service.
The writ petition was accordingly dismissed.
Hence, the Letters Patent Appeal at the instance of Lal Chand.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellant has raised a new argument before us.
He has referred to the grounds of appeal and has pointed out that the case of the appellant was covered by Regulations 164 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 and as such, the appellant was entitled to all pensionary benefits.
We find, however, this is a completely new case put up by the appellant in the Letters Patent Appeal and there is no basis in the pleadings in respect of the facts that are required to be proved in a case covered by Regulation 164 ibid.
We have nevertheless examined the argument on merits.
We reproduce Regulation 164 of Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 hereunder :-  "164.
Special pension or gratuity may be granted at the descretion of the President to individuals who are not transferred to the reserve and are discharged in large numbers in pursuance of Govt.'s policy :- (i) of reducing the strength of establishment of the Armed Forces : Or  (ii) of re-organisation, which results in disbandment of any unit/formation".
4.
A bare reading of this Regulation would reveal that it presupposes certain conditions before it can be applied, they being (i) the individual who claims for special pension or gratuity is not being transferred to the reserve, (ii) that the discharge is in large numbers pursuant to a Government policy of reducing the strength of the establishment of the Armed Forces or re- organization which results in disbandment of any unit/formation.
We find that the basis of the claim has to be laid in the pleadings but no such claim has been made.
Mr. Sangwan has, however, relied on paragraphs 6 and 7 of the written statement filed by respondents which we reproduce below :-  "6.
That the averment made by the petitioner in this para is denied being relevant irrelevant, false, unfounded, misleading and baseless.
In accordance with para 164 of Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, Part-I (Revised Edition) beings out that either special pension or gratuity may be granted at the discretion of the President in respect of individuals who are not transferred to the reserve and discharged in large numbers in pursuance of the Government policy because of reduction in the sanctioned strength or re- organisation leading to the disbandment of any unit.
Since the aforesaid case does not fall under this purview for grant of special pension or gratuity, hence the same cannot be considered.
7.
That the averment is denied being wrong and baseless.
It may be mentioned that the petitioner was released from the service as per the then prevailing policy which was applied to the petitioner was well as other cases.
Available records reveal the fact that a large number of personnel had been released from the service for similar cause as that of the petitioner i.e. "Services no longer required" as there being no vacancy.
The release order issued by the Army Authority was equitable and the equivocal.
Hence, the release of the petitioner in the instant case is not discriminatory and arbitrary.
The cited judgment is not applicable to the facts of the present case".
5.
We observe that a reading of these two paragraphs does not advance the case of the appellant whatsoever as the very ingredients of the Regulation 164 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 have not been pleaded.
As a matter of fact, in para 6, it has been specifically denied that the appellant had been retrenched on account of a policy or there was an attempt at the disbanding of any unit on re-organization, as the discharge order, Annexure P-1, merely stated that the appellant was being discharged being surplus to the establishment.
Mr. Sangwan's reliance on a judgment of Rajasthan High Court (Jaipur Bench) in Sultan Singh v. Union of India and others, 2002(1) RCR(Civil) 819 : 2002(7) SLR 230, is clearly misconceived.
In this case the writ petitioner had been discharged from the Army due to the disbanding of the unit and it is in that situation that the Division Bench had allowed his claim.
We have also considered Mr. Sangwan's alternate argument with respect to the applicability of the instructions, Annexure P-6 dated 30101987.
Concededly, the Government instructions could not be applied retrospectively.
We accordingly find no merit on this appeal.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.