In view of the admitted facts, we feel that no reply needs to be filed in the present writ petition, the more-so the order impugned is a quasi judicial order.
2.
The agency of the petitioner had been terminated vide order dated 29102004 (Annexure P-3).
He thereafter filed a statutory appeal before the Zonal Manager, which was the Appellate Authority (Respondent No. 1) and the said appeal was dismissed vide order dated 1352005 (Annexure P-7).
The order (Annexure P-7) has been challenged only on the ground that it had been made without hearing the petitioner personally as was envisaged under Section 23 of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Agents) Regulation, 1972.
Section 23 which is in the following terms :  "23.
Consideration of appeals.
- (1) Where an appeal is received under these regulations, the appellate authority shall consider all the circumstances of the case and pass such orders as it deems fit : Provided that the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of representing his case.
(2) All appeals shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible but not later than six months from the date of the receipt of the appeal by the appellate authority."
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner had to be given a reasonable opportunity to represent his case before the appellate authority.
3.
Mr. Mahajan, the learned counsel for the respondents argues that although the petitioner had been given the right to represent his case, but as the appeal has been disposed of on merits by the appellate authority, the question of a personal hearing under Section 23 did not arise.
4.
We are, however, of the opinion that the matter is not res integra.
In K Chellathangam v. The Chairman, Life Insurance Corporation of India, 2004(3) SCT 185 : 2004(3) SCT 185, the learned single Bengh of the Madras High Court has held that the provisions of regulation 23 clearly envisaged a personal hearing as well.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents has however pointed out that the correctness of the aforesaid judgment had been challenged before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, though no result had so far come about.
Prima facie, we too agree with the view taken by the single Judge in the above reported judgment, and accordingly deem it appropriate to take a similar view.
We accordingly allow the petition, quash order dated 1352005 (Annexure P-7) and direct the appellate authority to decide the matter afresh expeditiously in accordance with law after hearing the petitioner or his counsel.
No order as to costs.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.