Narendra Nath Tiwari, J - In this writ application the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the order dated 2761996, issued by the Civil Surgeon-cum-Chief Medical Officer, Lohardaga, whereby he has been reverted to the post of Vaccinator from the post of Computator (Sanganak).
The grievance of the petitioner is wholly illegal, without jurisdiction and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the said order has been passed in utter violation of the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as, the impugned order is non-speaking and cryptic and is not supported by any valid reason.
2.
The petitioner's case is that he was appointed on the post of Vaccinator on 331973 and was posted at Ranchi.
Annexure-1 to the writ application is the letter of appointment.
It was stated that the said appointment was in accordance with law and all the prescribed procedures had been followed including holding of interview and preparation of selection list.
According to the petitioner Lohardaga district separated from the district of Ranchi district in the year 1981-82 and the petitioner's services were placed in Lohardaga district as at the relevant time the petitioner was working within the territorial jurisdiction of Lohardaga district.
According to him, after continuous working for more than 15 years, the proposal of his promotion was placed before the District Establishment Committee along with several other candidates and in view of their eligibility and long service, the Establishment Committee approved the petitioner's promotion along with others to the post of Computator which carried the pay scale of Rs. 580-860.
The promotion order dated 30101989 was issued under the signature of the respondent No. 2 which has been annexed as Annexure-2 to the writ application.
The petitioner since thereafter had been working on the said post of Computator (Sanganak) in the promoted scale.
According to him all of a sudden the said promotion was cancelled for the reasons unknown to the petitioner as no reason whatsoever was assigned in the said order of cancellation dated 1061994 issued by the respondent No. 2, which is annexure-3 to the writ application.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the said order was passed without giving him any notice and without any hearing.
The petitioner challenged the said order before the Patna High Court (Ranchi Bench), as then was, in C.W.J.C.
No. 1888/1994(R).
In the said writ application a counter affidavit was filed by the respondents.
After considering the cases of the parties and after hearing them the said writ application was allowed and the matter was remitted back to the respondents to pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
The impugned order (Annexure-5), has been passed thereafter which is under challenge in this writ application.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that on bare perusal of the said order as contained in Annexure-5 it is evident that again a cryptic and non-speaking order has been passed by the respondent No. 2 and no reason whatsoever has been assigned in support of the said order of reversion of the petitioner.
Further, the said order has been issued passed by the Civil Surgeon-cum-Chief Medical Officer, Lohardaga without any approval of the District Establishment Committee.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the said impugned order is thus wholly illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and liable to be quashed by this Court.
3.
Mr. Singh, learned Standing Counsel No. 1 appearing on behalf of the respondents, has supported Annexure-5 submitting that the said Annexure-5 has been passed after due consideration of the petitioner's claim and the sane is in due compliance of the order dated 12494 passed in C.W.J.C.
No. 1888/94(R).
According to the learned counsel for the respondents the order of promotion itself was not in accordance with law and as such no notice was required to be served.
neither any hearing was required before passing the said order.
According to the learned counsel neither there is violation of principles of natural justice nor there is any other illegality in the said order as contained in Annexure-5.
He further submitted that the writ application is not maintainable and the same is liable to be dismissed.
A counter affidavit has also been filed on behalf of the respondent No. 2 wherein it has been stated that the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Computator was illegal and against the guidelines issued by the Health Department according to which the petitioner was only entitled for the post of Superior/Field Worker/Surveillance Worker.
It was further stated in the counter affidavit that the petitioner was illegally adjusted to the post of Computator and as such the said order was rightly cancelled.
It was contended that the impugned order does not suffer from any infirmity and there is no violation of principles of natural justice as the petitioner was given notice and he had also filed show cause reply and the order of reversion was passed thereafter.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the parties and perused the materials and documents on record, I find that the order of reversion as contained in Annexure-5 is not supported by any reason.
It is a cryptic and non-speaking order.
It is not clear from the order as to whether the petitioner was given sufficient opportunity of representing his case even after the order passed in the writ application bearing C.W.J.C.
No. 1888/1994(R) by which the earlier order in the same term was held to be arbitrary and without jurisdiction and the same was quashed and the matter was remitted back to pass a fresh order in accordance with law after hearing the petitioner.
It is further evident from the record that the petitioner was promoted to the post of Computator from the post of Vaccinator as far back as in the year 1989, on the recommendation and decision of the District Establishment Committee.
The said post of Computator admittedly carried higher pay scale.
The petitioner worked on the said promoted post for several years.
There is nothing on record to show that there was any complaint or anything adverse against him.
Such being the position, the petitioner cannot be abruptly reverted or downgraded and that too without informing him the reasons and giving him an opportunity of representation and hearing which is the minimum requirement of the principles of fair play and natural justice.
Having not done so the respondents have violated the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and on this ground alone the impugned order as contained in Annexure-5 is unsustainable.
It is now well settled that compliance of the requirement of the principles of natural justice should be evident from the orders itself and any supplement made by way of the counter affidavit stating about the compliance of requirement of the principles of natural justice cannot be read and accepted as valid compliance.
From bare reading of the impugned order (Annexure-5) it is apparent that there is only two-line conclusion without any discussion and recording of reason stating that on the basis of the explanation and remarks of Medical Officer-in-Charge, Primary Health Centre, Bhandra, the petitioner is being reverted to the post of Vaccinator.
There is not a single line about the said remarks or regarding the grounds taken in the show cause reply and the reason for rejecting the grounds and accepting the remarks of the said Health Officer-in-Charge.
Furthermore, no convincing ground could be made out by the respondents to meet the contention of the petitioner that the order of promotion having been passed by the Establishment Committee the Civil Surgeon has got no jurisdiction to annul the same and revert and downgrade the petitioner.
There is much substance in the contention of the learned lawyer for the petitioner that the impugned order is illegal and without jurisdiction.
5.
In view of the above discussions and in my considered view, the impugned order is wholly illegal, arbitrary and in violence of principles of natural justice and is not sustainable.
The impugned order dated 27696 issued by the respondent No. 2 is hereby, quashed and the writ application is allowed.
However, there is no order as to cost.
Application allowed.