SS Nijjar, J - The petitioner was appointed Social Study Master on 111991 through Employment Exchange.
He was subsequently made regular.
The petitioner had been appointed on the aforesaid post on the basis of reservation made in favour of the dependent of ex-serviceman.
Subsequently, the respondents advertised 140 plots of Headmaster/ Headmistresses on 14.12.2001.
The petitioner appeared in the written test.
On the basis of the result in the test he was called for interview.
However, when the result of successful candidates was released, the name of the petitioner was not included in the list of the successful candidates.
The father of the petitioner had been killed in the action during the Indo-Pak War in 1965.
Under the instructions dated 631992, the claim of the petitioner has been considered under the general category.
The petitioner claims that he was entitled to be considered in the category of dependents and wards of ex-serviceman.
In the advertisement, it was provided that the candidates must have eight years experience of teaching in Government/recognised Senior Secondary School/ High School/Middle School/master in Teachers Training Institute.
Since the petitioner possesses the requisite eight years experience he was entitled to be considered under the post reserved for the category of dependent of ex- serviceman.
He submits that the claim of the petitioner cannot be rejected on the ground that he was already gainfully employed.
Since eight years experience was required as essential qualification the candidate would only be gainfully employed.
He, therefore, submits the rejection of the candidature of the petitioner is arbitrary.
2.
We are unable to accept the submissions of the learned counsel.
The candidate who is already gainfully employed cannot possibly fall under the definition of "dependent of an ex-serviceman".
For this view of ours, we find support from the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of Haryana Public Service Commission v. Harinder Singh and another, 1999(2) SCT 298 (SC) : 1998(6) SLR 328.
In the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "The whole idea of the reservation is that those who are dependent for their survival on men who have lost their lives or became disabled in the service of the nation should not suffer.
The public purpose of such reservation would be totally lost if it were to be made available to those who are gainfully employed.
There is no justification for construing the words "dependents of ex-serviceman" in any manner other than that in which the appellant has construed them.
This is in accord with the reservation policy itself, as shown by the quotation therefrom aforestated."
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner was already gainfully employed in the State of Haryana since 1991.
Therefore, the respondents have rightly considered the candidature of the petitioner in the general category.
We are of the opinion that no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.