VK Bali, J (Oral) - By this common order, we propose to dispose of two connected Letters Patent Appeals bearing Nos. 319 and 305 of 1998, filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent as, both the appeals arise from the common impugned judgment recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 11647 of 1994, dated 2971998.
2.
After hearing learned counsel representing the parties, we are of the view that judgment of learned Single Judge needs to be set aside and the case be remanded for fresh decision.
All that needs to be mentioned, on facts of the case, is that the petitioners, in the original lis, challenged the report of Mr. RK Ranga, Senior Regional Manager, Haryana Region, FCI, Chandigarh dated 2941994 by seeking writ in the nature of certiorari.
It was further prayed that the respondents be prohibited and restrained from engaging the services of respondents 4 to 6 for the work of loading and unloading in the depot of FCI at Karnal, and further directing the respondents to issue the appointment letters to the senior-most workers identified by Chopra Committee Report, Annexure P2.
3.
The dispute, in short, is with regard to departmentalising 255 workmen of Karnal depot of FCI out of about 600.
In other words, who 255 out of 600 workmen, were to be departmentalised, was the sole question for consideration by learned Single Judge.
FCI was arrayed as respondents 1 to 3 in the original lis.
A detailed written statement came to be filed on behalf of the respondent-FCI, which is available at pages 332 to 348.
To the controversy, as referred to above, the written statement was filed on behalf of the respondent-Corporation, the employer of the workmen, which, in considered view of this Court, was relevant to determine the crucial question involved in this case.
Learned Single Judge, however, it appears, rendered the judgment on the crucial issue aforesaid by considering as if no written statement had been filed on behalf of the respondent-Corporation.
Reference in this connection may be made to the following paragraphs of the judgment recorded by learned Single Judge :-  "Only respondent No. 7 submitted written statement and raised preliminary objections that petitioners have concealed material facts from the High Court while filing this writ petition.... xx xx xx No other respondent has filed any written statement."
4.
It is not disputed during the course of arguments by learned counsel representing the respondents that written statement filed on behalf of the contesting respondents was not taken into consideration by learned Single Judge.
It is also not disputed that the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-Corporation contains such averments/documents which would throw sufficient light for arriving at a correct conclusion on the crucial question, as referred to above.
5.
In the circumstances, as fully detailed above, we are left with no choice but for to set aside the judgment passed by learned Single Judge and remit the case for fresh decision, which, naturally would be arrived at after considering the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent- Corporation.
So ordered.
6.
Since the litigation is going on for a long time, the parties, through their counsel, are directed to appear before learned Single Judge on 142004, wherever the matter shall be fixed as per roster.
Before we may part with this order, we would like to mention that during the pendency of the present petition, Mr. HS Bakshi, was appointed to examine the issue of seniority, and it will be open to learned counsel representing the parties to make submissions on the interim report filed by him.
Appeal disposed of.