SS Nijjar, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
With the consent of the learned counsel for the parties, this petition is taken up for final disposal.
3.
In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the communication dated 2162004, Annexure P-7, by which the petitioner has been informed that his application for being considered for the post of Headmaster/Headmistress by direct recruitment has been rejected and that he will not be called for interview.
The petitioner also seeks a direction to the respondents to interview him for the said post.
4.
On 4112003, the respondents invited applications for recruitment of 118 posts of Headmaster/Headmistress.
The petitioner applied for the post of Headmaster.
After qualifying the screening test, he was not called for interview.
The petitioner claims that he possesses the necessary qualifications and experience for being appointed on the post of Headmaster.
However, the respondents have arbitrarily cancelled candidature of the petitioner by communication date 2162004 Annexure P-7.
5.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
In paragraph 14 of the written statement, it has been stated that though the petitioner did not possess the requisite experience of eight years as Master, but he was called for interview in compliance of the directions issued by this Court in CWP No. 9852 of 2004.
Since the petitioner was being called for interview, the respondents have called number of other persons, who also did not have the necessary experience.
The candidates not possessing the requisite qualifications who were called for interview are mentioned in paragraph 13 of the writ petition.
These averments have been admitted by the respondents in the written statement.
6.
In view of the above, this petition is disposed of with the observations that the candidature of the petitioner be considered alongwith the candidature of other candidates, who did not fulfil necessary criteria whose particulars have been mentioned in paragraph 13 of the writ petition.
In the event, aforesaid candidates are considered for appointment after interview, the same relief be also granted to the petitioner.
No costs.
Order accordingly.