Surya Kant, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3835 and 4098 of 1987 as common questions of law and facts are involved therein.
For the sake of brevity, the facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 4098 of 1987.
2.
The petitioners have come up with a prayer to quash the condition imposed by the State of Punjab requiring 15 years service as Junior Engineers in Public Health Department (PWD) for the grant of selection grade of Rs. 800- 1400 against 20% posts w.e.f.
111978.
They have also sought a direction to remove anomaly in the selection grade by directing the respondents to suitably revise the same.
3.
The petitioners joined the Public Health Branch of Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, as Sectional Officers (subsequently re-designed as Junior Engineers in the year 1982) on different dates from the year 1963 to 1972.
Prior to 111978 the Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers were granted the time scale of Rs. 200-420 with selection grade of Rs. 450-500 which was admissible to the extent of 10% of the total posts.
On the recommendations of the Punjab Pay Commission, the pay structure of different posts came to be revised w.e.f.
111978 and the Junior Engineers were granted the time scale of Rs. 700-1200 with selection grade of Rs. 800-1400 to the extent of 20% of the total posts.
However, an eligibility condition was imposed that Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers should have 15 years of service to become eligible for the grant of selection grade.
In addition, the petitioners took exception to the fact that scale of selection grade was very low as it was yielding no monetary benefits to them.
Aggrieved at this, the petitioners have approached this Court.
4.
Upon notice of motion, written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
While there is no dispute on the factual matrix, it has been explained that the petitioners have actually been granted a higher time scale as well as better selection grade on the recommendations of the Senior Officers Committee constituted by the State Government over and above the recommendations of the second Punjab Pay Commission.
The precise stand taken by the respondents, as incorporated in para No. 14 of the written statement, reads as follows :-  "The second Punjab Pay Commission vide entries at Serial No. 28 of the schedule of page 274 of its report had recommended a revised scale of Rs. 570-1000 for the post of Sectional Officer in the PWD (Public Health).
These posts were, however, allowed the revised pay scale of Rs. 570-1000 plus two advance increments for those who are AMIE or possess degree in Engineering at the time of entry into service and a selection grade of Rs. 700-1200 at the rate of 20%.
The matter was further considered by the Senior Officers Committee constituted by the State Government for the removal of anomalies and said Committee recommended a higher scale of Rs. 700-1200 with two advance increments for those who are AMIE or possess degree in Engineering and selection grade of Rs. 800-1400 for 20% posts and the same was allowed by the State Government.
As such the existing time scale and selection grade of the Sectional Officers (now called JEs) stand allowed after due consideration by the appropriate forums and these scales are even higher than that recommended by the second Punjab Pay Commission.
Now the third Punjab Pay Commission headed by a retired Judge of Punjab and Haryana High Court has already been set up and in the case the petitioners have any grievance they may approach the third Punjab Pay Commission.
The State Government has already decided to refer all the cases of anomalies/revision of pay scale etc. to the third Punjab Pay Commission and a policy circular was issued to all the Departments vide UO No. 4/9/86-3FPT dated the 19th September, 1986 in this regard."
5.
I have heard Shri Chopra, learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Shri Dhaliwal, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of respondents and have gone through the record.
6.
Shri Chopra has made two-fold submissions.
Firstly, he contends that the Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers were already getting the selection grade of Rs. 450-500 to the extent of 10% of the total posts prior to 111978 when their time scale was Rs. 200-450 and at that time there was no such condition of having 15 years' service to claim the benefit of selection grade, therefore, imposition of such a condition at the time of revising the time scale w.e.f.
111978 amounts to adverse alteration in their service conditions.
Secondly, he contends that the selection grade of Rs. 800-1400 was totally anomalous inasmuch as the maximum of the time scale itself runs upto Rs. 1200/-, therefore, no financial benefit could be drawn by the Junior Engineers on grant of the selection grade if the same was admissible after rendering 15 years of service.
He has also attempted to build up a case of hostile discrimination vis-a-vis Sub-Divisional Engineers and Executive Engineers of the department, to whom, according to him, the selection grade was granted without imposing any condition of requiring 15 years of service.
7.
On the other hand, Dr. Dhaliwal contends that the very grant of selection grade is in the nature of concession to compensate the employees on account of their stagnation for want of sufficient promotional avenues.
The selection grade is not a condition of service, therefore, it cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
He further contends that keeping in view the large cadre strength of the Junior Engineers, imposition of the condition of requiring 15 years service was valid and the same was imposed keeping in view the guide- lines laid down by the Pay Commission in this regard.
He has also relied upon the fact that the Junior Engineers have already been granted handsome time scale which is equivalent to the selection grade recommended for them by the Second Pay Commission w.e.f.
111978.
8.
The question as to whether the selection grade is a condition of service or not, depends upon either the service rules governing the service conditions and/or the terms and conditions of employment on a particular post which are laid down by the competent authority and accepted by the employee.
There is nothing on record to suggest that selection grade was ever prescribed as a condition of service for Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers.
On the other hand, the petitioners themselves have admitted that selection grade was granted to them to compensate due to stagnation in their career as every one of them could not expect further promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer.
Thus, it is the pleaded case of the petitioners themselves that selection grade came to be granted to them as a substitute for promotion.
It is well settled that promotion is not a condition of service and cannot be claimed as a matter of right except that if promotional avenue is provided, the concerned employee has a right to be considered for promotion subject to his eligibility and suitability.
In view of this, it is difficult to accept that by laying down certain eligibility conditions for the grant of selection grade, service conditions of the petitioners have been adversely altered.
9.
Shri Chopra though has rightly contended that even in the matter of concession, once the State Government has taken a conscious decision to grant the same, it cannot act discriminately or arbitrarily in actual implementation thereof.
In order to examine as to whether while granting selection grade to the petitioners, the State Government has acted contrary to the spirit of Articles 14 and 16 of our Constitution or not, the stand taken by the respondents in paragraph 14 of the written statement will have a material bearing.
It is not disputed that the expert body, namely, the Pay Commission had recommended the pay scale of Rs. 570-1000 w.e.f.
111978 for Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers.
However, while granting the same, the State Government increased it to Rs. 570-1080.
Still further, the Senior Officers Committee constituted by the State Government "for removal of anomalies" recommended a higher time scale of Rs. 700-1200 with two advance increments for those who were AMIE or possessed degree in Engineering, apart from selection grade of Rs. 800-1400 for 20% of the total posts.
The recommendations of the Senior Officers Committee have been accepted by the State Government in toto.
It is not disputed that had the recommendations of the Pay Commission been implemented, the petitioners would have got selection grade of Rs. 700-1200 only to the extent of 20% of the posts.
The petitioners have, thus, been granted higher time scale than what was recommended by the expert body.
Proportionately, selection grade has also been granted at a higher rate.
It, therefore, belies the contention of the petitioners that they have been denied fair treatment by the State in the matter of grant of revised pay scale or the selection grade w.e.f.
111978.
10.
So far as the condition of requiring 15 years service to become eligible for the grant of selection grade is concerned, reference may be made to the criteria regarding provision for selection grade as incorporated in the Government circular dated March 3, 1980 (Annexure P-2), issued by the Finance Department whereby following parameters have been required to be kept in view while granting selection grade :-  (i) Selection Grade will be provided in cases where the number of Higher Posts (all levels taken together) to which employees in a particular case can seek promotion is less than half the strength of that cadre or where there is no promotion post at all available to a cadre or service; (ii) The number of selection grade posts at each level should not exceed 20% of the strength of the basic scale for which the selection grade posts are to be sanctioned.
For the purpose of calculating the number of selection grade posts, all posts including temporary posts, which have been in existence for three years, should be taken into account and; (iii) Selection grade will not be admissible to an officer unless he had completed 15 years service.
The service should either be in the basic scale where appointment to the basic scale is from the point of fresh entry into service or as the sum-total of the employee's service in basic scale and in the one scale next below".
(emphasis applied) 11.
In this regard, the stand taken by the respondents in para 10 of the written statement is also relevant wherein it has been specifically averred that the condition of requiring 15 years of service in a cadre for the grant of selection grade "is applicable in almost all the cadres of the State Services and is not peculiar to the Junior Engineers".
Thus, the condition of requiring 15 years service appears to have been applied uniformly without indulging in pick and choose.
The petitioners cannot claim exception to the same merely because prior to 111978 there was no such condition for the grant of selection grade.
It cannot be over-looked that prior to 111978, selection grade was admissible only to the extent of 10% of the posts whereas the same has been increased to 20% of the total posts in the revised pay scales granted w.e.f.
111978.
Thus, no case of either discriminatory or arbitrary treatment being meted out to the petitioners is made out.
Consequently, I find no merit in these writ petitions and the same are dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.