GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for quashing order dated 9102002 vide which Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Forests Department rejected his claim for compassionate appointment by invoking para 2 of the policy contained in the instructions issued vide circular letter dated 851995.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner's father - late Shri Balraj Singh died on 18.6.1995 while he was working as Forest Guard.
At that time, the petitioner was minor and was not eligible to be appointed in government service.
Smt. Beermati, widow of the deceased employee and the mother of the petitioner was entitled to apply for appointment on compassionate ground as per the policy of ex gratia, but instead of doing that, she represented to the departmental authorities for reservation of a post for the petitioner.
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Haryana (respondent No. 2) entertained application dated 11121995 (Annexure P-1) made by the petitioner's mother and directed that one post to be reserved for the petitioner which may be given to him on attaining the age of majority.
3.
After the petitioner became major, Smt. Beermati again approached the departmental authorities for his appointment on compassionate ground.
Respondent No. 2 forwarded his case to Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Haryana, Forest Department, but the latter declined to entertain his claim by invoking paragraph 2 of the policy decision circulated vide memo dated 851995 (Annexure P-9).
This was conveyed to respondent No. 2 vide letter dated 9102002 (Annexure P-8).
4.
The petitioner has invoked the doctrine of promissory/equitable estoppel and averred that after having reserved one post for him, the respondents cannot refuse to appoint him on compassionate ground by invoking the policy contained in letter dated 851995.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the claim of the petitioner and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
The philosophy underlying the policy of compassionate appointment is to provide some source of sustenance to the family of an employee, who dies in harness or is retired on medical grounds before attaining the age of superannuation.
The methodology of compassionate appointment is not a recognised source of employment, but is an exception to the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India which imposes a constitutional obligation on all public employers to consider the cases of all the eligible persons for appointment on public posts.
In Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 138, it was held that, "appointment on compassionate grounds is not another source of recruitment, but merely an exception to the aforesaid rules taking into consideration the fact of the death of an employee while in service leaving his family without any means of livelihood.
In such cases, the appointment is given to a dependent of the deceased to enable his family to get over sudden financial crisis.
However, such appointments have to be made in accordance with the rules, regulations or administrative instructions after taking into consideration the financial condition of the family of the deceased."
7.
In Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar (Mrs.) and another, 1994(2) SCT 548 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 718, it was held that, "the High Courts and the Administrative Tribunals cannot confer benediction impelled by sympathetic consideration.
The Courts should endeavour to find out whether a particular case in which sympathetic considerations are to be weighed falls within the scope of law."
8.
In Jagdish Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1996(2) SCT 207 (SC) : 1996(1) SCC 301, it was held that, "if the dependent of the deceased employee is not eligible for compassionate appointment at the time of demise of the bread- earner, he cannot seek a direction for such appointment after long lapse of time."
The same view was reiterated in HSEB v. Hakim Singh, 1998(1) SCT 511 (SC) : JT 1997(8) SC 332; Sanjay Kumar v. State of Bihar and others, 2000(4) SCT 323 (SC) : 2000(7) SCC 192; State of Manipur v. Md Rajaodin, 2003(4) SCT 242 (SC) : 2003(7) SCC 511 and Director, Defence Metal Research Laboratory and another v. G Murali, 2003(9) SCC 247.
9.
In Md Rajaodin's case (supra), a Division Bench of the Supreme Court referred to the earlier precedents and observed :  "A catena of decisions of the Supreme Court make it aptly clear that the purpose of providing compassionate appointments is to mitigate the hardship caused due to the sudden death of the breadwinner in the family.
It is to alleviate the distress of the family that such appointments are made but these consideration cannot operate when the application is made after a long delay."
By applying the ratio of the aforementioned decisions to the facts of this case, we hold that the petitioner, who was minor at the time of the death of his father, is not entitled to be appointed on compassionate ground and, at this late stage, a writ in the nature of mandamus cannot be issued directing the respondents to appoint him on compassionate ground, more-so because the policies of ex gratia framed by the State Government from time to time and The Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003 do not provide for reservation of post for minor dependent.
10.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has been made to suffer unnecessary litigation, we direct the respondents to pay him costs of Rs. 5,000/-.
This amount shall be recovered by the State Government from the officer, who had ordered reservation of one post for the petitioner.
A copy of this order be sent to Chief Secretary, Haryana so that he may examine the desirability of issuing instructions against the entertaining of applications of the minor dependents of deceased employees in violation of the policy instructions and the rules and issue necessary order.
Petition dismissed.