Viney Mittal, J - The present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner Jatinder Kumar for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the circular dated November 29, 1989 issued by the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
A further prayer has been made for directing the respondents not to recover an amount of Rs. 500/- per month from the salary of the petitioner in pursuance to the letter dated May 10, 2000.
2.
Certain facts be noticed.
The petitioner is working as an Auditor and is a regular employee of the Department of Food and Supplies, Punjab, Chandigarh respondent No. 2.
The petitioner claims that being a regular permanent employee of the State Government of Punjab, he is entitled to the reimbursement of the medical expenses incurred by him in accordance with the Punjab Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
3.
The petitioner has averred that on medical advice, he underwent surgery on his right eye at Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (for short called PGI, Chandigarh).
It is further stated that for the aforesaid surgery, the petitioner was hospitalised from September 22, 1999 to September 23, 1999.
The case of the petitioner is that for the aforesaid treatment, the petitioner spent Rs. 11,855/- out of which a sum of Rs. 5,000/- was charged on account of implantation of Intra-Occular lens in his right eye.
A certified copy of the medical reimbursement certificate showing the total amount spent by the petitioner being Rs. 11,855/- has been appended as Annexure P.1 with the present petition.
On being discharged from the hospital, the petitioner submitted all the bills and completed all other formalities for claiming reimbursement of the aforesaid amount.
The departmental authorities verified the claim of the petitioner and on being satisfied, respondent No. 2-Department of Food and Supplies, Punjab, Chandigarh sanctioned the full amount for medical reimbursement.
Accordingly, the aforesaid amount was paid to the petitioner.
However, subsequently the aforesaid bills and other necessary papers were forwarded by respondent No. 2 to respondent No. 3-Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, Chandigarh.
The aforesaid respondent No. 3 directed respondent No. 2 to recover the amount of Rs. 4,23850 on account of excess amount paid to the petitioner for implantation of Intra-Occular lens and the cost of Betadine medicine (Rs. 4,200/- having been paid excess for the aforesaid implantation and Rs. 3850 on account of the cost of Betadine medicine).
The Department of Heath and Family Welfare respondent No. 3 directed the Department of Food and Supplies, Punjab Chandigarh respondent No. 2 to recover the aforesaid amount from the petitioner.
4.
Upon the aforesaid communication having been received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare, the Secretary of the Food and Supplies Department wrote a communication on July 7, 2000 to the Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare, whereby it was brought to the notice the latter that since the petitioner had taken the treatment from PGI, Chandigarh, therefore, there appeared to be no justification in imposing a cut on the price of lens.
The Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare was accordingly requested to intervene in the matter.
The petitioner also represented to the respondents and even chose to serve the legal notice.
A copy of the aforesaid legal notice has been appended as Annexure P.6 with the petition.
Ultimately, vide communication dated June 27, 2002, a reply to the aforesaid legal notice was sent by the Director, Food Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs, Punjab.
It was maintained in the aforesaid reply that since the approved rates for the reimbursement of the cost of Intra-Occular lens have been fixed upto a maximum of Rs. 800/- once in life time for each eye to all the State employees/pensioners and their dependents, therefore, the payment of Rs. 5,000/- as medical reimbursement for the aforesaid lease has been paid in excess to the petitioner.
With regard to the cost of medicine being Rs. 3850 it was also stated that the aforesaid cost was not reimbursable.
Accordingly, the Department of Food and Supplies respondent No. 2 maintained that recovery of Rs. 423850 being made from the petitioner was fully justified and the same was being made under directions given by the Director, Health Services and Family Welfare, Punjab, Chandigarh who was stated to be the competent authority in such matters.
5.
The petitioner has also attached a copy of the Circular No. 12/4/89- 5HBV/24805 issued by the Under Secretary, Health to all the Heads of the Departments etc. whereby the State Government had decided to allow the reimbursement of the cost of Intra-Occular Lens upto a maximum of Rs. 800/- once in life time for each eye.
The aforesaid circular has been appended as Annexure P.8 with the petition.
The claim made by the petitioner is to quash the aforesaid circular Annexure P.8 and reply dated June 19, 2002 issued by the Director, Food Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs, Punjab (appended as Annexure P.7) and consequential recovery being effected by the petitioner.
6.
The case put up by the petitioner is that since he was a regular Government employee, therefore, he was entitled to full reimbursement of his medical expenses and that no ceiling could be imposed upon the aforesaid reimbursement since the petitioner had received the treatment from PGI, Chandigarh, which was a Government run hospital.
7.
Notice of the writ petition was issued to the respondents.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have appeared and filed a joint written statement.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
The facts as narrated by the petitioner in his writ petition have not been disputed.
The recovery being effected by the petitioner has been justified on the basis of directions issued by the Department of Health and Family Welfare and also on the basis of the Circular dated November 29, 1989 (Annexure P.8), the respondents have maintained that since the payment had been made to the petitioner over and above the ceiling limit imposed by the aforesaid circular (Annexure P.8), therefore, the recovery order of the excess amount was fully justified.
8.
We have heard the petitioner who has appeared in person and Shri Ashok Aggarwal, the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record.
9.
The petitioner has submitted that his case was covered under the Rules as he had been treated in the PGI, Chandigarh which was admittedly a Government hospital, therefore, he was entitled to the full reimbursement of his medical expenses.
The petitioner has brought to our pointed attention the circular for medical reimbursement (Annexure P.1) wherein it has been mentioned that the aforesaid treatment given to the petitioner was necessary and further that the medicines charges have no cheaper effective substitute.
It has also been mentioned that the medicines are not in the list of non-reimbursable medicines articles.
On the basis of aforesaid submissions, the petitioner has submitted that he was entitled to the full reimbursement of the aforesaid amount spent by him for his treatment and that the ceiling imposed by the Circular (Annexure P.8) dated November 29, 1989 was totally arbitrary impracticable.
10.
On the other hand, Shri Ashok Aggarwal, the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab has submitted that the medical reimbursement of Government employee was to be assessed keeping in view the various Government circulars.
Shri Aggarwal has maintained that since the Department of Health and Family Welfare had objected to the full medical reimbursement of the petitioner being beyond the ceiling put by the circular Annexure P.8, therefore, the recovery now being effected by the petitioner, was fully justified.
11.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter.
At the outset, it may be pertinent to notice the certain provisions of the Punjab Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1940.
The aforesaid Rules were promulgated by the Government of Punjab in view of the powers conferred by clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 241 of the Government of India Act, 1935.
The aforesaid provision authorised the Governor of the Province to make rules in the case of persons serving in connection with the affairs of a Province.
In this view of the matter, it is apparent that the aforesaid Rules have statutory force.
Certain relevant Rules may be noticed as under :-  "Rule 2.
In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant to the subject or context - 3.
"treatment" means the use of all medical and surgical facilities available at the hospital in which a Government servant is treated, and includes : (i) the supply of all such medicines and vaccines as are in the price lists of the Medical Store Depots and such medical comforts as are certified by the Civil Surgeon to be necessary, but no alcoholic stimulants; (ii) such special treatment including electrical treatment and X- ray examination as is certified by the Civil Surgeon to be necessary and which may be provided by the staff of the hospital; (iii) such accommodation as is ordinarily provided in the hospital and is suited to the status of the Government servant; (iv) the service of such horses as are ordinarily employed by the hospital; but does not include diet, or treatment by specialists who are not on the staff of the hospital.
Rule 3.
A Government servant shall be entitled free of charge to treatment in a hospital in the place where he falls ill and, in the absence of a hospital there, in the nearest hospital.
(i) Where according to the rules of the hospital in which a Government servant receives treatment separate charges are made for medical, surgical and nursing treatment and for board, the charges for the former shall be defrayed by Government and the charges for board will be met by the officer himself.
(ii) Where the hospital charge is an inclusive charge, the charge for Board shall be levied from the Government Servant under treatment at the rates noted below and the remaining hospital charges shall be regarded as the charges for medical, surgical and nursing treatment.
xxxx...xxxxx.....xxxxx........xxxx.. xxxx...xxxxx.....xxxxx........xxxx.." At this stage, it may also be relevant to notice the circular dated November 29, 1989 issued by the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of Punjab.
The aforesaid circular reads as under : "To All the Heads of Departments, Commissioners of Divisions & Sub- Divisional officer (C), Registrar Punjab and Haryana High Court, Distt.
and Session Judge in the State.
Dated Chandigarh, the 29th November, 1989.
Subject :- Reimbursement of cost of Intra-Occular Lens to Punjab Govt. employees/pensioners and their dependents.
Sir,  I am directed to say that the question regarding making the cost of Intra- Occular Lens reimbursable for the Punjab Govt. employees/pensioners and their dependents has been engaging the attention of the State Govt. for some time past.
After careful consideration it has been decided to allow reimbursement of the cost of Intra-Occular Lens upto a maximum of Rs. 800/- once in life time for each eye to all the State employees/pensioners and their dependents subject to the condition that its necessity is certified and it is fitted by an Authorised Medical Attendant (ophthalmologist) of a State Government Hospital.
2.
This issues with the concurrence of the Department of Finance conveyed vide their ID No. 8A/49/89-5FE-II 3224 dated 27111989."
12.
A conjoint reading of the aforesaid Rules and the circular Annexure P.8 would show that the said circular is apparently contrary to the Rules which have statutory force.
Under the Rules "treatment" has been defined as use of all medical and surgical facilities available to the petitioner in which a Government servant is treated and is to include the supply of all such medicines and vaccines as are in the price lists of the Medical Store Depots and such medical comforts as are certified by the Civil Surgeon to be necessary, but no alcoholic stimulants.
13.
In view of the provisions of the aforesaid Rules, the certificate Annexure P.1 issued by the Medical Attendant certifying the treatment of the petitioner and further certifying that the aforesaid bills did not include proprietary preparations for which cheaper substitute for equal therapeutic value are available, nor preparations which are primarily food, toilets of disinfectants.
It has further been certified that the aforesaid treatment given to the petitioner was necessary and there was no cheaper or effective substitute available.
14.
The aforesaid certificate Annexure P.1, in our opinion, is absolutely in conformity with the provisions of Rules.
We find absolutely no justification for limiting the cost of Intra-Occular Lens upto a maximum of Rs. 800/- once in life time for each eye to a Government employee who was otherwise entitled to under the Rules to get the medical reimbursement.
We may also notice at this stage that it was not the case of the respondents that the petitioner had not actually incurred the aforesaid expenses as shown in Annexure P.1.
It is also admitted between the parties that the treatment given to the petitioner for the aforesaid implantation of Intra-occular lens was at PGI, Chandigarh which is a Government Hospital of repute.
Under these circumstances, we find absolutely no justification to put the aforesaid ceiling of Rs. 800/- vide circular Annexure P.8.
The aforesaid circular having been issued on November 29, 1989, with the rise in cost of treatment, has apparently lost its relevance and has become impracticable.
Even otherwise, the aforesaid circular runs contrary to the provisions of the Rules having statutory force.
The putting of the aforesaid limit vide circular Annexure P.8 denying the benefit of full reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on account of treatment to the petitioner is violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
15.
In a similar situation, a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Renu Saigal v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) SCT 565 has held a similar circular being contrary to the Rules as ultra-vires.
16.
Accordingly, we also have no hesitation in declaring the circular Annexure P.8 as ultra-vires to the Rules as well as violative of the principles enshrined in Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
17.
Consequently, the present petition is allowed.
The circular Annexure P.8 dated November 29, 1989 putting an outer limit of Rs. 800/- as costs of Intra-Occularr Lens for realising medical reimbursement to Government employee is hereby quashed.
As a consequence thereof, the communication/order dated June 19, 2002 is also held to be contrary to the Rules.
With the result, the petitioner shall be entitled to the full medical reimbursement of the treatment of his eye for which he has submitted the medical reimbursement certificate Annexure P.1 and no recovery in this regard shall be made from the petitioner.
However, the parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.