ML Singhal, J. (Oral) - Through this civil writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India by Malkit Singh and his wife, they have prayed for direction to the State of Punjab to release family pension to them from the date of the death of their son and all other death- cum-retiral benefits to them alongwith interest @ 24% per annum.
It is alleged by them in this petition that Surender Singh was their son.
He was Draftsman in the Department of Public Health of the State of Punjab.
He joined on 2781985 as Draftsman.
He died on 22111991.
There was no adverse remarks against him and as such the petitioners could not be denied "family pension" and other death-cum-retiral benefits.
As per Family Pension Scheme, 1964, "family pension" is admissible to the eligible members of the family in case the deceased employee has completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without break as provided in Rule 6.17(2) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
Under Rule 6.17(4) "family pension" will be admissible in case of widow upto the date of her death or re-marriage which ever is earlier.
Under the family pension Scheme, 1964, the parents of the deceased employee were not eligible for family pension.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 11118 of 1989 the State was directed to grant family pension to the parents of the deceased at the rates admissible under the Family Pension Scheme from the date of death of government employee.
State of Punjab filed L.P.A. No. 640 of 1990 against the said decision.
L.P.A.
Bench also decided that the parents of the government employee are entitled to family pension.
Surender Singh was married with one Hardeep Kaur daughter of Dr. Surjit Singh Purba, resident of Kot Kapura.
After the death of Surender Singh, his widow Smt. Hardeep Kaur re-married one Darshan Singh Granthi.
Smt. Hardeep Kaur has one daughter from the loins of her later husband Shri Darshan Singh.
2.
Respondents-State of Punjab contested this writ petition urging that in State of Punjab v. Kharak Singh, 1998(1) SCT 556 (P&H) : 1998(1) RSJ 412, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana held that the parents of the deceased government employee are entitled to family pension and that Rule 6.17 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-II is bad to the extent it debars/disqualifies the parents of the deceased employee from family pension.
In S.L.P.
No. 4350 of 1998 filed by the State of Punjab, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has set-aside the judgment and has held that the parents of the deceased government employee are not entitled to family pension and that Rule 6.17 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume-II is good in its entirety.
Smt. Hardeep Kaur widow of the deceased was qualified to receive family pension till her re-marriage.
As Smt. Hardeep Kaur re-married one Darshan Singh Granthi, she ceased to be entitled to the family pension due to the demise of Shri Surender Singh.
New Family Pension Scheme was introduced by the State Government in the year 1998 applicable w.e.f.
111996.
In the new Family Pension Scheme, the definition of the "family" has been changed.
Parents of the deceased government employee are also mentioned as entitled to receive family pension provided their total income from all sources does not exceed Rs. 2,620 per mensem.
3.
Learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Punjab submits that as the petitioners are parents, they are not covered in the definition of family as given in Rule 6.17(3) and as such no family pension will be sanctioned in their favour.
He further submits that the definition of family was revised vide notification dated 1671998 vide sub-clause 43 of Rule 6.17 (ibid).
Vide the revised definition of family which took place on 1671998, parents are also covered in the definition of family provided they were fully dependent on the government employee when he or she was alive and if he did not leave behind any widow or child.
He further submits that the said definition of family became effective w.e.f.
111996 through notification dated 1671998.
Since the petitioners' son died on 22111991 leaving behind widow, the petitioners are not entitled to any family pension.
4.
Ours is a welfare State.
Where should the petitioners go if they have none to look upon.
Their son Surender Singh was the only ray of hope for them.
Destiny played foul with the petitioners when it snatched the only source of their livelihood from them.
Their son was the only source of livelihood for them.
In my opinion, the revised definition of family which came into force with effect from 111996 will enure in favour of every parent whether father or mother who happens to be alive after 111996 irrespective of the fact his/her son died before or after 111996.
Petitioners belong to the lower strata of society.
They do not have any property.
Their son Surender Singh was the only earning member in the family.
After the death of Surender Singh, where should they go.
If destiny played foul with them, at least, the society should not play foul with them.
5.
It was held in State of Punjab and another v. Kharak Singh Kang and another, 1998(1) RSJ 412 that the parents of the deceased employee cannot be excluded from the definition of family or denied the benefit of family pension.
This is a beneficent measure namely the grant of family pension, which is to be interpreted liberally.
It is well settled that every executive action and in particular a legislative measure like a statutory rule governing the grant of pensionary benefits should meet the test of reasonableness as contemplated under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Parents of a deceased employee are eligible for the grant of gratuity.
They are also eligible for the grant of certain kinds of pension.
In the case of an employee, who is not even married, they are not entitled to the grant of family pension.
The rule has no rationale.
It is totally arbitrary.
It will be unreasonable to hold that parents of a deceased employee are not entitled to the grant of family pension, particularly when they do not have any source of their own to maintain themselves.
Definition of family given in the new Family Pension Scheme enuring w.e.f 111996 is attracted fully in this case.
In this case, the deceased cannot be viewed as a married person when his widow has re-married and has taken a husband.
After her re-marriage, the parents of Surender Singh will be entitled to "family pension".
6.
For the reasons given above, this writ petition is allowed.
State of Punjab is directed to release family pension in their favour with effect from the date when this writ petition was filed as also death-cum-retiral benefits, if the same have not been collected by Smt. Hardeep Kaur, his widow, before her re-marriage.
Petitioners shall be entitled to interest @ 9% per annum on the arrears of family pension and death-cum-retiral benefits.
Petition allowed.