JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The respondents advertised certain posts of masters/mistresses on 28121994.
The petitioner applied for the post of DPE (Teaching).
Her claim was for the post reserved for Backward Class candidates.
In order to substantiate her claim, she appended along with her application form, a certificate indicating that she belonged to Backward class.
2.
The result of the selection process was declared on 16121996.
The name of the petitioner did not figure in the said result.
On enquiries made by the petitioner, she came to be informed that she had been considered under the category of Sportsman (female).
The petitioner was aggrieved by the action of the respondents in evaluating her claim under the category of Sportsman (female) as she had never applied under the aforesaid category.
To seek consideration from amongst Backward class candidates, she approached this Court by filing CWP No. 8208 of 1999.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by this Court by directing the respondents to re-determine the claim of the petitioner.
On such re-determination, the petitioner received a communication dated 2452000 from the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee, informing her that the error committed by the selecting body in evaluating her claim from the Sportsman (female) category has been corrected and that she has been duly considered from the Backward class category.
The aforesaid communication also informed the petitioner that in view of her merit position wherein she had obtained 5421 marks, she had been placed at Sr. No. 5-A in the merit list pertaining to Backward class candidates.
On the basis of the aforesaid correction, the petitioner received an appointment letter dated 1362000 appointing her against the post of DPE at Government High School, Malowal.
The petitioner assumed her duties as such on 1462000.
3.
The grievance raised by the petitioner in the instant writ petition is that her seniority should be determined on the basis of the merit obtained by her in the joint process of selection above all those who are placed lower than her in the merit list.
It is also the petitioner's claim that she should be given the benefit of service from the date persons junior to her assumed duties in response to the process of selection in which she had participated.
4.
The sequence of facts narrated above, authenticate that non-appointment of the petitioner along with those selected on 16121996 was based on a fault committed by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The petitioner cannot be made to suffer a loss as a consequence of errors committed by others.
In such circumstances, we are satisfied that the claim of the petitioner for seniority above those who are placed at a position in the merit list inferior to that to the petitioner is fully justified.
The respondents are directed to assign the petitioner seniority in terms of her merit at Sr. No. 5-A.
It is, however, clarified that the petitioner would not be entitled to wages for the period she did not discharge her duties under the principle of "no work no pay."
As a natural corollary to the aforesaid determination, we are satisfied that by a fiction of law the petitioner should be treated to have entered service with effect from the same date as others who are placed in the merit position at a position inferior to her.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, a direction is also issued to the respondents to grant all consequential benefits to the petitioner flowing to her; by accepting her date of entry into the service to be the same as was assigned to persons, who participated in the same process of selection as the petitioner and were placed at a position lower than the petitioner in the merit list.
This would include the claim of the petitioner for any onward promotion including promotion to the post of lecturer for which according to the averments made in the writ petition the matter is under active consideration of the respondents.
Allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petition allowed.