GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner No. 1-Girdhari Lal, who possesses the qualification of Matric with Diploma in Mechanical, joined service as Storekeeper in Haryana Roadways w.e.f.
20.2.1974.
Petitioner No. 2-Lal Chand is a Matriculate.
He joined service as Storekeeper on 4.2.1971.
They have jointly filed this petition with the prayer that appointment of respondent No. 2-Nand Lal as Store Purchase Assistant by transfer from the Post of Junior Auditor may be declared illegal and respondent No. 1 may be directed to promote them on that post as per rules.
2.
The main plank of the petitioners' challenge to order Annexure P.1 dated 1641985 vide which respondent No. 2 was appointed as Store Purchase Assistant is that he does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed under the Draft Rules, i.e., Haryana Transport Department (State Service Class-III) Rules, 1983 which are being followed by the department for regulating recruitment to Class-III posts in Haryana Roadways.
The other ground on which they have challenged the appointment of respondent No. 2 as Store Purchase Assistant is the violation of Article 16 of the Constitution.
According to them, the post of Store Purchase Assistant can be filled by direct recruitment and/or promotion but respondent No. 1 did not consider their candidature and appointed respondent No. 2 even though he is not qualified for recruitment from either sources.
3.
The stand taken by respondent No. 1 is that respondent No. 2 was appointed as Store Purchase Assistant by transfer from the post of Junior Auditor because pay scales of both the posts were identical.
Respondent No. 1 has controverted the petitioners' challenge to the appointment of respondent No. 2 on the ground of violation of the rules and Article 16 of the Constitution by asserting that the Draft Rules do not have the force of law and the appointment of respondent No. 2 does not result in depriving them of their right to be considered for promotion.
It has also controverted the averment contained in the writ petition that the Draft Rules are in the nature of instructions issued by the government for making recruitment to Class-III posts including the post of Store Purchase Assistant.
4.
Although respondent No. 2 has not filed written statement, he filed affidavit dated 2312003 to defend his appointment.
Paragraphs 4 to 8 of his affidavit read as under :  "4.
That the above deponent was appointed Store Purchase Assistant from the post of Junior Auditor by the respondent No. 1, i.e., State Transport Commissioner, Haryana vide order dated 1641985 which are under challenge before the Hon'ble High Court.
5.
That the deponent has been working as a Store Purchase Assistant and still working as Store Purchase Assistant in Haryana Roadways, Panipat.
Thus, the deponent has rendered 18 years service as Store Purchase Assistant and completed successfully the period of probation also.
That the petitioners have challenged the appointment orders on the basis of draft rules of the Transport Deptt.
Class-III Rules, 1983 but it is pertinent to mention here that the said rules have not been signed by the competent authority till now.
Hence, these rules have no legal validity.
7.
That at the time of appointment the deponent was more qualified than the petitioner and has unblemished service record till today whereas the petitioner awarded punishment of stoppage of three increments by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, Chandigarh.
8.
That the deponent is to be retired on 3132004 after attaining the age of 58 years and undertakes that I will forgo my further promotion in the line of purchase section in which the petitioners are seeking relief."
5.
Shri PN Arora, learned counsel for the petitioners referred to the averments contained in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the amended writ petition and the corresponding paragraphs of the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 and argued that the appointment of respondent No. 2 as Store Purchase Assistant may be declared illegal and quashed because he does not possess the qualifications prescribed in the Draft Rules which are being followed by the department for making recruitment to Class-III posts.
6.
Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General candidly and fairly admitted that even thought the draft Rules prepared by the department in 1983 have not been published, the same are being followed for making recruitment to Class-III posts.
He also conceded that respondent No. 2 does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed in the Draft Rules for appointment as Store Purchase Assistant by direct recruitment or by promotion but submitted that the Court may not invalidate order Annexure P.1 at this belated stage because respondent No. 2 is going to retire on 3132004.
Respondent No. 2, who appeared in person, also submitted that his appointment may not be nullified at this stage.
7.
I have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
In paragraph 4 of the amended writ petition, the petitioners have averred that respondent No. 1 had issued various instructions in the form of draft rules from time to time and are made applicable to Class-III employees of the Haryana Roadways.
In paragraph 5, they have reproduced the qualifications prescribed for the posts of Storekeeper, Junior Auditor and Store Purchase Assistant.
8.
In its written statement, respondent No. 1 has denied that instructions have been issued in the form of Draft Rules but admitted that the same are being applied while making appointment/promotions to Class-III posts.
This is clearly evident from paragraphs 4 and 5 of the written statement filed to the amended writ petition.
The same read as under :  "4.
Para No. 4 is wrong hence denied.
No instructions have been issued by respondent No. 1 in the form of draft rules as alleged in this para.
It is, however, correct that these draft rules are made applicable while making appointment/promotions to Class-III posts.
5.
Para 5 is wrong.
As already stated in para 4 above, no such instructions have been issued.
The said qualifications, however, figure in the draft rules which have not so far been notified and as such have no legal force."
9.
Rules 7 and 9 of the Draft Rules, which have been made applicable for making recruitment to Class-III posts in Haryana Roadways, read as under :  "7.
No person shall be appointed to the Service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix `B' to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 3 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of recruitment by promotion.
xx xx xx (1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made - (i) by promotion, or (ii) by direct recruitment, or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an officer already in the service of any State Govt. or the Govt. of India.
(2) The posts shall be filled in the manner prescribed in columns 2 and 3 of the Appendix `B' to these rules.
(3) When any vacancy occurs or is about to occur in the service, the appointing authority shall determine the manner in which the same shall be filled.
Provided that in the case of posts in which one of the methods of recruitment is by way of direct appointment, 50% of the vacancies shall be filled by direct appointment except in the case of Statistical Assistant (Sr. No. 4), Senior Auditor (Sr. No. 8), Senior Accountant/Accountant/Manager-cum- Accountant/Junior Auditor (Sr. No. 9) and Assistant Tin Smith/Asstt.
Radiator, Repairer/Asstt.
Panel Fitter (Sr.No.
42), 60% and in the case of Clerks (Sr. No. 10), 80% of vacancies will be filled by direct recruitment.
(4) All promotions whether from one grade to another or from one class of service to another shall be made by selection based on merit taking into consideration seniority and seniority alone shall not give any right of appointment."
The qualifications prescribed for the post of Store Purchase Assistant are as under :  Designation of the post on which a person is to be appointed Qualification and experience if any for recruitment by direct appointment 1 2 3 Store Purchase Assistant Diploma in Mech/Electrical/Automobile Engineering.
i) Matriculate Preference will be given to those who have experience in handling Automobile Stores in Govt/Semi-Govt. Deptt.
or Public Undertaking.
ii) 5 years experience on the post of Storekeeper."
10.
A conjoint reading of the Draft Rules reproduced above shows that the post of Store Purchase Assistant can be filled either by promotion or by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation of an officer already in service of the State Government or Government of India provided that he possesses the qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix B The minimum qualification prescribed for appointment on the post of Store Purchase Assistant by direct recruitment is Diploma in Mechanical/Electrical/Automobile Engineering with a provision for preference to those who have experience in handling Automobile Stores in Government/Semi Government Department or Public Undertaking.
The qualification prescribed for recruitment by promotion is Matriculate with 5 years experience on the post of Storekeeper.
11.
If the legality of the appointment of respondent No. 2 is examined in the light of the relevant provisions of the Draft Rules, I do not have any hesitation to quash the impugned order.
It is an undisputed position that on the date of his appointment as Store Purchase Assistant by transfer, respondent No. 2 neither possessed the qualification of Diploma in Mechanical/Electrical/Automobile Engineering nor he was holding the post of Storekeeper.
Therefore, he was not eligible to be appointed as Store Purchase Assistant either by direct recruitment or by promotion.
This appears to be the reason why he was appointed by transfer.
However, that too was impermissible because even for appointment by transfer a person must either be holding that very post in the service of any State Government or the Government of India or possessing the qualifications prescribed under the Draft Rules.
The case of respondent No. 2 does not fall in either of these categories.
Therefore, it must be held that the appointment of respondent No. 2 as Store Purchase Assistant by transfer from the post of Junior Auditor is illegal.
12.
I also agree with Shri PN Arora that the appointment of respondent No. 2 had resulted in violation of the right of the petitioners to be considered for appointment as Store Purchase Assistant by direct recruitment and/or by promotion because if he had not illegally usurped that post, then they could have been considered for appointment by either of the two modes of recruitment.
13.
No other points has been argued.
14.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 1641985 issued by Transport Commissioner, Haryana appointing respondent No. 2 as Store Purchase Assistant by transfer is declared illegal and quashed.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to fill up the post of Store Purchase Assistant in accordance with the Draft Rules within a period of 2 months from the receipt of copy of this order.
If the Draft Rules have been finalised in the meanwhile, then the post be filled in accordance with the notified rules.
While disposing of the writ petition in the manner indicated above, I deem it proper to observe that the State Government may adjust respondent No. 2 on any equivalent post in the department because he has worked as Store Purchase Assistant for almost 18 years.
Petition allowed.