Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner Babita Rani has filed the present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated March 19, 1999 passed by Head Master, Government Primary School, Budanpur (Samalkha).
A further prayer has been made for the issuance of a direction to the respondents restraining them from terminating the services of the petitioner on the post of J.B.T.
Teacher till a regular selectee is appointed.
2.
Certain facts may be noticed.
The petitioner states that in pursuance to the advertisements issued by the respondents on August 19, 1997 and August 29, 1997, applications were invited for appointment of Lecturer, Master, Mistresses and teachers on a consolidated salary of Rs. 5000/- per month (for Lecturer), Rs. 3500/- per month (for Masters/Mistresses and C&V Teachers) and Rs. 2000/- per month (for JBT Teachers).
The stipulation made in the aforesaid advertisement was that the appointments were to be made on contract basis for 89 days.
The petitioner states that in pursuance to the aforesaid advertisement, she applied for the post of JBT Teacher and after the interview by the Selection Committee, she was appointed on the post on a consolidated salary of Rs. 2000/- per month.
It is her case that the fulfils all the qualifications for the post of JBT Teacher and after her selection she was appointed vide appointment letter dated January 20, 1998.
A copy of the appointment letter has been appended as Annexure P/1 with the petition.
She was asked to join at Government High School, Raksera.
Accordingly, the petitioner joined the aforesaid post with effect from January 27, 1998.
A copy of the joining report has been appended as Annexure P/2 with the petition.
3.
The petitioner maintains that although her appointment was for a period of 89 days but even after the expiry of the aforesaid period, the services of the petitioner were not terminated and were continued/extended from time to time by the respondents.
While working at Raksera, the petitioner received an order dated May 15, 1998 issued by the District Primary Education Officer, Panipat and accordingly the petitioner was received from has service with effect from May 23, 1998 as one Sat Narain, teacher working in the Government Primary School, Chulkana had been transferred to the Govt. Primary School, Raksera.
The petitioner was asked to contact the Block Education Officer, Samalkha-respondent No. 4.
4.
Accordingly the petitioner contacted the Block Education Officer, Samalkha and requested that the posts of JBT Teachers are lying vacant in other schools, therefore, she be adjusted at some other school.
A representation in this regard had also been filed, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P/4 with the petition.
The representation made by the petitioner was, accordingly, accepted and she was allowed to join at Government Primary School, Budanpur on May 23, 1998.
5.
The service of the petitioner was terminated once again on March 9, 1999.
The petitioner received an order passed by respondent No. 5-Head Master, Govt. Primary School, Budanpur whereby she was informed that her services have been terminated as one Rajesh Kumar JBT teacher had been appointed on regular basis in the Government Primary School, Budanpur.
The aforesaid termination order dated March 9, 1999 has been appended as annexure P/6 with the present petition.
It is the aforesaid order Annexure P/6 which is being challenged by the petitioner in the present petition.
6.
The main grievance of the petitioner in challenging the aforesaid order Annexure P/6 is that although the initial appointment of the petitioner was made for a period of 89 days on contract basis on a consolidated salary of Rs. 2000/- pm but a number of persons such as the petitioner who were appointed for 89 days approached this court through various Civil Writ Petitions, then this court in a writ petition being C.W.P.
No. 18839 of 1997 (Polu Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others) held that the teachers working on contract basis were to continue in service till the availability of the regular selected candidates and it was further directed that the services of the aforesaid persons could be dispensed with only in accordance with the rule of "last come first go".
While deciding the aforesaid writ petition in Polu Ram's case and other connected matters, a Division bench further held that the condition in the appointment letter limiting the appointment to 89 days was illegal and unconstitutional and further such teachers could not be restricted to a consolidated salary but were entitled to similar salary as was being paid to persons performing the similar duties.
7.
A specific averment has been made in the written statement that a number of posts of JBT teachers are still lying vacant in the State of Haryana and, therefore, as per the condition contained in Polu Ram's case (supra) it was incumbent upon the State of Haryana to first fill up all the vacancies on regular basis and, thereafter, apply the principle of "last come first go" to dispense with the services of such persons like the petitioner.
The petitioner maintains that her services have been dispensed with on the pretext that one Rajesh Kumar had been appointed on regular basis and, therefore, her services were liable to be dispensed with.
8.
Upon a notice issued in the writ petition, the respondents have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents No. 1 to 4 contesting the claim made by the petitioner.
9.
The stand taken by the respondents to contest the claim made by the petitioner is that the petitioner was appointed for 89 days since there were 58 posts.
Of JBT teachers vacant.
Out of the aforesaid 58 posts, 45 teachers were working on 89 days basis against the aforesaid vacant posts.
It has been stated that there was a reservation and as per the reservation only 4 posts of BC-B category and three posts of ESM category remained vacant after the appointment of regular incumbents.
Since the petitioner did not belong to any one of those categories, as such she was not entitled to continue on vacancy belonging to aforesaid categories.
10.
We have heard Shri Ashish Aggarwal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana.
11.
We find that the present petition deserves to succeed.
While issuing the appointment letter to the petitioner on contract basis and making her appointment on 89 days, there was no question of any reservation.
The petitioner was not appointed against any of the posts stated to be reserved.
As per the directions contained in Polu Ram's case (supra) such appointees were to be continued till the regular selected persons had been appointed.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner did not belong to the categories to which the vacant posts belonged.
This stand taken by the respondents is wholly untenable.
The petitioner was merely appointed on contract bass and was to continue till there was some vacant post available.
There was no question of any categorisation of such contractual appointments.
12.
Admittedly, there are some vacancies available.
Of course those vacancies would be filled up by the persons belonging to the categories for which the posts are meant.
In these circumstances, we allow the writ petition and while quashing the order Annexure P/6 direct that the petitioner would be entitled to continue in her job till a regular incumbent is appointed.
While disposing with the services of the petitioner, the principle of "last come first go" would be observed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.