Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in these three cases are working as Part Time Sweepers.
They complain that their claim for regularisation has been arbitrarily rejected on the plea that they had not been employed after having been sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts in C.W.P.
No. 12199 of 2000.
2.
The petitioner claims that she was registered with the Employment Exchange, Mansa on July 24, 1990.
On September 1, 1990, she was appointed as a Part Time Sweeper in Government Primary School, Matti in District Mansa.
She continues to hold this post till date.
3.
The State Government has been periodically issuing instructions for the regularisation of the services of different categories of employees.
On March 4, 1999 the State Government had issued instructions for the regularisation of the services of Class-IV employees working on part-time basis in various Government Departments.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure P-13 with the writ petition.
It was inter alia provided that ".....the part time workers who have worked for 10 years or more will be considered for regular appointment in the concerned Department....." Various conditions were laid down.
One of these conditions was that the petitioners should have been "appointed initially on part time basis through Employment Exchange or through open advertisement in the Press......"  4.
After the issuance of the aforesaid instructions and in pursuance to the directions given by a Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 13565 of 1997, the petitioner's claim for regularisation was considered by the Departmental Screening Committee.
Vide order dated September 7, 1999, it was held that she was not eligible for regularisation as the initial appointment had not been made through the Employment Exchange.
Aggrieved by the order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
5.
The petitioner alleges that she has been satisfactorily performing the duties of a Sweeper for the last more than 10 years.
There is no complaint about her work and conduct.
She further alleges that the condition in the instructions regarding appointment on recommendation of the Employment Exchange cannot be applied to the petitioner.
In fact, in the connected writ petitions, even the validity of the condition regarding the requirement of appointment on reference from the Employment Exchange has been questioned.
On these premises, the petitioners prays that the order dated September 7, 1999, a copy of which has been produced as annexure P-14, be quashed and all other consequential benefits be granted.
6.
The factual position in the connected cases is similar.
7.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been averred that the policy instructions were issued in pursuance to the directions given by a Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 13565 of 1997 (Gurdev Kaur v. State of Punjab).
Since the petitioner does not fulfil the qualification, the present writ petition is not maintainable.
It has been averred that the petitioner's claim was duly considered.
It was rejected by the competent authority as the petitioner was not eligible for regularisation.
8.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioners it has been contended that the notification of a vacancy to the Employment Exchange is not a condition precedent for recruitment to a Class-IV post in the State.
Nothing has been placed on record to show that in late eighties or in early nineties, the Departments were required to submit requisitions to the Employment Exchange for forwarding the names of eligible persons for appointment as Part-time Sweepers.
Since the Department itself was not seeking recommendations from the Employment Exchange, it cannot refuse to regularise the services on the ground that the petitioners do not fulfil the condition of eligibility.
9.
Mr. DV Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that the State Government had laid down the conditions of eligibility.
The petitioners do not fulfil these conditions.
Thus, they are in-eligible for the regularisation of their services.
Consequently, the impugned orders deserved to be sustained.
10.
Admittedly, the petitioners belong to a poor section of the society.
They have been working on the posts of Sweepers for a substantially long period of 10 years or more.
Nothing has been placed on record which may even prima facie show that the petitioners have been found wanting in the performance of their duties.
Still further, it is not disputed that there is a continuing need for the posts of Sweepers as it is necessary to have someone to clean the class-rooms and toilets etc. in the educational institutions.
11.
In the background of this factual position, the short question that arises for consideration is - Can the petitioners be denied the relief of regularisation merely because their names had not been sponsored by the respective Employment Exchanges at the time of their entry into service ?
12.
To answer this question, we have repeatedly asked Mr. DV Sharma, if the State Government had issued any instructions to the Departments requiring that the posts of Part Time Sweepers shall be filled up only after submission of a requisition to the Employment Exchange.
The counsel has not been able to point out anything from the record of these cases which may indicate that it was necessary for the Departments of the Government to ask for recommendations from the Employment Exchange.
Still further, it is not disputed that the requirement for notification of the vacancies to the Employment Exchanges is not a mandatory pre-condition for filling up the posts in different services of the Government.
In fact, a reference to Section 4(4) of the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 clearly indicates that the provisions have not to be "deemed to impose any obligation upon any employer to recruit any person through the Employment Exchange to fill any vacancy merely because that vacancy has been notified under" sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 4.
The provision clearly militates against any plea of a mandatory requirement of law under which the employer may be required to notify the vacancies to the Employment Exchange.
13.
In view of the factual position that there is nothing on record to show that the departments of the State Government had ever notified the vacancies of Part Time Sweepers under Section 4 to the Employment Exchanges or that any instructions had been issued to the Departments to notify the vacancies to the Employment Exchanges, the condition as now sought to be imposed is apparently arbitrary and unfair.
14.
Mr. DV Sharma submits that the petitioners had not even been recruited after open advertisement.
We have asked him if the State Government has ever advertised the posts of Sweepers ?
The learned counsel is unable to place on record any material to show that it had done so.
If the Government had never notified the vacancies in the Press, it cannot blame the petitioners or refuse the relief of regularisation to them.
15.
On a consideration of the matter, we are satisfied that the impugned orders are not just and fair.
The petitioners have been made to work for a long time without even being placed in a regular scale.
In fact, they are being paid a meagre sum ranging from Rs. 375/- to Rs. 600/- per month.
In the present day when the cost of living has gone very high , it is not a fair wage.
16.
In view of the above, the writ petitions are allowed.
The impugned orders are set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioners for the regularisation of their services.
They would be placed in a regular time scale of pay.
The consequential reliefs shall also be given to them.
The needful shall be done within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.