SS Saron, J - The petitioner, who is working as an Octroi Clerk in Municipal Council, Maur, District Bathinda, has filed the present petition for quashing order dated 2782001 Annexure P-2 in pursuance of which he has been suspended by respondent No. 4 on the allegation that he misbehaved with Madan Lal Octroi Inspector, Municipal Council, Maur, and taking Rs. 15/- as bribe on 25.8.2001.
It is alleged that in the month of June 2001 respondent No. 4 was transferred to Municipal Council, Maur from Municipal Council, Sardulgarh by the Director, Local Government, Punjab.
The transfer of respondent No. 4 is said to be for the purpose of putting pressure on the employees of Municipal Council, Maur, to withdraw the writ petition and contempt petitions pending in this Court.
Respondent No. 4 is said to be belonging to the area where the petitioner is stationed.
It is further alleged that the pressure tactics of respondent No. 4 failed when the employees of Municipal Council, Maur refused to withdraw the contempt petitions No. 292 and 294 of 2001.
These petitions are pending against the Director Local Government respondent No. 2 and some other Executive Officer.
Respondent No. 4 is reported to have warned the employees of the Municipal Council to face dire consequences for their refusal to withdraw the afore-referred petitions.
The petitioners has also filed a separate writ petition No. 6851 of 2001 for quashing the order regarding withholding his increment without serving any charge-sheet and conducting an inquiry.
It is alleged that respondent No. 4 put pressure on the petitioner to withdraw the said writ petition to which he refused.
Some warning is reported to have been given to the petitioner also.
In this regard a joint representation dated 2082001 Annexure P-1 was sent to respondents No. 2 and 3 in which prayer was made to take necessary steps and inquiry be conducted so that justice is given but there has been complete inaction.
The petitioner alleges that the writ petition filed by him i.e. C.W.P.
6851 of 2001 was pending for 2782001 when respondent No. 4 came to know that petitioner is not willing to withdraw the same and on the same day he was placed under suspension in pursuance of the impugned order.
Respondent No. 5 Octroi Inspector is reported to have made a false report against the petitioner to please respondent No. 4.
The suspension of the petitioner is said to be only to harass the petitioner with mala fide intention.
2.
Respondents No. 4 and 5 have filed a written statement.
The allegations made by the petitioner have been denied.
It is contended that no contempt petition was pending against respondents No. 4 and 5 and that they have no concern with the writ petition filed by the petitioner.
The representation is also said to have been wrongly made to respondents No. 2 and 3 and in the case the petitioner had any grievance, he ought to have made the representation to the Municipal Council Mqur (Mayor ?).
It is stated that the petitioner was suspended on the report of the Octroi Inspector respondent No. 5 and on the complaint of a private individual.
The allegations of mala fide intention of respondent No. 4 have been denied.
It is stated that in fact petitioner is not working in a disciplined manner and he threatens the employees of the Municipal Council that he will file writ petition and contempt petition in the High Court in case any action is taken against him.
The petitioner is misusing the powers of the Courts and there are many cases pending against him.
It is contended that petitioner was suspended on 2752001 for accepting bribe of Rs. 15/-.
He was earlier also charge-sheeted twice.
3.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that on the reading of Section 39(1) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (for short, the Act of 1911), shows that over- all control regarding the service conditions of the employees vests in the Municipal Committee which may suspend, remove, dismiss or otherwise punish any officer.
Besides, under Section 4(b)(i) of the Punjab Municipal (Executive Officer) Act, 1931 (hereinafter referred to as the Act of 1931), the powers of the Committee can be exercised by the Executive Officer subject to limitations.
The provisions of Section 39(1) of the Act of 1911 read as under:-  "Employment of other officers and servants :- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder, a committee may, and if so required by the State Government shall, employ other officers and servants and may assign to such officers and servants such remuneration as it may think fit, and may suspend, remove, dismiss, or otherwise punish any officer or servant so appointed."
4.
Section 4(a) and (b)(i) of the Act of 1931 read as under :-  "Power of the Executive Officer :- In a municipality or notified area as the case may be in which an Executive Officer has been appointed - the executive power for the purpose of carrying on the administration of the municipality shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made under this Act, or under the Municipal Act vest in the Executive Officer; (b) the powers conferred and duties imposed upon, the functions vested in, and the objections to be tendered and notice given to the committee under the sections of the Municipal Act mentioned in Schedule I, shall not be exercised or performed by, vested in, or be tendered or given to the committee, but may be exercised or shall be performed by, or shall vest in, or shall be tendered or given to the Executive Officer, provided that - (i) the power conferred by section 39 of the Municipal Committee shall not be exercised by the Executive Officer and may be exercised by the committee in respect of the appointment of any officer or servant, of the committee to a post for which the monthly remuneration exceeds Rs. 25, and in respect of the power of removal or dismissal of any officer or servant whose monthly remuneration exceeds Rs. 45 provided that the Executive Officer shall dismiss an employee if required by the committee to do so;" 5.
The provisions of Section 39 of the Act of 1911 enjoin that a committee, which would also mean Municipal Council as defined in Section 3(4) of the Act of 1911, may suspend, remove, dismiss or otherwise punish any officer or servant of the Municipal Council.
This power of the Municipal Council is subject to the provisions of the Act of 1911 and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder.
Section 4 of the Act of 1941 provides for the powers of the Executive Officer.
The executive power for the purpose of carrying on the administration of the municipality, vest in the Executive Officer as per the provisions of Section 4(a) of the Act of 1931.
6.
Section 4(b)(i) of the Act of 1931 provides for the conferring of powers and duties imposed upon, the functions vested in, and the objections to be tendered and notice given to the Committee (Municipal Council) under the sections of Municipal Act mentioned in Schedule I are not to be exercised or performed by, vested in, or be tendered or given to the committee, but may be exercised or shall be performed by, or shall vest in, or shall be tendered or given to the Executive Officer.
Section 39 of the Act of 1911 is mentioned in Schedule I to the Act of 1931.
Therefore, in terms of proviso (i) to section 4(b) of the Act of 1931, the powers conferred by Section 39 of the Act of 1911 are not to be exercised by the Executive Officer and may be exercised by the Committee in respect of the appointment of any officer or servant, of the committee to a post for which the monthly remuneration exceeds Rs. 25, and in respect of the power of removal or dismissal of any officer or servant whose monthly remuneration exceeds Rs. 45 provides that the Executive Officer shall dismiss an employee if required by the committee to do so.
As such, it is apparent in terms of proviso (i) to Section 4(b) if the Act of 1931, the Executive Officer is not to exercise powers in respect of appointment of any officer or servant of the Committee to a post for which the monthly remuneration exceeds Rs. 25.
Besides he is not to exercise powers of removal or dismissal of any officer or servant whose monthly remuneration exceeds Rs. 45.
However the Executive Officer shall dismiss an employee if required by a committee, i.e. the Municipal Council to do so.
7.
The present is a case of suspension and, therefore, in terms of the Section 4(a) and (b) of the Act of 1931, the powers to suspend under Section 39 of the Act of 1911 are to be exercised by the Executive Officer.
The present is not a case of appointment of any officer or servant of the Municipal Council nor a case of removal or dismissal.
In this view of the matter proviso (i) to Section 4(b) of the act of 1931 is inapplicable.
The impugned order dated 2782001 Annexure P-2 has been passed by the Executive Officer.
Therefore, in our view there is no error of jurisdiction in passing the impugned order of suspension by the Executive Officer respondent No. 4 and the same is within his purview.
As such the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is getting remuneration of more than Rs. 45 and as such the order passed by the Executive Officer is illegal, is not sustainable as the same is inapplicable in the case of suspension of employee of the Municipal Council.
8.
The allegations of mala fide have been denied by respondents No. 4 and 5 and even otherwise from the perusal of the record, we find that the allegations of mala fide are without any force.
The petitioner has been merely suspended in view of the complaint against him.
As per settled law, suspension is not a punishment and only an administrative action.
The power to suspend has been exercised under the statutory provisions governing the service conditions of the petitioner.
9.
Therefore, in view of the above, we find no merit in the present writ petition and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.