Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On January 29, 1998, the Punjab Public Service Commission advertised 22 posts of Medical Officers (Dental).
On February 17, 1988, the Punjab Government withdrew 18 posts of Medical Officers (Dental) from the purview of the Public Service Commission.
A copy of the notification has been appended as Annexure P/2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner, a graduate in Dental Surgery, has approached this Court with the grievance that the action of the respondents in abruptly withdrawing 18 posts from the purview of the Commission in order to save a few influential candidates from the screening test which was to be conducted by the Public Service Commission was arbitrary.
The petitioner was a candidate.
18 posts had been taken out of the purview of the Commission.
Only 22 posts are left for which she could compete.
Her chances were adversely affected.
Thus, she prays that the notification dated February 17, 1988 be quashed.
Still further, through a Civil Miscellaneous application, the petitioner had prayed that the 17 persons, whose services had been regularised be impleaded as respondent Nos. 3 to 19.
It appears that this prayer was allowed by a Bench of this Court vide order dated December 18, 1998.
The obvious purpose is to challenge the action of the State Government in regularising the services of respondent Nos. 3 to 19.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia pointed out that 18 Medical Officers had been working in the Health Department on adhoc basis since the year 1988.
They were being given periodic extensions in service.
A Committee had been constituted to suggest the ways for administrative reforms.
Hon'ble the Chief Justice Mr. SS Sandhawalia (Retd.)
had submitted a report.
It was specifically observed as under :-  "(XV).
REGULARISATION OF SERVICES OF ADHOC DOCTORS The State Government should consider the regularisation of services of all adhoc doctors who have completed four years of service, provided they are otherwise fit."
3.
In pursuance to the above recommendation, 18 posts of Medical Officers (Dental) were taken out of the purview of the Commission.
The services of the incumbents were regularised.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner could compete for selection against one of the 22 posts, for which the Commission was proceeding to make selections.
On these premises, the respondent-State prays that the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
Two separate replies on behalf of the private respondents have also been filed.
5.
Mr. RS Bains, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the action of the respondent-State in taking the 18 posts out of the purview of the Commission and in regularising the services of respondent Nos. 3 to 19 is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Has the State acted arbitrarily in taking the 18 posts out of the purview of the Commission and in regularising the services of the Medical Officers, who were working on adhoc basis ?
7.
It is undoubtedly true that the Constitution guarantees an equality of opportunity to all citizens.
Every person, who fulfils the qualifications for a post, has a right to be considered.
A person must get a chance to compete.
Whatever be the nature of appointment - adhoc, temporary or regular, the guarantee of equality of opportunity has to be ensured.
The fairest method which an employer, especially the State Government, is expected to adopt is that the posts should be advertised.
Every eligible candidate should be given a reasonable chance to apply.
The claims of all eligible persons should be impartially and objectively considered by the competent authority by adopting a fair, just and reasonable criteria.
Thus, who are selected should be appointed in order of merit.
This is undoubtedly the scope and mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
8.
In the recent past, a tendency has grown to fill-up the posts on adhoc basis.
Thereafter periodical instructions are issued for regularisation of the services.
All this usually results in a back-door entry of certain persons without their facing a fair and proper process of selection.
After a lapse of time, the State Government issues instructions for the regularisation of their services.
Mr. Bains is right when he contends that such a process defeats the guarantee of equality of opportunity.
Yet, the fact remains that instructions for regularisation have been approved by the Courts in the country.
9.
Regularisation of an irregular appointment should normally not receive a stamp of approval from the Courts.
Upholding the action of the State Government in issuing periodical instructions for regularisation has only encouraged the State and its instrumentalities to resort to adhoc appointments and then regularise their service.
Result is that those who are not in a position to exercise and exert pressure or are unable to secure a back-door entry, do not get a chance to compete for appointment to a large number of posts under the State.
Those who have the ability to exert pressure are able to secure jobs and then become regular members of the service.
It is the time that the State Government seriously considers the desirability of desisting from regularising the adhoc appointments.
As a result of proper competition, only the meritorious shall be selected.
They would perform the duties better.
It would promote public interest.
10.
As for the present case, it is admitted position that respondent Nos. 3 to 19 had been working on adhoc basis since the year 1988.
A recommendation for the regularisation of Medical Officers (Dental) working on adhoc basis was made by what has come to be known as the `Sandhawalia Committee' on administrative reforms.
The State Government, which had initially included the 18 posts also in the requisition sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission, had in pursuance to the recommendation of the Committee chosen to withdraw the posts from the purview of the Commission.
It had acted in deference to the recommendation of the Committee and not in defiance thereof.
Thus, it cannot be accused of having acted arbitrarily.
Still, further, the incumbents having continued on the posts for a long period of about 10 years, throwing them on the road would have been unfair.
They could have become overage and may have been ineligible to appear for the screening test before the Commission.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that the State Government had acted on account of any extraneous consideration or that its action was totally arbitrary and illegal.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, we find that it would not be just and fair to oust them from their posts at this belated stage especially when they have served the State for about 14 years.
Resultantly, though reluctantly, we dismiss the petition.
In the circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.