RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Smt. Suman Aggarwal daughter of Shri Bal Krishan Aggarwal (hereinafter called the petitioner) has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued in her favour and against the `respondents for the release of Master's grade i.e. Rs. 525-1050 w.e.f.
141985 which was revised to Rs. 1400-2600 w.e.f.
111986 the date from which the petitioner was performing the duties as Mistress and to release the Lecturer grade of Rs. 2000-3500 w.e.f.
July 1992, the date from which the School was upgraded to that of Senior Secondary School as the petitioner was teaching the Senior Secondary classes since the date of her appointment.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Two sets of written statements have come on record - one by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 where the stand is that the petitioner was appointed by the Manager and her service conditions were governed by the rules laid by the management or society running the school.
The government reimburses the salary of the teachers working against sanctioned staff to the extent of 90% in order to compensate the financial deficit of the management.
Also it was pleaded that the petitioner was working in a purely private school where grant is given on the basis of the deficit of the budget.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim the benefit of claimed by her against respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
3.
Respondent No. 3 i.e.
The Managing Committee of DAV Senior Secondary School, Mustafabad, has taken the stand that the letter dated 23rd July 1957 was issued by the Punjab Government as an incentive measure because at that time, the education was on the verge of expansion and the government was unable to find qualified and suitable teachers to meet the demand of that day.
The benefit of the said letter cannot be availed of by the petitioner.
4.
Two points survive for determination in this writ petition.
Whether the writ petition is maintainable and the answer of this Court is in the affirmative because respondent No. 3 is a government aided institution.
Rule 10 of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971 lays down that the scales of pay of the employees shall be as specified in column 4 of Appendix "A" to these rules and the rates of dearness allowance payable to the employees shall be the same as are admissible from time to time to government employees.
The ancillary point for determination yet would be that when the petitioner has been asked to perform the duties of higher responsibility, why she should get the salary of a lower job.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, during the course of his submissions, has invited my attention to the appointment letter Annexure P-1 vide which it is abundantly clear that the petitioner was appointed as SS Mistress on JBT post in the institution in the grade of Rs. 480-760 + usual allowance, which can be sanctioned by the Haryana Government from time to time.
The learned counsel further invited my attention to the certificate issued by the Institution -respondent No. 3 in which the Principal of the Institution while issuing the "Experience Certificate" on 791995 states as follows :  "Certified that Miss Suman Aggarwal d/o Sh. Bal Krishan Aggarwal, MA BEd.
(MA in Political Science) has been working in this institution as a SS Teachers on sanctioned against a JBT post since 01-04-1985.
She is teaching S.S./English to High and Senior Secondary Classes."
Sd/-Principal 791995" 5.
Thus, no doubt is left in the mind of the Court that the petitioner was performing the duties of the SS Mistress, though against the post of a JBT It is the settled principle of law that an employee must be paid according to the duties which he/she is performing.
It is established on the record that as she was performing the duties of the SS Mistress, therefore, she is entitled to that grade which is applicable to the post of SS Mistress right from the day of her appointment.
More so, the school has already been upgraded w.e.f.
July 1992 and the level of the school has been raised to Senior Secondary School and with enhancing of the status of the institution, the petitioner is performing the duties of the Lecturer.
Be that as it may, the principal remains the same, that the petitioner had been performing the duties against the higher post though she was getting the salary of the lower post and, therefore, she has to be compensated for the loss which had occurred to her from time to time.
In the present case, the petitioner is seeking the benefit since 1985 but the present writ petition has been filed in the year 1996.
Therefore, only the arrears for the period of three years can be granted.
6.
Resultantly, while allowing the writ petition partly, a declaration is given that the petitioner shall be given the arrears w.e.f.
1st January, 1996 by determining as against, which post she was performing her duties as on 1st January, 1996.
The arrears shall be calculated and shall be paid by respondent No. 3 within three months from receipt of a copy of this order.
It will be open to respondent No. 3 to make a request to the Government for reimbursement and the government will examine the case of respondent No. 3 on merits.
No order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.