Swatanter Kumar, J - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the petitioners challenge the validity and legality of the order dated 891998 Annexure P/2 to this petition, vide which the respondents have reduced the pay scale of the petitioners and ordered recovery from their salary.
The principal contention raised on behalf of the petitioners while praying for quashing of this order is that the order has been passed contrary to the principles of natural justice and without affording them any opportunity of any kind.
2.
The petitioners who are blind except petitioner No. 5, are working as blind teachers with Superintendent of Government Blind School, Panipat.
Alike other teachers, the petitioners were drawing their pay in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-40-1600-50-2300-EB-50-2600/- which was equal to the other Haryana Government High School BEd.
teachers scales.
According to the petitioners they have the same qualifications as are prescribed for the teachers working in the Education Department.
The State of Haryana on 711998 revised the pay scales of all its employees including the petitioners category with effect from 111996.
After revision of pay scales in the year 1998, the petitioners were granted the pay scale of Rs. 5500-9000/- with effect from 111996.
The petitioners have been drawing their salary in the revised pay scales for all this time.
However, vide order dated 891978.
Annexure P/2 to this writ petition, the respondents reduced the pay scale of the petitioners from Rs. 5500-9000/- to Rs. 5000-7850/- with effect from 111996 and directed the recovery to be made from the salary of the petitioners.
According to the petitioners, this action of the respondents is illegal, arbitrary and in violation of principles of natural justice.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
Various judgments have been referred to in the written statement but basic facts are not in dispute.
According to the respondents, the reduction in the pay scales is fully justified and the petitioners are not entitled to get the pay scale of Rs. 5500-9000/- as pleaded.
4.
We may may notice at the very outset that in paragraph No. 6 of the writ petition, the petitioners have made a specific averment that they are entitled to receive the same pay scale which they were receiving from 111996 i.e. Rs. 5500 - 9000/-.
It is also specifically averred that neither any show cause was given nor the petitioners were heard before the order of rejection in scale as well as recovery from their salary has been passed by the respondents.
In ground No. 1 this ground of attack has also been specifically pleaded.
In reply to paragraph No. 6 of the writ petition the respondents have not denied these facts.
It is not even contended before us that petitioners were granted any opportunity of being heard.
5.
In view of the above pleadings of the parties before us, there can be no doubt that the respondents have passed the above order in violation to the principles of natural justice.
It is a settled principle of law that any order adversely affecting the rights of an employee should normally be passed by the authorities in strict adherence to the maxim of audi alteram partem.
In this regard reference can be made to a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, 1967(2) S.C.R. 625, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under:-  "We think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences as already stated, informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
6.
We do not consider it necessary to go into the merits whether the petitioners are or are not entitled to continuance of the pay scales given to them of Rs. 5500 - 9000/-.
This is a question which the respondents need to decide in accordance with law, principles of natural justice and the rules of pay governing the petitioners.
We would set aside the impugned order Annexure P/2 principally on the ground that it is violative of principles of natural justice.
7.
In view of our above discussion, we allow this writ petition and set aside the order dated 891998 Annexure P/2.
The respondents are at liberty to pass fresh order in accordance with law and after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioners of being heard.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.