TS Doabia, J - Petitioner after he had rendered 23 years of service was called upon to show cause as to why his services be not brought to an end.
He has been removed from service.
The reason for this was that he had made a wrong declaration as to his date of birth.
Two articles of charges which formed the bases are part and parcel of Annexure-B For facility of reference this is being reproduced below :  Article-I  That the said No. 710350902 NK Angrez Singh while functioning as a member of the Force u/s 11(1) of CRPF Act 1949 in that he had declared his date of birth false stating as 9101952 instead of 9101954 at the constable in CRPF.
Thereby he committed an offence of misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force.
Article II.
He was enlisted in CRPF w.e.f.
171971.
His actual date of birth is 9.10.54.
Since he was under age at the time of his enlistment in CRPF he changed his DOB in school leaving certificate as 9.10.52 from 9.10.54 by tampering to become eligible and enlistment in CRPF.
Thus he committed an offence of mis- conduct in discharge of his duties as a member of the Force.
A perusal of the above would indicate that the mere allegation against the petitioner was that his date of birth was 9101954 and he has wrongly declared it as 9101952.
It is further stated that he has tampered with the school leaving certificate.
It is accordingly submitted that this act of his, which enabled him to join the service was covered by section 11(1) of the Central Reserve Police Force Act.
As indicated above he was called upon to show cause and after holding enquiry, the resultant order removing the petitioner from service came to be passed.
2.
Two charges against the petitioner were that he has declared his date of birth falsely and secondly that he had tampered with the school leaving certificate, vis-a-vis these matters when enquiry was conducted by the enquiry officer he was pointedly asked as to what his age was at the time he sought enrolment.
His reply was that at that time he was studying in 9th class.
It was on that basis his physical measurements were taken.
As to what his exact date of birth is, petitioner was unable to reply.
He was unable to tell the exact date of birth.
Another question put to him was to the effect that in the certificate furnished by him the date of birth has been erased and it has been shown as 9.10.52 instead of 9101954.
The reply given by the petitioner was in the CRP Form No. 1 he had indicated that he has passed 9th Class.
As to who produced the certificate and as to who caused the eraser as per the petitioner was not in his knowledge.
He took a categorical stand that he had furnished this certificate.
3.
To another question put to him he has categorically stated that the certificate given by him was a clear certificate and no cutting or overwriting or evasion was done by him.
4.
Notwithstanding the stand taken by the petitioner, the enquiry officer came to the conclusion that the petitioner had changed the date from 9.10.54 to 8101952.
5.
It is not in dispute that this certificate was furnished by the petitioner at the time of his joining.
It was at this point of time, the respondents were supposed to examine this certificate.
Even if it is presumed that the petitioner did make any eraser, this was before he joined the service.
Two questions arises:  i/ as to whether an act of omission if a person prior to his joining the Force can be taken note of while imposing punishment under Section 11 of the Central Reserve Police-Force Act, of 1949 (here-in-after referred to as the Act);  ii/ whether order of removal can be passed under Section 11(1) of the Act;  On both the issues, view expressed on judicial side is against the respondents.
6.
So far as first question is concerned, in the case reported as Dheeraj Singh v. Union of India, 2000 KLJ 612, it has been observed.
"Section 11 of the CRPF Act makes only those acts punishable under it which are committed as member of the force only."
7.
So far as second aspect of the matter is concerned, this has been considered by the Gauhati High Court in case reported as Deep Chand v. Union of India 2001(4) SCT 965.
HK Sema, J. (now Chief Justice of this Court) has expressed the view that under Section 11(1), only minor punishment can be imposed.
8.
What has been observed in paras 7 and 8 of the judgment is being reproduced below:-  "Section 11(1) of the Act deals with the punishment and empowers the commandant or any other prescribed authority, to impose punishment for misconduct upon the members of the force with the following punishment;  (a) reduction in rank;  (b) fine or any amount not exceeding one month's pay and allowances;  (c) confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not exceeding one month?
(d) confinement in the quarter guard for not more than twenty eight days, with or without punishment drill or extra-guard, fatigue or other duty, and  (e) removal from any office or distinction or special emolument in the force."
In the present case, admittedly the punishment of compulsory retirement imposed upon the petitioner has been made under the procedure prescribed under Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955, which is a major punishment.
Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules only prescribed procedure for award of major punishment.
It is not a penal provision itself.
This apart, the petitioner has been charge-sheeted under the provisions of section 11(1) of the Act, the disciplinary proceeding initiated against him under that Section, he was allowed to defend himself by cross-examining the prosecution witness under that section and, therefore, the Disciplinary Authority is not permitted to convert a charge under Section 11(1) which is minor penalty to that a major penalty for the completion of the enquiry.
This amounted to denial of reasonable opportunities to defend himself and is hit by Article 311 of the Constitution."
The afore-mention reasoning would be squarely attracted to the facts of this case.
Order of removal could not be passed.
Thus looking from any point of view the order of removal passed in this case cannot be sustained.
The same is quashed.
The petitioner is held entitled to reinstatement with all consequential benefits minus monetary benefits.
Disposed of as such.
Petition allowed.