SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner was appointed as Physical Training Instructor on ad hoc basis on 2821982.
He was having qualification of Matric, BA and diploma in Physical Education.
The qualification required for the post was Matric and a certificate in Physical Education.
Petitioner apprehended that the respondents would terminated his services because the qualification possessed by the petitioner, though higher than the qualification required for the post yet was not the same as required.
Hence, he filed this writ petition with a prayer that :  1) to consider the petitioner for the post of Physical Training Instructor advertised by respondent No. 2. ii) a writ in the nature of certiorari to be issued to quash the impugned order (termination order) if issued.
iii) a writ in the nature of mandamus to consider the petitioner for the post of PTI.
2.
At the time of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner has insisted for a direction to the respondent to consider that he was eligible for the post of PTI though he had higher qualification.
3.
Counsel for the respondent argued that the qualification of Diploma in Physical Education is not higher qualification than a certificate in Physical Education.
He also argued that according to the judgment of the Full Bench in case of Som Dutt v. State of Haryana, 1983(3) SLR 141, the unprescribed equivalent or higher academic qualifications cannot be more advantageous for the peculiar needs of a post for which the employer has prescribed lower qualification.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner has relied on a judgment in the case of Krishan Kumar, PTI and another v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 3758 of 1984 decided on 22111984.
In that judgment, the Full Bench has also considered the case of Som Dutt (supra).
Their Lordships observed inter alia as under :-  "However, the enunciation to the law by the Full Bench is not an authority for the proposition that if a person with superior qualifications had been recruited for the job by the competent authority and he had been in saddle for some time, that he can be casted out of the job for merely on the ground that he possessed more than minimum qualifications prescribed for the job."
Here in the present case, the petitioner is in the saddle for some time and now the question is whether he is unqualified for the post ?
5.
In view of the observations of the Division Bench, in relation to the applicability of the Full Bench Judgment to the persons who are already saddled in their job for sometime, the distinction made by the Division Bench can be accepted by this Court.
I have been told that there is another Full Bench who has to consider and decide such case.
It is not necessary to await the decision in that case.
The reasons is that the policy of the respondents as laid down in letter No. 6914/76-TM(3) dated 10111981 is annexed as Annexure P 1 in the paper book.
The text of which is reproduced as under :-  "In reference your letter No. 1556-66 dated 1461981 on the above mentioned subject.
CWP No. 2603 of 1980 which was filed in the Punjab and Haryana High Court, the persons who were possessing the Diploma in Physical Education for appointment on the post of Physical Training Instructor.
It has been decided on 22.5.1981 that person possessing the qualification of D.P.Ed.
could be appointed on the post of Physical Training Instructor.
This order will not be applicable on MA (Hindi) and MA (Sanskrit) working on Hindi and Sanskrit posts."
6.
As it has been decided by the respondents that on 22.5.1981 (prior to the appointment of the petitioner) a person possessing the qualification of DP Ed. could be appointed on the post of Physical Training Instructor, the respondents can not now say that the petitioner is not eligible for the job.
The policy (Annexure P.1) clearly endorses the qualification.
7.
As a result, this writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner is qualified to hold the post.
The respondents are directed not to terminate his services on the ground that he is not qualified.
Petition allowed.