RL Aanand, J - By this judgment I dispose of two Civil Writ petitions - No. 14834 of 1993, Balwinder Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 2002(1) SCT 1143 (P&H) and 18051 of 1993, Teja Singh and another v. The State of Punjab and others, as in the opinion of this Court both the writ petitions can be disposed of by a common judgment.
For the sake of facts, I am taking from C.W.P.
No. 14834 of 1993, titled Balwinder Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others.
2.
The petitioners through these writ petitions are seeking the directions of this Court against the respondents to pay them the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 and to absorb them in the service in the rank and status of Senior Accountant and to give them the benefit of previous service rendered by them for the purpose of fixation of pay, seniority etc.
The case set up by the petitioners is that the Punjab State Cooperative Bank Ltd i.e. respondent No. 2 is performing public duties in cooperative sector.
It advertised 50 posts of Mobile Trainers/Guides to be filled through the direct recruitment and deputation from the persons working in the Government/Semi-Government/Co- operative Organisations for the World Bank aided project i.e. Topic.
The advertisement was published in the newspaper in the month of October, 1986.
The qualifications required for the post of Mobile Trainers/Guides were master or equivalent degree in Business Administration/Agri/Commerce/Economics or Graduation with 2nd Division in above subjects with two years experience at managerial level in agri.
extension, rural or co-operative development.
All the Mobile Guides were to draw the fixed salary of Rs. 2,000/- per month.
In pursuance of the advetisments, the petitioners were appointed.
It may also be mentioned here that besides the petitioners.
Principals in the same project were also appointed on the same terms and conditions on a fixed salary of Rs. 3,500/-.
The project was initially for a period of two years which was extended from time to time.
The National Cooperative Development Corporation (in short `NCDC') is the premier cooperative development institution at the central level which disburses the finances to the cooperative banks.
Even this premier corporation i.e. NCDC recommended that Mobile Guides like the petitioners be given the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 since they are equivalent to Assistant Directors in the NCDC.
The recommendations of the NCDC were considered by the committee consisting of Managing Director and other high -ups in its meetings dated 2411991 and 28.1.1991 and the committee agreed with the recommendations of the NCDC as regards pay, designation, allowances and the scales which were recommended by the NCDC for Mobile Guides and other ranks.
So much so this grade was accepted by the Mobile Guides and all the Mobile Guides were consequently given the said pay.
However, so far as the absorption of Mobile Guides and other staff was concerned, it was resolved that these persons would either be absorbed in the bank in the pay scale of the Junior Clerk if they join the regular cadre of the bank.
The petitioners were not satisfied with this decision to be absorbed as Junior Clerks.
Subsequently, it was decided that the Mobile Guides should be given the scale of Junior Clerk but they should be designated as Planning and Recovery Assistant rather than Junior Clerks.
Therefore, it was decided to grant all the Mobile Guides the pay scale of Junior Clerk i.e. Rs. 1450-2950, but they would be designated as Planning and Recovery Assistant.
Still the petitioners were not satisfied and they made representation that they should be granted the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 and the matter was again considered and a recommendation was given that the Mobile Guides should be designated as Planning and Recovery Assistants and they would be given the pay scale of Rs. 1560-3075.
In short, the grievance of the petitioners now is that since NCDC recommended the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 to the Mobile Guides and they were designated as Planning and Recovery Assistants, therefore they ought to have been absorbed in the grade of Rs. 2200-4000 when the counterparts working in the State Government are being adjusted in this grade.
Their further grouse is that though the bank has equated their post as Planning and Recovery Assistant, but they are getting a lower grade of Rs. 1560-3075 as against Rs. 2200-4000 which their counterparts are getting in the State Government when the petitioners are having the same qualifications and performing the same nature of work.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and they had denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, petitioners were given fixed salary of Rs. 2000/- against a World Bank aided project (TOPIC).
It was a diminishing cadre.
The life of the project initially was of two years.
The recommendations of NCDC are not binding upon the respondent-Bank.
At any rate, the petitioners were given the grade of Junior Clerk though designated as Planning and Recovery Assistant.
Therefore, they cannot get the scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
They further cannot equate themselves by stating that since Principals and Trainers have been given a particular grade, they should also be absorbed in the grade of their own choice i.e. Rs. 2000-4000.
4.
I have heard Mr. Arun Jain, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners, Mr. Hemant Kumar, Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
From the lengthy case of the parties the short point for determination is whether the petitioners are entitled to the grade of Rs.2200-4000.
It is the case of the petitioners that earlier their appointment was in an aided project whose life was only for two years and they were recruited against the fixed emoluments of Rs. 2,000/-.
The cadre of the petitioners was a diminishing one.
Of course, the NCDC made recommendation to the respondents to absorb the petitioners in the grade of Rs. 2200-4000 by treating them equivalent to Assistant Directors working in the NCDC but this recommendation could not be binding upon the respondents.
At any rate, they were adjusted in the cadre of Junior Clerks with a designation of Planning and Recovery Assistant.
They were never substantially appointed against these posts.
This designation was only for the purpose of giving a status as the petitioners were not inclined to call themselves as Junior Clerks.
By simply holding the qualification or simply having a designation as equivalent to planning and Recovery Assistant in the counterparts working in the State Government, the petitioners do not become entitle to the scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
When the petitioners were adjusted in a lower grade of Junior Clerk, their pay, which they were drawing as Mobile Trainers, was never affected.
They were not the losers.
In fact, the petitioners want to take the advantage of a nomenclature of their posts.
In this view of the matter, I am of the view that there is no merit in these writ petitions and the same are hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.