RL Anand, J - Earlier this writ petition was filed by two persons namely Shri Ajit Kumar Yadav and Shri Veer Singh in the year 1990 against the State of Haryana and others, fully described in the head-note of the writ petition, and a writ in the nature of mandamus was prayed for regularisation of services of both the petitioners and they also claimed parity in the pay on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
Yet during the pendency of this writ petition, Shri Veer Singh, petitioner No. 2, was dismissed from service vide order dated 15121992 on account of embezzlement of some amount of the Haryana Tourism Corporation Ltd (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) i.e. respondent No. 2, therefore, the writ of petitioner No. 2 was dismissed as infructuous vide order dated 16.2.1994 and now I have to consider only the case of petitioner No. 1 Shri Ajit Kumar Yadav, who, according to him, was appointed by respondent No. 2 as Counter Incharge Apprenticeship on 9121987.
There was a condition in the letter that the petitioner was to be paid stipend @ Rs. 230/- per month during the first year, Rs. 260/- per month in the second year and Rs. 300/- per month in the third year of apprenticeship.
Petitioner No. 1 joined as Counter Incharge on 14121987.
Now his case is that he is working as Counter Incharge Trainee under the control of the Corporation.
He requested the Corporation for regularisation of his services through various representations.
His name was recommended for regularisation but no action has been taken so far.
It is also the case of the petitioner that his services are to be regularised as per the policy decision of the State Government.
It is also the grouse of the petitioner that he is being deprived equal pay for equal work, therefore, he is entitled to a regular scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
2.
The notice of the writ petition was given up the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 2 and 3.
The stand of these respondents is that the petitioner does to posses the requisite qualifications i.e. diploma from Catering Institute required for the post of Counter Incharge as he has done Post Graduate Diploma in Tourism and Hotel Management from the University which is not considered to be recognised for this purpose.
Thus the petitioner No. 1 has no locus standi to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was appointed as Counter Incharge apprenticeship on fixed emoluments which were revised from time to time, but so far as the case of regularisation is concerned he does not fulfil the requisite qualifications for regular appointment as he does not have the Diploma in Hotel Management Catering and Nutrition from Haryana Institute of Catering and Hotel Management, Panipat or any other recognised Institute for this purpose.
The Post Graduate Diploma in Tourism and Hotel Management from Kurukshetra or Rajasthan Universities is not a prescribed qualification.
The case of the petitioner for regularisation could not be accepted for want of having requisite qualifications for the purpose.
Moreover, the petitioner was initially appointed as Counter Incharge Apprentice and subsequently he was appointed as Counter Incharge Trainee and his period of training was extended from time to time.
No promise of regularisation of services was given.
With this broad defence, the respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
4.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that since he is working as Counter Incharge since 14121987, therefore, his services should be regularised and he should be given a regular pay scale.
On the contrary, the short stand of the respondents No. 2 and 8 is that since the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualifications prescribed for the post of Counter Incharge, therefore, he could not be considered for regularisation.
There is a merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3.
In order to consider the case of regularisation of an individual we have to depend upon the policy and the essential qualifications for the post against which regularisation is under consideration.
The Board of Directors of the Corporation approved the revised qualifications for the various posts including the Counter Incharge.
This decision was taken in the year 1989 and at that time the qualifications prevalent for the post of Counter Incharge in the grade of Rs. 1200-2040 were matric, one year Diploma/Certificate in Hotel Reception & Book Keeping from HIC&HM.
Panipat or any other recognised University and the proposed qualifications made were Matric, one year Diploma/Certificate in Hotel Reception & Book Keeping from HIC&HM, Panipat or any other recognised institute or 2/3 years diploma in Hotel Management, Catering and Nutrition from HIC&HM, Panipat or any other recognised institute.
The persons having 60% marks in 2 or 3 years diploma will be given two special increments, if appointed as Counter Incharge.
5.
Let us now examine the qualifications of petitioner Shri Ajit Kumar Yadav.
He has given an affidavit dated 21.1.1990 wherein he has mentioned his qualifications as Matric with Hindi, BA, Post Graduate Diploma in Tourism and Hotel Management, MA and MA in Social Work.
Though no supporting documents have been filed in support to his affidavit, yet a comparative study of the qualifications possessed by the petitioner and the qualifications prevalent for the post of Counter Incharge are totally different.
The authorities have purposely inserted that the candidate in order to qualify the post of Counter Incharge must possess Diploma in Hotel Reception & Book Keeping from HIC&HM, Panipat or any other recognised institute.
The Post Graduate Diploma in Tourism and Hotel Management is totally different from the one of Hotel Reception & Book Keeping.
Moreover, the diploma held by the petitioner is not from any recognised University of Haryana.
He has obtained it from Rajasthan as stated at the Bar by the learned counsel for petitioner No. 1.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not placed any document on the record to show that the diploma obtained by the petitioner is equivalent to the diploma as required in the essential qualifications or that it was recognised by the Haryana Government or by any University of the Haryana.
When the qualifications are laid down by an employer for any post, those are laid down with a purpose and before claiming regularisation against any post one must satisfy that he has the requisite qualifications.
As the qualifications of the petitioner are totally different, therefore, he cannot ask for regularisation against the post of Counter Incharge.
6.
Faced with this difficulty the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner has the requisite experience and moreover when he was recruited in the year 1987 no qualification was prescribed.
If subsequently the qualifications were prescribed by the Corporation, it cannot be taken for the disadvantage of the petitioner.
The submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted.
Rather, similar point came up for consideration before the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 5153 of 1989, decided on 721994 and it was observed by the Bench that merely a person has worked for some time is not ground to consider his case for regularisation.
It was also observed that no person can be regularised against a cost for which he does not possess the essential qualifications.
7.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner is working since 1987 and he is possessing good qualifications a query was also put to the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 2 and 3 whether the petitioner can be considered for regularisation against any other junior post.
The learned counsel Ms. Chaudhary informed this Court that there is no post at the moment against which the case of the petitioner for regularisation can be considered as and when any vacancy will fall vacant it will be open to the petitioner to apply for the same.
Be that as it may, I have already held above that the petitioner is not qualified for the post of Counter Incharge as he does not possess requisite qualifications and mere continuation in service and that too on stipend basis will not clothe him with the right to claim regularisation into service.
8.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition and I hereby dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
9.
Before I part with this judgment, I may also make a mention that in the interim order dated 12.7.2001 Hon'ble Mr. Justice SS Nijjar was pleased to direct that the present writ petition be listed along with C.W.P.
No. 3131 of 1989.
The said writ petition has already been disposed of on 721994 along with C.W.P.
No. 5153 of 1989, titled Dharam Singh and others v. Haryana Tourism Corporation, which was decided by Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Bali vide judgment dated 721994 wherein similar point came up for consideration.
Petition dismissed.