VM Sahai, J - Petitioner's mother Smt. Uma Rani was an Assistant Teacher (LT Grade) in Government Girls Uchchatar Madhyamik Vidyalaya, Ajmatgarh, Azamgarh.
She died in harness on 2881996.
She left behind her husband Sri Ravindra Nath Rai and the petitioner, her only son.
Petitioner's father wrote a letter on 2371997 to the Joint Director of Education, Fourth Region, Azamgarh (in brief JDE) that his wife who was a teacher in the Vidyalaya died on 2861996.
And on 2171997 an application was moved for appointing the petitioner under dying in harness rules.
But the petitioner on the date of application had not completed his education and was not eligible therefore, he was moving the application for appointment of petitioner after completion of the course and till then a post in LT Grade may be kept reserved for him.
On the application of the petitioner claiming appointment under dying in harness rules, the JDE appointed him on 1312000 on a class III post of junior clerk in the same institution.
He accepted the appointment, reserving his right to claim appointment on the pot of Assistant Teacher (Art.).
On 3062000 he made a representation to JDE that he had accepted the appointment in class III without losing his right to claim appointment in LT Grade and since a Division Bench of the High Court has held that a candidate could claim appointment to the post of Assistant Teacher under dying in harness rules, therefore, the petitioner may be appointed Assistant Teacher (Art) under the dying in harness rules.
2.
Shri DB Misra, the learned Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently urged that in view of decision in Sanjeev Kumar Dubey v District Inspector of Schools, Etawah, 2000(1) UPLBEC 634 : 2000 All LJ 881, petitioner possessed the qualification to be appointed Assistant Teacher (Art) and his appointment of the post of junior clerk could not take away his right to claim the post of Assistant Teacher.
On the other hand, Sri KK Chand, the learned Standing Counsel appearing for respondents Nos. 1 and 2 has urged that once the petitioner accepted the appointment of junior clerk under the dying in harness, he could not claim appointment on the post of Assistant Teacher.
And the decision in Sanjeev Kumar (supra) was not applicable to the facts of this case.
He further urged that father of petitioner is alive, therefore, the petitioner would be dependent of his father and not of his mother.
He submitted that since it has not been disclosed as to what his father was doing and what was his source of income he was not entitled for compassionate appointment.
3.
The facts of the case demonstrate that the petitioner and his father were under complete misapprehension about the purpose and objective of the appointment under the Dying in Harness Rules.
In Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) SCC 138 : 1994 AIR SCW 2305 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) the Apex Court while considering a similar rule held that employment under such rule was not a vested right.
The object was to enable the family to get over financial crisis which it faces at the time of death of the sole bread earner.
UP Recruitment of Dependents of Government Servants Dying in Harness Rules, 1974, framed by the State Government and amended from time to time and those framed by the Education Department are not different.
The petitioner's father while approaching the department on behalf of his son sought reservation of one post in LT Grade as he was not qualified and eligible on the death of his mother.
The compassionate appointment is permitted at the time of death.
It does not entitle anyone to claim that since he was not eligible or qualified on the date of death, the post may be reserved for him when he becomes eligible.
The rules do not contemplate any reservation.
If such request is accepted it would defeat the objective of the rule which would convert itself from compassionate employment to tide over financial crisis in the family to reservation of post for employee's dependent and when he desires.
The claim of petitioner's father, therefore, for keeping a post in LT Grade reserved for his son was misconceived.
The argument of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that he accepted the appointment to class III post without prejudice to his right to claim appointment on the post of Assistant Teacher is equally devoid of any merit.
4.
The object for granting appointment on compassionate ground is to enable the family of deceased employee to tide over the sudden crisis, which has occurred due to the death of sole bread earner of the family.
Such appointments are made purely on humanitarian consideration with an object to provide the family some source of livelihood.
The appointment is given by making a departure from the general provisions for making appointment to a post.
It is in the nature of exception to the general provision.
It cannot be treated as creating a right which could be enforced at will.
The petitioner in his representation dated 3062000 (Annexure 2) clearly stated that he has accepted the appointment on the post of junior clerk.
Learned counsel for the petitioner failed to show any rule that entitles a dependent who has been appointed can claim a change of post either in the same or higher grade.
In absence of any rule once the petitioner joined on class III post of junior clerk, he could not claim the post of Assistant Teacher.
The decision in Sanjeev Kumar Dubey (supra) is of no help to the petitioner.
Petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
5.
For the reasons aforesaid, I do not find any merit in this petition.
6.
This petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.