Satyabrata Sinha, J - This application is directed against a judgment and order dated 7.4.97 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioner herein questioning an order of dismissal passed against him, was dismissed.
2.
The short question which arises for consideration in this application is as to whether after filing of the enquiry report by the Enquiry Officer before the disciplinary authority, the petitioner had been given ample opportunity to file a show cause and make a prayer for personal hearing before the disciplinary authority.
The relevant rule in this regard is as follows :  "861.
Proceedings in cases for major punishment.
(a) No major punishment shall be awarded to any police officer of the subordinate ranks except in proceedings in the prescribed form.
xx xx xx (f) The authority empowered to pass the orders of punishment shall grant a personal hearing to the person charged if prayed for and then pass the final orders.
When the enquiring officer himself passes the final order, no personal hearing is necessary as the person charged is present throughout the enquiry.
After the enquiry has been completed and after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed the accused officer shall, if the penalty proposed is dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank, be supplied with a copy of the report of the enquiring officer and be called upon to show cause within a reasonable time not ordinarily exceeding one month against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted except in the following cases -  (i) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; (ii) where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to give that person an opportunity of showing cause; or  (iii) where the Governor is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to give to that person such an opportunity."
Admittedly, only a copy of the order sheet dated 28495 of the Superintendent of Police was forwarded to the petitioner herein.
The said order reads thus :  "The charges against the Constable have been proved.
A show-cause should be served upon the charged Constable, so as to explain why he should not be discharged from the service.
His explanation should reach by 15595 without fail."
The petitioner filed a show cause, inter alia, alleging "That the order made by your goodself does not show any REASONS as to how you arrived at the conclusion stating.
"The charges against the constable have been proved."
That it has been misfortune for me that prior to passing Final Order how could you stay that the charges have been proved without giving any Reason.
EO may say so but how would you before the Final Order ?
That your Order is not a Speaking Order as because you did not make any Discussion.
That your Order is not Speaking Order.
It has been a Rubber Stamp of E.O's finding.
That I have been deprived of Reasonable Opportunity as I did not get the scope to know the trend of your mind as you did not show any ground on which you passed the order and without knowing the ground how could I show cause and as such your order has been unfortunate.
That from attending circumstances it appears that both you and EO predetermined the issues and opportunity has been given to me only to disposal the conclusion already drawn up you.
That the conduct of EO has not been fair and suffers from motives, mala fides and victimization.
You passed the order to show cause which is not speaking order depriving me of reasonable opportunity to show the grounds of dissatisfaction and grievances before the appellate authority or Hon'ble High Court."
The petitioner in his aforementioned show cause has also made an attempt to show that the findings of the enquiry officer are not correct.
3.
The only question, which in our opinion, arises for consideration in this application is whether forwarding a copy of the aforementioned order sheet dated 28495 would amount to a second show cause notice contemplated under Regulation 861(f) of the Police Regulations of Bengal, 1943.
The answer to the aforementioned question must be rendered in the negative.
It is now a well settled principle of law that when a statutory regulation lays down the procedure for the purpose of imposing major penalty upon a delinquent officer, such procedure must be followed scrupulously.
It is trite that he who carries the procedural sword must perish with it.
4.
In terms of the aforementioned regulation, which is statutory in nature, the disciplinary authority is required to arrive at a provisional conclusion as to why the penalty proposed should not be imposed on him, and for the said purpose he is under a statutory obligation to direct issuance of a show cause notice.
Once such a show cause is issued, the delinquent officer is entitled to make a prayer for personal hearing only upon issuance of such a second show cause notice.
Upon receipt of reply and grant of personal hearing, if prayed for, the disciplinary authority may arrive at a conclusion that the delinquent employee is guilty of the charges levelled against him and he is liable to be punished.
The aforementioned order sheet dated 28495 shows that the procedure laid down under the statutory regulation had not been followed at all.
The disciplinary authority, in terms of clause (f) of Regulation 861 did not arrive at a provisional finding of guilt on the basis of the materials made available to him by reason of the enquiry report but jumped to the conclusion that the charges against the constable had been proved.
Even, the Superintendent of Police did not take pains to issue a show cause notice but merely thought that such show cause notice should be served upon the charged constable.
5.
There is also nothing to show that the aforementioned finding of guilt had been arrived at upon perusal of the report as also application of mind by the disciplinary authority so as to enable him to arrive at the aforementioned provisional conclusion in regard to the penality to be imposed, which must have been preceded by a provisional finding that the findings arrived at by the enquiry officer are correct and accepted.
Having regard to the fact that no show cause notice as such has not been served, nor the mandatory regulations of the statute had been complied with, we are of the opinion that the learned tribunal was not correct in passing the impugned order.
6.
We, therefore, set aside both the order of the learned tribunal as also of the disciplinary authority and direct the present incumbent of the post of Superintendent of Police, Purulia, to apply his mind on the material afresh and in the event he agrees with the findings of the enquiry officer and comes to the provisional conclusion in regard the penality proposed to be imposed, he may again issue a second show cause notice by giving the petitioner herein an opportunity to file an appropriate representation and in the event a prayer is made for personal hearing, grant him the said opportunity, whereupon he may pass an appropriate order in accordance with law.
7.
Having regard to the decision of the Apex Court in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, reported in 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : A.I.R. 1994 SC 1074, the petitioner shall be deemed to be under suspension till an appropriate order is passed.
8.
Xerox certified copy of the order be supplied on priority basis.
Order accordingly.