M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The petitioner has in the instant writ application questioned the panel prepared by the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose of recruitment of an Assistant Teacher in Science Group in Kaliaganj Milanmayee Girls High School whereby the petitioner was placed in the second position.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the private respondent No. 5 (Smt. Paramita Adhikary) has been illegally awarded marks for B.Ed.
Qualification despite the fact that the Employment Exchange while sponsoring her name had not specified the said qualification of B.Ed.
3.
The qualifications possessed by the petitioner are Madhyamik Parikshya conducted by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, petitioner obtained first division securing 6622% marks.
In Higher Secondary Examination conducted by West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education in second division securing 542%.
Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.)
in Botany (Hons.)
from University of North Bengal.
Master of Science in Botany from the University of Kalyani in First Class obtaining 675% marks and B.Ed.
Examination from the University of North Bengal in First Class securing 695% marks.
4.
Private respondent No. 5 in the affidavit-in-opposition stated that her qualifications are Secondary Examination from West Bengal of Secondary Education in First Division, Higher Secondary Examination in Second Division in Science Stream from the West Bengal; Council of Higher Education.
Bachelor of Science (Hons.)
in Second Class in Botany from the University of North Bengal; Master of Science (M.Sc.)
in Botany in First Class from the University of Kalyani having secured more than 68% of marks.
B.Ed.
examination in 1993 placed in First Division having secured more than 70% of marks.
5.
It is not in dispute that the names of the petitioner as also the private respondent No. 5 were sponsored by the Employment Exchange for the post in question.
6.
It is the case of the private respondent that the petitioner as also private respondent No. 5 appeared for the B.Ed.
Examination from the same University, results whereof were published in the first week of January, 1994.
This is sought to be demonstrated from the mark sheets submitted with the writ application and the affidavit-in-opposition.
7.
Private respondent No. 5 applied for registration of the B.Ed.
Qualification to the National Employment Exchange through the Local Employment Exchange.
The District Employment Exchange Officer by his Memo dated 10th March, 1994 intimated the same to the Employment Officer P.E.
Section (Annexure `P' to the affidavit-in-opposition).
The interview was held on 24th April, 1994.
8.
The panel prepared by the Selection Committee was duly approved by the Managing Committee and forwarded to the District Inspector of Schools concerned whereupon a query was raised relating to awarding of marks of B.Ed.
Examination to private respondent No. 5 and in reply thereto, the Secretary of the Managing Committee informed the District Inspector of Schools that by a subsequent corrigendum dated 24th March, 1994, District Employment Officer intimated the Secretary of the Managing Committee that the private respondent has duly registered her name of B.Ed.
Qualification and as such, marks have been awarded for B.Ed.
Examination to the said private respondent No. 5.
9.
From the facts as above, it will be apparent that both the petitioner as also the private respondent No. 5 fulfilled the eligibility criteria prescribed for the post in question.
As a matter of fact both the candidates have similar qualifications.
10.
The only controversy in the instant writ application is thus with regard to awarding of marks for B.Ed.
to the private respondent No. 5.
If the same are excluded from consideration, then the petitioner would be entitled to be placed at Sr. No. 1 of the panel.
11.
It is the contention of Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned Sr. Advocate for the petitioner that in accordance with the Recruitment Rules, no credit can be given for the B.Ed.
Qualification said to have been possessed by the private respondent No. 5, inasmuch as, the said qualification had not been stated by the employment exchange while sponsoring the names of eligible candidates.
Reliance has been placed upon Rule 6A of the Recruitment Rules to buttress the said contention.
12.
On the other hand, Mr. RL Maitra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 5 submitted that the marks for B.Ed.
Qualification cannot be denied to respondent No. 5 on any valid or tenable grounds.
The petitioner as also the respondent No. 5 passed the B.Ed.
Examination from the same University in the same year.
Referring to Annexure `C' to application being CAN 5595 of 1994 (at page 28) and Annexure `B' (at page 30) of the writ application, it is demonstrated that both the candidates i.e. petitioner as also the respondent No. 5 appeared and passed the B.Ed.
Examination from the North Bengal University held in 1993.
The mark sheets established the said position.
13.
The further submission of Mr. RL Maitra is that the private respondent had applied on 19th January, 1994 after the results of the B.Ed.
Examination were published to the National Employment Exchange through the Local Employment Exchange for incorporating the B.Ed.
Qualification.
By Annexure `P' dated 10th March, 1994 the District Employment officer intimated the same to the Employment Officer (P & E), 11, Camac Street, Calcutta.
Thereafter, by a memo dated 24th March, 1994, the Employment Officer-in-charge, District Employment Exchange, Raiganj informed the Secretary of the Managing Committee that the respondent No. 5 had registered her name for B.Ed.
Qualification in the P & E. Cell and request was made for taking necessary action.
14.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned Sr. Advocate for the petitioner, however, relied upon the pleadings in the affidavit-in-opposition to submit that the respondent No. 5 applied for registration on 10th March, 1994 which is after the date of the names having been sponsored by the employment exchange.
15.
A factual dispute is thus sought to be raised with respect to the date when the application was made by private respondent No. 5 for incorporating with the employment exchange, the acquisition of the qualification of B.Ed.
by private respondent No. 5.
16.
The undisputed fact, however, is that the private respondent No. 5 obtained the B.Ed.
qualification at the same time as the petitioner and that action was taken for incorporating the said qualification with the employment exchange.
19th January, 1994 is said to be the date when the application was made by the respondent No. 5 as per the oral submission made by the learned counsel Mr. Maitra whereas in the affidavit-in-opposition the date of such request was made for incorporation is stated to be 10th March, 1994.
The further fact is that by the memo dated 20394 (Annexure `P' to the affidavit-in-opposition), the District Employment Officer intimated the Employment Officer (P & E) with respect to the said B.Ed.
qualification obtained by respondent No. 5 and for incorporation thereof in the employment exchange.
The employment exchange intimated the school authorities by a letter dated 2431994.
When the candidates were called upon to appear along with all original mark-sheets of all examinations, xerox copies thereof as also with other testimonials.
Based thereon, the Selection Committee prepared panel wherein the respondent No. 5 was placed at serial No. 1 and the petitioner at serial No. 2.
17.
In the affidavit-in-reply certain additional facts have been stated namely that the District Inspector of Schools (SE) on 381994 informed the Director of School Education that he is not in a position to approve the panel as the respondent No. 5 has been awarded marks for B.Ed.
although the same was not mentioned when the names were sponsored by the employment exchange.
The Deputy Director of School Education is said to have taken the view that the respondent No. 5 has "no eligibility of having marks awarded on B.Ed.
as the training qualification has not been mentioned by the employment exchange."
18.
The only question, therefore, for consideration is whether the respondent No. 5 is not entitled to the awarding of marks for the B.Ed.
Qualification possessed by her.
19.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by the Division Bench of this Court in Pintu Achariya v. State of West Bengal & Ors., reported in 1997(2) C.L.J.
428.
In that case, similar question arose for consideration viz., whether the B.Ed.
Qualification of the writ petitioner in that case could have been taken into consideration by the Selection Committee.
In paragraph 16 facts have been noted of that case which are to the effect that the employment exchange sponsored the name of the writ petitioner in that case having merely a B.Sc.
(Hons.)
qualification.
The qualification of B.Ed.
although could have been recorded in the local employment exchange was not so recorded nor the said qualification could have been sent as employment exchange admittedly sponsored the names of the candidates much prior to the writ petitioner's acquisition of the said qualification.
20.
In that factual matrix, the Division Bench held that in terms of 1993 Recruitment Rules which govern the recruitment process only the qualification recommended by the employment exchange can be taken into consideration.
21.
Another Division Bench, in a later judgment in Sankar Das v. Arup Kumar, 1991(1) C.L.J.
11, construed the provision of Rule 6A of 1993 Rules and the synopsis of instruction on employment exchange procedure issued in 1998 by the Government of West Bengal (Directorate of Employemnt) which lay down detailed procedure for ensuring that candidates obtaining additional qualifications but originally registered in the local employment exchanges and they can informed about their additional qualification to the employment exchange concerned who shall after verifying the relevant documents send information to P & E Office for registration.
The said communication has been extracted in the said judgment.
The Division Bench in paragraph `9' of the said judgment held as under :  "Undoubtedly Rule 6A (supra) of the Recruitment Rules issued on 20th May, 1993 does lay down that no credit shall be given to a candidate in respect of the qualification which has either not been mentioned by the DIS in the prior permission communication or by the Employment Exchange in the sponsoring communication.
We are also quite clear that Rule 6A is required to be followed.
However, when this Rule refers to the expression "mentioned by the Employment Exchange", such "mentioning" relates to an act validly and properly done by the Employment Exchange.
If the Employment Exchange is seized of an information with regard to a candidate being possessed of a particular qualification and yet does not mention the same in the sponsoring communication, this cannot be called a valid or proper "mentioning" by the Employment Exchange and merely because by such improper or invalid "mentioning" the qualification of the candidate has been omitted, he cannot be deprived of the credit in respect thereto.
Similarly, therefore, if the candidate has done all that was required of him to be done and, for no fault of his, the Employment Exchange concerned because of some Systems Failure, or otherwise does not mention the qualification, this cannot be construed to be of any disadvantage of the candidate concerned and the candidate cannot be deprived of the credit in respect of such qualification, if he is otherwise possessed of the same as on, or before the cut-off date and had taken all due steps to inform the Employment Exchange concerned regarding his having obtained such qualifications."
Then Division Bench also considered the rights guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution and in relation to Rule 6A of the Recruitment Rules, the Division Bench in paragraph `10' of the said report held as under :  "Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity.
No one can be denied the equality of opportunity.
If therefore the appellant and respondent No. 1 are similarly situated, it was not permissible to the authorities to treat the appellant differently and to deprive him of the advantage which had accrued to him, along with respondent No. 1, in the matter of getting credit of B.Ed.
qualification.
It appears to us clearly that the authority by practicing hostile discrimination against the appellant have accorded undue benefits and illegitimate favour of respondent No. 1 and the merit obtained by the appellant, by such unconstitutional act of the respondents has been converted into demerit.
The DIS committed a patent illegality by ordering the recasting of the panel.
It appears that by placing on illogical and absurd interpretation upon Rule 6A and by improper application of this Rule to the facts of the present case, DIS in utter disregard to established norms and principles illegally deprived the appellant of the benefit which had stood accrued in his favour on account of his having acquired the qualification of B.Ed.
We can even go to the extent of saying that even independent of Rule 6A, on the reasoning and logic of common law and common sense, if a person has acquired a qualification before the cut-off date and if such qualification is to be counted for the purposes of either determining the eligibility or giving credit to the candidate, and the selection panel is convinced of the authenticity of the information regarding the qualification, the candidate concerned cannot be deprived of the benefits flowing therefrom.
No rule can take away such benefit from the candidate.
Rule 6A also undoubtedly does not attempt to take away any such benefit; only it has to be properly applied and its proper application has to be understood in its true perspective.
So much for the merits of the controversy."
22.
The controversy in the instant case, in my view, is squarely covered by the Division Bench in Shri Sankar Das' case, cited supra.
Admittedly, the petitioner and the respondent No. 5 herein had obtained B.Ed.
qualification from the same University and at the same examination.
While the B.Ed.
qualification in respect of petitioner was mentioned while sponsoring the names of candidates, the aforesaid qualification of B.Ed.
in so far as respondent No. 5 is concerned, the same was intimated on 2431994 to the institution though registered with the employment exchange by 10394 and it must be assumed that application for incorporation thereof would have been made earlier thereto.
The said qualification was obtained much prior to the names having been sponsored by the employment exchange.
It is not a case where the B.Ed.
qualification was obtained by the petitioner after "any cut off date".
The delay with regard to the incorporation of the B.Ed.
qualification in so far as respondent No. 5 is concerned can be attributed to the employment exchange.
Even otherwise as held by the Division Bench in Sankar Das's case, supra, if a person has acquired the qualification before the cut off date, the same is liable to be taken into account.
Candidate, it was categorically held, cannot be deprived of the benefit.
23.
Mr. BR Bhattacharjee, however, sought to rely upon the Supreme Court judgment in Ashok Kr.
Sharma & Anr. v. Chandra Sekhar & Ors., 1997(2) SCT 123 (SC) : reported in 1997(4) SCC 18, wherein, it was held that the eligibility of the candidates shall have to be judged with reference to the last date for filing the application.
It was further held therein that a person who acquires the prescribed qualification subsequent to such prescribed date cannot be considered at all.
24.
In my view, the aforesaid decision is of no avail to the writ petitioner and on the contrary is of some benefit to the respondent No. 5, inasmuch as, she is entitled to have the qualification of B.Ed.
considered as the same was acquired by her prior to the last date of applications in the instant case, the same being the date when the employment exchange sponsored the names of candidates.
At the cost of repetition, it must be stated that the respondent No. 5 acquired the qualification of B.Ed.
much prior to the names having been sponsored by the employment exchange and at the same time as the writ petitioner.
In terms of rule 6(b) of the Recruitment Rules all relevant qualifications are to be taken into consideration by the Selection Committee.
25.
In the circumstances, it must be held that the Selection Committee/Managing Committee have not committed any illegality in taking into consideration the B.Ed.
Qualification of respondent No. 5.
The view of the DIS (SE) and that of the Deputy Director in that behalf it must be held is erroneous and suffers from error apparent on the face of record.
26.
In the result, the instant writ application is disposed of with a direction upon the Director of School Education to call for the records from the Office of the DIS (SE) Uttar Dinajpur and to pass appropriate orders in accordance with the law with regard to the approval of the panel in the light of the observations made hereinbefore and communicate his decision with regard to the panel submitted for approval by the school authorities within a period of 6 weeks from date of communication of a copy of this order uninfluenced in any manner with the opinion of the DIS (SE) or the Deputy Director referred to hereinbefore.
It is clarified that it shall be open to the Director of School Education to call for the information from the office of the employment exchange to ascertain whether the application for incorporation of the B.Ed.
degree by Smt. Paramita Adhikary, respondent No. 5, was made on any date prior to 10394 and if so the date when the application was made and particularly whether the same had been made prior to the names having been sponsored by the employment exchange to set at rest any factual dispute in the matter.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this judgment and order be furnished to the appearing parties expeditiously, if applied for.
Orders accordingly.