RL Anand, J - Jiwan Kumar, present petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of writ, order or direction specially in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him disability pension and it has been further prayed by the petitioner that directions be also given to the respondents to give him all the consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the army service on 23.9.1976.
In May, 1994 he developed heart problem and remained admitted in Command Hospital, Chandi Mandir, where, he was diagnosed as IHD with effort Angina, class-II and was placed in medical category CEE temporary.
The petitioner was again admitted to military hospital on 1941996, where, he was placed in low medical category "CEE" permanent and was advised to be released.
The petitioner submits that so far as his knowledge goes his disability was noticed to the extent of 60%.
On 3091996, the petitioner was discharged as L/Defadar from the Army after completion of 20 years of active service on medical grounds being placed in low medical category CEE.
His case for disability pension was sent to the authorities which was rejected by CDA (Pension) Allahabad on 1021997 and the petitioner received information on 2021997 to this effect.
He filed an appeal which was again dismissed on 1251997.
Further he made the representation in the year 1998 but to no effect.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The written statement has been filed.
According to the respondents the petitioner was discharged from the service not on medical ground but on completion of his engagement tenure, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
4.
I have heard Shri SK Rattan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Anil Malhotra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner had invited my attention to the document, Annexure P-2 and submitted that a close reading of this document clearly proves that the petitioner was invalidated from the military service on account of medical ground when he was placed in medical category "CEE" permanent.
Referring to the recommendations, it was submitted that it was recommended that the petitioner should be released on medical ground as he was placed in category CEE permanent.
The counsel for the petitioner further supplemented his argument with reference to the written statement filed by the respondents and he stated that from the written statement of the respondents, it stands proved that petitioner had been getting the medical treatment from time to time and this medical treatment ultimately became the basis of invalidation of service.
6.
On the contrary, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has shown to me the Roll of a Soldier proposed to be discharged and he drew my attention to column No. 20 of this document which clearly satisfies that the petitioner was discharged from the army service on completion of term of engagement.
7.
After considering the rival contention of the parties, this Court is of the opinion that the petitioner was not discharged on medical ground as suggested and contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Rather he was discharged on the completion of the tenure and in these circumstances, the petitioner did not become entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner then relied upon a judgment of this High Court reported as 2000(1) SCT 389, Gian Chand v. Union of India.
I have gone through the contents of this cited judgment with the assistance rendered by the learned counsel for the petitioner and facts of this case are totally distinguishable.
In the cited case the claim made by the petitioner-Shri Gian Chand was of disability pension.
The claim was rejected on the ground that the disease suffered by the petitioner was not attributable to the army service.
The Hon'ble Judge was seized of the matter whether the disease suffered by Shri Gian Chand in the cited case is attributable to the army service or not.
His Lordship was of the view that this disease was attributable to the army service and moreover, this disease can be aggravated or developed on account of stress and strain of the army duties.
9.
In the present case, the point for determination is about the mode of discharge of the petitioner.
The respondent-Union of India nowhere admits in the written-statement that the discharge of the petitioner from military service was on account of the disability attributable to the army service.
Rather the stand of the respondent is specific that the petitioner was discharged from the army on completion of engagement period.
10.
In this view of the matter, the present writ petition is hereby dismissed, with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.