RL Anand, J. (Oral) - This writ petition was filed by Badlu Ram, Ex- Driver of Haryana Roadways against the State of Haryana, the General Manager, Haryana State Transport Department, Sirsa depot and the Accountant General (A and E) Haryana under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for the quashment of order Annexure P-3 and has sought directions of this Court to the respondents to pay him the service pension, gratuity, etc. along with interest.
In the alternative, it was prayed by the petitioner that the period from 31101983 to 1.5.1984 and 29.5.1979 to 2651991 be treated on duty for the purpose of paying pension and other benefits.
2.
The case set up by Badlu Ram deceased was that he joined the services of respondents No. 1 and 2 as driver in the month of January, 1968 at Rohtak depot and he served in different depots and lastly served under respondent No. 2 as a driver till January, 1988.
Thereafter he was made to retire voluntarily w.e.f.
31.1.1988.
The short case set up by the deceased was that he had completed 20 years of qualifying service and was entitled to all the pensionary benefits which were being deprived to him.
3.
It may be mentioned here that during the pendency of this writ petition Badlu Ram petitioner died on 13111988 and now the present petition is being prosecuted by his widow Smt. Sarwan Kaur.
4.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It has been contested mainly on the ground that Badlu Ram had not completed 20 years of qualifying service.
In fact, he joined the job on 5.12.1968 and as such he had no qualifying service of 20 years to claim the pensionary and retiral benefits.
5.
I have heard Mr. RS Sangwan, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Suveer Sehgal, DAG, Haryana, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of this case.
6.
The short point which survives for determination is whether the deceased and now his widow can claim retiral benefits or not irrespective of the fact that Badlu Ram had not completed 20 years of qualifying service as required under the rules.
When a person joins government service, he furnishes sufficient proof regarding his date of birth and an entry is made in the service record and the record remains in the possession of the department throughout so long the public servant serves the department.
There can be an honest (sic) on the part of a public servant as to whether he had completed his qualifying service or not.
But it does not meant that the department had no responsibility to perform.
The document Annexure P1 shows that it is an order dated 411988 issued by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa vide which Badlu Ram deceased was made to retire w.e.f.
31.1.1988 (FN) on his own request.
In these circumstances, it will be unjust on the part of the respondent authorities to say that since Badlu Ram had not completed qualifying service of 20 years, therefore, he is not entitled to the pensionary benefits.
There will be an estoppel against the State to raise this type of plea.
The issue in hand was also considered by this High Court in Ramesh Chand Kaushik v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) RSJ 792 : 1994(1) SCT 227 (P&H)(DB), and in para No. 4 of the judgment their Lordships were pleased to hold as follows :-  "4.
Viewing it from another angle, the petitioner served the Army during Emergency and if that period is also counted towards his total length of service, to which he is entitled under the rules as a matter of right, the total period of service rendered by the petitioner would qualify for the grant of pension.
Otherwise also, when the petitioner sought voluntary retirement, it was the duty of the respondents to ensure compliance of the statutory rules which enjoin a duty upon the respondents to see that an employee is permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement if he qualifies twenty years' service, so that his right to pension is not adversely affected.
Once the petitioner has been permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement, and in fact he has so retired, it is no longer open to the respondents to tell him that instead of 20 years, he has put in 19 years and 5 months service, and on that account he was not entitled to draw any pension."
This view was again adopted in Narinder Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1993(1) RSJ 522 : 1992(2) SCT 340 (P&H), and was further reiterated in Rajbir Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1996(2) RSJ 559 : 1996(1) SCT 481 (P&H)(DB).
Acting upon these judgments, I am of the considered opinion that the stand taken up by the respondents is not tenable and stands repelled.
Resultantly, the writ petition is hereby allowed and directions are given to the respondents to release all retiral benefits including pension, gratuity, leave encashment etc. to the widow of Badlu Ram deceased within two months from the receipt of the copy of the order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum till the entire payment is made.
Firstly, the respondents shall calculate the pension, gratuity, leave encashment etc. and thereafter the process of family pension will be taken up by them.
Petition allowed.