RL Anand, J - Ex-Sepoy Harwinder Singh through his wife Smt. Surjit Kaur, who is petitioner No. 2, has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents in which the petitioner No. 1 has prayed for the release of disability pension consisting of both the element w.e.f.
3.10.1983 onward for life along with interest and consequential relief.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that petitioner No. 1 Shri Harwinder Singh joined the Army Service on 6101977.
At that time he was found fit in the medical category "A" as per the prescribed military standard.
He served at various places in field, peace areas and high altitude areas with adverse climatic conditions.
Unfortunately, the petitioner suffered from the mental disease due to stress and strain of service and he was admitted to Hospital after preliminary treatment.
Immediately, he was downgraded to category "C" for a period of six months.
Again he was produced before the Medical Board and his disability was assessed 60% permanent and the petitioner was found suffering from Neurosis disease.
As per petitioner No. 1, he was invalidated from the service on 2101983.
According to the petitioner, he has rendered total service of 5 years 11 months and 27 days in the Army w.e.f.
6101977 to 2101983.
Since the disability suffered by the petitioner is attributable to the military service, therefore, he is entitled to the disability pension and service element.
This is short case made out by the petitioner in the writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the disability suffered by the petitioner was 15 to 19% and, therefore, he is not entitled to disability pension.
It was also the case of the respondent-authorities that as per Rules 197 and 198 of Pension Regulations for the Army 1961, the petitioner is not entitled to service element.
4.
I have heard Shri B.S.
Sehgal, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri A Mohunta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The first point raised for consideration in the present writ petition is as to whether the petitioner Shri Harwinder Singh is entitled to disability pension on account of the disability suffered by him which is attributable to the army service because the petitioner was found fit at the time of his admission in the army and, therefore, there is no difficulty on the part of the Court to hold that the disease suffered by the petitioner is attributable to the army service.
The respondents have not placed any record to indicate that the time of the admission of the petitioner in army service, he was suffering from any ailment much less Neurosis.
Since the disability of the petitioner is less than 20%, therefore, this Court decides this point against the petitioner and in favour of the respondents by holding that the petitioner does not deserve the benefit of disability pension.
6.
The second point for consideration is as to whether the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of service element ?
If so for what period ?
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents relies upon Rules 197 and 198 but these Rules are not applicable to the facts of the present case because I have already held above that the disability suffered by the petitioner is attributable to the army service and in these circumstances, Regulation 186(1) will apply which runs as follows :-  "An individual who is invalided out of service with a disability attributable to or aggravated by service but assessed at below 20 per cent, shall be entitled to service element only."
By virtue of the above rule, the petitioner is entitled to the service element only.
The petitioner was shunted out from the service in the year 1983.
The present writ has been filed in the year 1999 after a lapse of 16 years.
Therefore, the petitioner is only entitled to the benefit of service element of 38 months immediately before the filing of the writ petition.
8.
Resultantly, the writ petition is partly allowed and directions are given to the respondent-authorities to release the service element of the petitioner for a period of 38 months only, which shall be calculated at such rate applicable immediately before the institution of the writ petition.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent-authorities.
It may also be observed here that if the Medical Board gives the finding that the disability is more than 20%, in that situation the petitioner will also be entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
The benefit of service element shall be released to the petitioner within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
Petition allowed.