Nirmal Singh, J - Petitioner-Saroj Bala has invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution for the issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider her case for regularisation on the basis of instructions issued by Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms (Personnel Policies Branch) dated 22101982, Annexure P-3.
2.
The brief facts of the case are as under :-  Petitioner was appointed as Clerk-cum-typist in the grade of Rs. 400-600/- on temporary basis initially for six months by the District Education Officer (Primary) Faridkot vide order dated 2241980.
Petitioner joined duty on 2541981 (forenoon).
Petitioner continued on the post till 16.2.1981 when she was transferred in Government Girls School, Baghapurana.
She was adjusted against the vacant post of a clerk on the same terms and conditions.
3.
Petitioner has claimed that on the basis of Instructions of Punjab Government dated 22101982, her services may be regularised as she was fulfilling all the conditions of eligibility as mentioned in the Instructions Annexure P-3.
It was, further, averred in the petition that the District Education Officer vide memo No. E-1-2(1)/82-83/61113-317 dated 24111982 informed heads of all the Government Higher Secondary/ High Schools in Faridkot District that the Government has decided to regularise the ad hoc services of employees appointed to the posts under Punjab Government carrying an initial pay of not less than Rs. 325/- per mensem and not more than Rs. 699/- per mensem.
The case of the petitioner duly recommended by District Education Officer, Faridkot was sent to the Govt. for consideration, but the office of Director, Public Instructions (Schools) Punjab, Chandigarh on 22.11.1983 wrote a memo to the District Education Officer that petitioner's case was not covered under the instructions.
It was also directed that services of the petitioner be dispensed with.
4.
The petitioner has prayed that the order passed by the Director, Public Instructions (Schools) Punjab dated 22.11.1983, Annexure P-5 be quashed and her services be regularised.
5.
Respondents have filed written statement and admitted that petitioner was appointed purely on temporary basis with a clear indication that her services will be terminated without assigning any reasons.
The services of petitioner were no more required, hence her services were terminated.
It was also admitted that petitioner was appointed as clerk against the vacant post of Superintendent and not against the vacancy of clerk, for which requisition was sent to the Employment Exchange.
Therefore, the case of the petitioner is not covered for regularisation under the Instructions Annexure P-3.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
It is the admitted case of the parties that petitioner was appointed as clerk-cum-typist for six months in the grade of Rs. 400-600/-.
As per terms and conditions of the appointment letter, her services can be dispensed with at any time without assigning any reason.
It is also on record that petitioner was appointed against the vacant post of Superintendent on the same terms and conditions in Govt. High School, Baghapurana.
8.
Mr. HS Gill, learned DAG submitted that the case of the petitioner is not covered by the Instructions dated 22101982, as the petitioner was not appointed as Clerk and she was appointed against the vacancy of Superintendent.
9.
I have considered the submission made by learned DAG, but his contention is devoid of merit.
It is the case of the respondent that petitioner was appointed against the vacant post of Superintendent.
As per the appointment letter, Annexure P-1 the petitioner was appointed as clerk-cum-typist.
This appointment was against the post of Superintendent.
If the petitioner has been appointed against the vacant post of Superintendent, it cannot be said that petitioner has not worked as clerk-cum-typist.
The Punjab Government issued instructions dated 22101982 regularising the services of the employees who have been appointed on ad hoc basis.
The relevant portion of the Instructions is as under :-  (1) That the ad hoc employees should have completed a minimum of one year service on the date of issue of this order, while calculating the period of service, any break of notional nature falling (filling) of posts and in the same department may be ignored, in other words, the break in ad hoc service would not be ignored in cases where :- (a) The employees concerned left service on volition whether to join some other department or for some other reasons; (b) the ad hoc appointment was against a post/vacancy for which no regular recruitment was intended/required to be made e.g. leave arrangement or filling of other short term vacancies; (ii) That they fulfil the conditions of eligibility as prescribed (i.e. they have been recruited through the employment exchange or by open advertisement) academic qualifications experience and condition of age in accordance with the department service rules and instructions issued by the Government.
(iii) That their record of service is satisfactory.
(iv) That they have been found medically fit for entry into Govt. service and that their character and antecedents have also been so verified and found suitable for Govt. service.
(v) That a regular post/vacancy is available for regularisation; (vi) That they have been found fit for regularisation by the departmental selection committees to be constituted in accordance with the Instructions contained in Govt. Circular Letter No. 12/19/80-IGE/3582 dated 2831980.
These departmental selection committees shall also consider cases of common categories of employees; (vii) Inter se seniority of ad hoc employees will be determined on the basis of service rendered on ad hoc basis.
The older member will be senior to the younger member appointed on the same date.
All such ad hoc employees will be placed junior to those working on regular basis.
10.
The case of the petitioner is fully covered by the Instructions issued by the Government of Punjab.
It is no ground for State to say that the petitioner was appointed against the vacancy of a Superintendent.
11.
During the course of arguments, Mr. VK Jindal pointed out that petitioner has been regularised by the respondents on the basis of the Instructions issued by the Government.
Learned Deputy Advocate General Punjab has not denied this fact.
12.
Even if the petitioner has been regularised subsequently, on the basis of the instructions issued by the Government, the petitioner cannot be denied of her right of regularisation on the basis of the instructions dated 22101982 (Annexure P-3) when she was fulfilling all the conditions laid down in the said letter.
13.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is accepted and order Annexure P-5 is quashed.
Petitioner is entitled to be regularised on the basis of instructions Annexure P-3.
She is also held entitled to all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
Petition allowed.