RL Anand, J - Miss Arundhati through her father Shri Raj Kalia has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for the quashment of admission of respondent No. 5 in the Computer Science and Engineering Course Part-I in session 1999-2000 in Shaheed Bhagat Singh College of Engineering and Technology, Ferozepur.
The case of the petitioner is that respondent No. 5 got the admission on the basis of a false certificate of Border Area.
2.
The petitioner and respondent No. 5 appeared in the C.E.T., 1999 held by the Punjab Technical University for admission to B Tech.
Course in the year 1999-2000.
The petitioner as well as respondent No. 5 both appeared under the category of Border Area.
The rank of the petitioner in the Test was 756 while the rank of respondent No. 5 was 573.
The petitioner got admission in Giani Zail Singh College of Engineering and Technology, Bathinda, while respondent No. 5 got admission in respondent No. 3-College.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner is that the Border Area certificate produced by respondent No. 5 before the Selection Committee was factually incorrect.
The said Border Area certificate has not been issued by a competent authority; the notification declaring Abohar as a border area has not been notified in any official gazette and Abohar is, in fact, at a distance of more than 22 KMs whereas in order to declare any City as a border area, the distance should be less than 16 KMs.
In these circumstances, the admission of respondent No. 5 is illegal and against the rules.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given and the respondents No. 2, 4 and 5 have contested the writ petition and the common stand of these respondents is that the admission of respondent No. 5 to the course is in accordance with the rules.
Moreover, respondent No. 5 hails from Abohar, which is a border area as declared by the Govt. authorities.
It was also the stand of the respondent-authorities that the petitioner has filed the present petition to dislodge respondent No. 5 while she herself has taken the admission at Bathinda.
5.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner relies upon order, Annexure R-6 and submits that Abohar has been deleted from the areas which were declared as border area and, in this view of the matter, the order Annexure R-5 cannot be relied upon vide which Abohar has been notified as border area.
He also drew my attention to plan, Annexure P-5, prepared by the Director of Land Records and with the aid of section 9 of the General Clauses Act, tried to make out a case that Abohar is beyond 16 KMs from the international border and, therefore, it could not be declared as a border area.
7.
On the contrary, counsel for the respondents have tried to convince me that, in fact, Abohar, was always treated as a border area.
Vide order dated 12121974, certain more villagers were declared as border areas but it is not a case of deletion.
The order dated 12121974 is a supplement to the order dated 2841974, Annexure R-5 and this aspect of the case has been cleared by the Deputy Commissioner in the affidavit dated 3062000.
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that this writ petition has to be dismissed on two grounds; firstly, that disputed question of fact has been raised by the petitioner about the distance of Abohar from the international border.
In this view of the matter, it is not open to the High to invoke its extraordinary jurisdiction to adjudicate this controversy.
Even otherwise, Annexures R-5 and R-6 have to be read together.
Annexure R-6 is not in supersession to Annexure R-5 but it is supplement to Annexure R-5, vide which more areas were declared as border areas and this position has been fully explained by the Deputy Commissioner in his affidavit in para-11, which reads as under :-  "That on 12121974, 28 villages were notified as border area and Abohar was not included in issued list by the then Deputy Commissioner Ferozepur and circulated vide endorsement No. 7379-7419, dated 12121974 (copy attached as Annexure R-6) because Abohar Town had already been declared as border area vide order dated 2841974 duly endorsed vide No. 2792-2801/EA dated 1051974."
Thus, it can be reasonably concluded that Abohar was always a border area and the certificate issued in favour of respondent No. 5 is valid and, therefore, he was eligible to appear in the examination under the reserved category of border area and to be admitted as such.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismmissed.