RL Anand, J - Krishan Kumar son of Siri Ram Sharma has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of Certiorari or direction to quash the impugned order dated 2851990, Annexure P-1 and order dated 20121990, Annexure P-3, and for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to complete the training of Constable and also all consequential benefits accrued to the petitioner from the date of his initial appointment.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled as a recruit Constable on 681989 but on 2221990, he was deputed for election duty to Rohtak vide Report No. 85 dated 2221990 under the Supervision of ASI Ram Kishan as Incharge.
The election duty of the petitioner was ordered in Meham Constituency and the petitioner was deputed to Village Lakhan Majra, which was near to Village Bainsi where six persons of the public were killed in police firing and 20 police officials including SP, D.S.Ps.
and Constables were injured seriously.
This disturbance continued upto 331990, as the villagers of Lakhan Majra and other villages had gheraoed the police personnel who were deputed on duty along with the recruits.
In these circumstances, it was very difficult for the police personnel and officers to save their lives.
However, the petitioner succeeded in saving his life from the said disturbances and death violence and reached at Madhuban on 431990 and joined his duty but he was not allowed to do so by the officers at Madhuban.
The petitioner met the Commandant but no fruitful purpose was served and consequently the petitioner was put off on one pretext or the other till 30.4.1990.
Then, respondent No. 4 verbally directed the petitioner to join the duty but he was not allowed to mark his presence in writing.
On 2851990, the petitioner was discharged from the said job vide order of the even date dated Annexure P-1, passed by respondent No. 4, which runs as follows under :-  "Rect.
Constable Krishan Kumar No. 2/58 is hereby discharged from service under PPR 1221 with immediate effect as he is not to prove an efficient Police Officer."
3.
The petitioner sent a detailed representation dated 2761990 to respondent No. 3, wherein he explained how he had reached Madhuban on 431990.
Respondent No. 3 decided the representation of the petitioner without applying his mind and vide order dated 20121990, Annexure P-3, the representation of the petitioner was rejected.
Annexure P-3 runs as under :  "Refer to your representation/appeal received in this office on 3790, on the subject noted above.
2.
Your appeal/representation has been considered and filed."
4.
Again, the petitioner made a representation to respondent No. 2 against the orders passed by respondents No. 3 and 4, but the respondent No. 2 has not so far decided the said representation.
The petitioner has challenged the orders, Annexures P-1 and P-3, on the ground that those are illegal, void, arbitrary and against the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
The petitioner submitted that he was a recruit and he was not certified to be a full-fledged Constable and, therefore, the order of discharge of the petitioner from the services was not in accordance with Rule 1221 of the Rules.
Respondent No. 4 did not conduct any inquiry and no show- cause notice was given to the petitioner regarding his alleged absence.
5.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondent who filed the reply and denied the allegation.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 2 to 4.
A preliminary objection was taken that when a police officer is deputed for a temporary duty for the maintenance of law and order, he comes under the command of the Chief of the District in which he is deputed.
The petitioner was deputed to District Rohtak, so he was under the control of Superintendent of Police, Rohtak, who alone can depose about the movements of the petitioner when he was under his control, Superintendent of Police, Rohtak, has not been made a party to the writ petition, therefore, the same deserves to be dismissed.
6.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was enrolled as a recruit Constable on 791989 and not on 591989, as alleged by the petitioner.
The petitioner was deputed for election duty at Rohtak on 2221990.
The petitioner was discharged from service on 2851990 as the petitioner was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
The petitioner was not dismissed from service.
He was simply discharged from service and a discharge of a Constable during three years of service is by simpliciter order and not by way of punishment.
The record of the petitioner showed that while undergoing recruit basic course, he absented himself on different occasions starting from 9121989 to 2751990.
The shortest absence of the petitioner is for 23 hours and 20 minutes and the longest absence of the petitioner is for 15 days.
I need not incorporate the different periods of absence of the petitioner at this juncture.
The respondents further stated that the continued absence of the petitioner showed that he had no interest in the training and he was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, therefore, he was discharged from service.
The companions of the petitioner who accompanied him to Rohtak returned to Madhuban on 131990 whereas the petitioner returned to duty on 431990.
The petitioner was supposed to return on 131990.
It has been admitted by the respondents that the petitioner made a representation though such representation or appeal is not legally maintainable under Rule 1221 of the Rules as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The representation of the petitioner was considered and was filed.
The impugned orders, Annexures P-1 and P-3 have been passed in a legal manner and within the framework of the Rules.
Before discharging the petitioner from the service; the entire service record of the petitioner was perused and it was revealed that the petitioner was a habitual absentee who absented himself on various occasions while undergoing training.
There is no rule of law that before discharging a recruit any opportunity or show-cause notice is required and, in these circumstances, the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution are not applicable.
The order of discharge is neither punitive nor arbitrary or mala fide and the order, Annexure P-1, has not been passed by way of punishment.
7.
With the above broad allegations, the respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
8.
I have heard Mr. VB Aggarwal, counsel for the petitioner and Ms. Anju Arora, AAG, Haryana, for the respondents.
9.
The first submission of the counsel for the petitioner is that before passing the impugned order, Annexure P-1, no show-cause notice has been given to the petitioner.
It was obligatory on the part of the respondents to hold a regular inquiry and to give adequate opportunity to the petitioner to show cause concerning his alleged wilful absence from duty.
The order is stigmatic one and could not be passed without holding a regular and proper inquiry.
The counsel relied upon a judgment of a Division Bench of this Hon'ble High Court in Brahma Nand v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 360 wherein it was held as follows :  ".............We are of the view that it was obligatory for the respondents to give adequate opportunity to the petitioner to show cause concerning his alleged wilful absence from duty.
This action of the respondents is against the principles of natural justice.
After considering the reply to the show cause notice the competent authority in our view could pass an appropriate order.
The impugned order in our view would attach a stigma to the character of the petitioner and as such it would have been far better if the competent authority had conducted regular enquiry before passing the order of discharge which in our view amounts to order of dismissal."
10.
The counsel also relied upon the judgment of a Single Judge reported in Ex. Const Ram Niwas v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) SCT 493.
In this judgment, his Lordship was pleased to rely upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in Smt. Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State and another, AIR 1986 SC 1790, wherein it was held as under :  "...............Where the impugned order of discharge was made on the basis of the misconduct, it amounts to an order of dismissal from service on the ground of misconduct and, therefore, the order is in contravention of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and is liable to be quashed and set aside."
11.
His Lordship was further pleased to hold in the above judgment, that the impugned order clearly shows that the petitioner was absent from duty habitually and, admittedly, no charge sheet has been served and no explanation was called for and no opportunity was given and no inquiry had been conducted and, in this view of the matter, the writ deserves to be accepted.
12.
I have considered the submissions of the counsel for the petitioner and the case law which has been relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner and in my view, both the judgments are not relevant to the facts in hand and, in these circumstances, the contentions of the counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted.
Every case has to be examined on its own facts.
A reading of Rule 1221 of the Rules, would show that a constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, can be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment and there shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule.
It is the satisfaction of the competent authority to find whether a recruit is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer or not.
No employer would like to discharge a subordinate if the work and conduct of such employee is upto mark.
To determine as to whether the order is stigmatic or not, we will have to depend upon the order itself.
There might be a motive lurking in the mind of the punishing authority as to retain a particular employee in the service or not but that motive should not be a foundation of the order itself.
If the lurking doubt has become the foundation of the order itself, in such a situation, one can say that the order cast a stigma on the character of a person.
In such a situation, before passing a stigmatic order, the principles of natural justice are required to be fulfilled.
In the present case, the impugned order, Annexure P-1, does not indicate that it is stigmatic.
I have already reproduced the operative portion of order, Annexure P-1, in the earlier portion of this judgment.
The petitioner was supposed to be present in Madhuban on 131990 but he remained conveniently absent upto 431990.
Written statement of the respondents further shows that for the period from 9121989 to 10.12.1989, 21101989 to 22101989, 20.1.1990 to 23.1.1990, 521990 to 11.2.1990, 1131990 to 12.3.1990 and 13.4.1990 to 2751990, the petitioner remained absent.
In such a situation, the competent authority before passing the impugned order, Annexure P-1, must have seen the past record of the petitioner but that record has not been made the basis to discharge him from service as per order, Annexure P-1.
It has been held in Amrit Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) SLR 44, that when a specific rule exists authorising the competent authority to discharge a police officer during the first three years of his service, the exercise of this power on the basis of evaluation of the performance of the employee cannot be held as illegal unless it is shown to be mala fide or patently arbitrary.
For exercise of power under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, the competent authority is bound to examine the record of the employee concerned before forming an opinion whether he would or would not make an efficient police officer.
In that process consideration of past punishments cannot give rise to an inference that the order of discharge is founded on misconduct and, therefore, compliance of Article 311 of the Constitution and Rule 16 of the Rules is necessary.
13.
Thus, in view of the judgment in Amrit Kumar's case (supra), the petitioner has no case  14.
It was, then, submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that the provisions of Rule 1221 of the Rules cannot be made applicable to the petitioner as he had not completed the training.
Till he completes the training, the petitioner cannot be held to be a constable and, in these circumstances, the provisions of Rule 1221 of the Rules are not applicable.
15.
The argument is totally devoid of merit and is misconceived.
The moment a person is recruited to the police department at the lowest rank, he is recruited as a constable.
Thereafter, a training is imparted to him at different training centres.
Nevertheless his status is of constable.
He draws the salary of a constable.
It is not necessary that before an employee is to be labelled as a constable, he must complete his training formally.
The petitioner was a constable for all intents and purposes and for the purposes of rule 1221 of the Rules.
16.
No other point was urged before me.
17.
1 do not see any merit in this petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.