Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Shakargarh D.A.V.
High School, Gurdaspur, advertised a post of Social Studies Master.
The petitioner who possesses the qualifications of BCom., B.Ed.
was one of the candidates.
He was considered along with other eligible candidates in the interview held on May 6, 1998.
He was selected.
An offer of appointment was made to him by the respondent-Institute.
The petitioner had accepted that offer.
He joined and started teaching.
The petitioner's case was referred to the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), for approval.
On receipt of the details regarding the petitioner's case, the Director referred the case to the University, for clarification regarding his qualifications.
The petitioner alleges that the University opined that the petitioner possesses the requisite qualifications.
Despite that the Director of Public Instructions refused to approve the petitioner's appointment.
As a result, the aid which is given by the Department of Education was not released insofar as the post held by the petitioner is concerned.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondent in not approving the petitioner's appointment, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner prays that respondents Nos. 1 to 4 be directed to grant approval for his appointment as Social Studies Master.
2.
The petitioner has alleged that he had passed an additional subject of History.
He has further alleged that he has studied the subject of Economics during his studies for BCom.
He has further stated that Sarvshri Rajesh Kumar and Kulbhushan Sharma who are similarly situated and possess the qualifications of BCom.
with B.Ed.
have been selected and appointed as Social Studies Master in Government Schools in District Gurdaspur.
On these premises, the petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents in not approving his selection and appointment is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4.
It has been, inter-alia, averred that according to Guru Nanak Dev University Amritsar, "subject of Economics taught in BCom.
Classes is equivalent to the subject of Economics taught in BA Classes.....".
However, it has been added that "the petitioner has not passed the Economics in BCom.
examination.
He has passed only Indian Economy and Punjab Economy which cannot be treated as Economics subject of BA level".
It has been further stated that the Government has rejected the case of the petitioner vide order dated October 18, 1999, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
In this order, it has been observed that the petitioner does not "fulfil the requisite Educational Qualification as laid down by the Punjab Government for the post of Social Studies Master".
Regarding the petitioner's allegations that two other candidates possessing same qualifications have been appointed, it has been averred that "the appointments of Rajesh Kumar and Kulbhushan Sharma were made as Social Studies Masters and they joined the Govt. duty.
It is, however, stated that if the facts stated by the petitioner in this para are found true, the necessary action will be taken for their termination of service".
On these premises it has been prayed that writ petition be dismissed.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is "Was the petitioner rightly selected for appointment ?"
Admittedly the petitioner was interviewed by the Selection Committee constituted in accordance with the rules.
It has not been disputed that the representative of the Director of Public Instructions was present in the Committee.
The Subject Expert was also there.
They had interviewed the petitioner and selected him.
Not only this.
Even the University, on receipt of a detailed reference, had opined that the petitioner was qualified.
Still further at the hearing it has not been shown that the course content of the subject of Economics studied by a candidate for degree of BCom.
are materially different from the course contents of the subject taught at BA level.
6.
Mr. Chhinna contends that a person who has passed the BCom.
examination is qualified for appointment as Commerce Master.
He further points out that according to the instructions issued by the department a person should have passed two subjects in BA out of the six subjects before he becomes eligible for appointment as Social Studies Master - (1) History (2) Economics (3) Political Science (4) Geography (5) Public Administration and (6) Sociology.
Even though the above subjects have not been enumerated in the rules, we shall assume that the requirement has been validly laid down.
Still, it is clear that a person who has studied History and Economics is eligible for appointment as a Social Studies Master.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner has passed in the additional subject of History after having passed BCom.
So far as the subject of Economics is concerned, it is not disputed that Guru Nanak Dev University has certified that the petitioner is qualified.
Still further on the showing of the respondents themselves, a person who has passed the BCom.
examination is competent to teach Economics to the students in the schools and he can be appointed as a Commerce Master.
Resultantly, it is clear that the rules do not debar the appointment of a person possessing the qualification of BCom.
to teach Economics to the students in the schools.
That being so, the mere fact that the petitioner has to teach the same subject of Economics with the label of Social Studies Master, does not really makes any material difference.
7.
It is undoubtedly correct that the Courts do not enter academic thickets.
However, in the present case we have considered it appropriate to go into the matter only because the refusal to interfere would have caused injustice to a duly selected teacher who had worked for more than one year and six months and would have been thrown out of the job.
8.
In addition to the above, it is the admitted position that at least two other persons who possess the same qualification as the petitioner have been appointed by the respondents themselves in Government schools.
There is no justification for treating the petitioner differently.
9.
No other point has been raised.
10.
In view of the above we find that the action of the respondents in declining to approve the petitioner's appointment vide order dated October 18, 1999 was not valid.
Consequently, the order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1, with the written statement, is quashed.
We are not unmindful of the fact the petitioner had not produced a copy of this order.
However, it is the admitted position that it had been passed during the pendency of the petition and had been produced by the respondents with the written statement.
It had not even been communicated to the petitioner.
The writ petition is allowed.
The respondent shall release the salary etc. of the petitioner within one month from the date of the receipt of the certified copy of this order.
In the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.