OP Sharma, J - Facts of the case are these.
The father of the petitioner, Late S Iqbal Singh was a Deputy Superintendent of Police and died in harness.
After the death of his father petitioner applied for appointment on compassionate ground.
The Government appointed him Head Constable in the Police Department by order dated 181995.
However petitioner was not satisfied with this offer because according to him respondents have acted arbitrarily in the matter of compassionate appointments inasmuch as while respondents 4 and 5 were appointed Inspectors, respondent No. 6 was appointed Assistant Sub-Inspector, although they were also similarly placed with the petitioner.
The case of the petitioner is that he possesses similar qualifications as were possessed by respondents 4 to 6 at the time of their appointment.
There was thus no justification for appointing him as Head Constable and is a discrimination between the similarly situated persons thereby offending Article 14 of the Constitution.
He, therefore, claims that respondents be directed to appoint him atleast Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police if it is not permissible to adjust him on any higher post.
2.
In the objections filed on behalf of official respondents it is stated that petitioner is not similarly situated with the private respondents because his father died a natural death whereas those of private respondents were killed while fighting militancy in Kashmir.
3.
Mr. Singh appearing for the petitioner argued that respondents have by offering the post of Head Constable humiliated the petitioner so that he does not join the post.
The offer according to him is against the status of the post held by his father at the time of his death.
The family background of the petitioner, it is argued, does not permit him to accept the offer because his mother, who also died in a bus accident, was a teacher and he is expected to maintain the same level of standard in the family.
He also pointed out that the government cannot discriminate in the matter of compassionate appointments between similarly situated persons.
However according to him it is a worse case of discrimination where private respondents have been appointed on higher post even though at the time of death their fathers were also holding the same position as the father of the petitioner.
4.
Mr. Kapoor appearing for the respondents argued that petitioner has not brought on record the facts indicating how and in what circumstances private respondents were appointed Assistant Sub-Inspector and Inspectors of Police after the death of their fathers, in the absence of which it cannot be said that he has been discriminated.
However, as a matter of fact respondent No. 4 was appointed as Inspector because his father, Late Shri Nazir Ahmad was killed by the militants while on duty as SP Security, New Secretariat, Srinagar.
The father of respondent No. 5 was also killed in similar circumstances.
The State was thus justified in differentiating between persons, who died while fighting militancy in the Valley and those who died a natural death, while making appointments of their wards on compassionate grounds.
However the letter written by respondent No. 3 to respondent No. 2 on 921993 states the facts as under :  "The applicant appeared in this office and stated that apart from the death of his father, his mother also died in a Bus accident near Kaluchak during the floods and he has been left alone.
He has got 4 sisters who are married and reside in their in-laws.
It is therefore requested that his case may be considered on compassionate grounds.
The application of the candidate is enclosed for favour of further necessary action."
5.
As per averments made in the petition, mother of the petitioner, who was a teacher died in the year 1990 and his father died soon thereafter.
Whether the petitioner, who has no dependent as all his sisters are married and settled, was entitled to compassionate appointment is a matter which the respondents did not consider.
However, it is necessary to point out that object of compassionate appointment is to give succour to family to tide over sudden financial crisis on account of untimely demise of earning family member as observed in Haryana State Electricity Board v. Hakim Singh, AIR 1997 SC 3887 : 1998(1) S.C.T.
511, holding that :  "If the family members of the deceased employee can manage for fourteen years after his death, one of his legal heirs cannot put forward a claim as though it is a line of succession by virtue of a right of inheritance.
The object of the provisions should not be forgotten that it is to give succour to the family to tide over the sudden financial crisis befallen the dependents on account of the untimely demise of its sole earning member."
6.
It is therefore not to maintain a particular level of standard as claimed by the petitioner that he had to be provided employment but only to provide succour to tide over the financial crisis.
There is not even a whisper in the petition that the family was plunged into economic crisis because of the death of his father.
He in fact claims appointment at the rank of ASI of Police or above as a matter of right and not tiding over the financial difficulties.
In this case the petitioner does not disclose when he applied for appointment on compassionate ground though it appears to have been processed during 1992-93, but the fact that he did not accept the offer of appointment made vide order dated 181995 shows that he is not in economic distress, the removal of which is the only purpose of such appointments as observed in Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar, 1996(8) SCC 23 : 1996(2) SCT 778 (SC), holding that :  "9.
It has been indicated in the decision of Umesh Kumar Nagpal that compassionate appointment cannot be granted after a long lapse of reasonable period and the very purpose of compassionate appointment, as an exception to the general rule of open recruitment, is intended to meet the immediate financial problem being suffered by the members of the family of the deceased employee.
In the other decision of this Court in Jagdish Prasad case, it has been also indicated that the very object of appointment of dependent of deceased employee who died in harness is to relieve immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning members of the family and such consideration cannot be kept binding for years."
7.
The question that a person seeking compassionate appointment has no right to a particular post, is no longer res-integra as laid down in State of Bihar v. Samsuz Zoha, AIR 1996 SC 1961 : 1996(4) SCT 51 (SC) holding that :  "It is not in dispute that there is no right vested in the candidates for particular appointment on compassionate grounds."
8.
Similarly, in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) SCC 138 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC), it has been held that :  "2......What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Classes III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz., relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected to required to be given by the Public authorities for the purpose.
It must be remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
The exception to the rule made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment which are suddenly upturned."
9.
It was next argued that the appointment of the petitioner as Head Constable is humiliating as his status being the son who was a gazetted officer and mother, a respected teacher has been ignored.
If it is true that post has been offered to him ignoring his status which includes financial status, he is not entitled to compassionate appointment.
In view of the law laid down in Nagpal's case, 1994(4) SCC 138.
Rejecting a similar argument in Nagpal's case (supra) that the appointment offered was humiliating and below the status.
Their Lordships further held that :  "5.
It is obvious from the above observations that the High Court endorses the policy of the State Government to make compassionate appointment in posts equivalent to the posts held by the deceased employees and above Classes III and IV.
It is unnecessary to reiterate that these observations are contrary to law.
If the dependent of the deceased employee finds it below his dignity to accept the post offered, he is free not to do so.
The post is not offered to cater to his status but to see the family through the economic calamity."
10.
So, the petitioner cannot seek compassionate appointment to maintain his status.
Moreover, the petitioner has been appointed Head Constable which is higher than Class III post and the law of the land is that only posts in Class III and IV can be offered on compassionate grounds that too after examining the financial condition as held in Nagpal's case (supra) which reads as under :-  "3.
Unmindful of this legal position, some Governments and public authorities have been offering compassionate employment sometimes as a matter of course irrespective of the financial condition of the family of the deceased and sometimes even in posts above Classes III and IV.
That is legally impermissible."
11.
Since the petitioner has no vested right to be appointed on compassionate ground, he cannot ask for a particular post.
Further, it is wrong to suggest that such appointments should be made without considering the financial condition and the antecedents of the candidate seeking appointment because it is only a person in distress who has to be shown compassion and not a person who seeks appointment to gain an official status.
Moreover, the petitioner has not pleaded the circumstances in which the private respondent were appointed against higher post on compassionate grounds, in the absence of which it is not possible to make a comparison.
12.
However, as noticed above, any appointment to a post higher than Class III post is illegal because it offends Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as laid down in Nagpal's case (supra), but since their appointments have not been challenged and instead similar treatment is being claimed, therefore, it is not necessary to decide the circumstances in which they were appointed.
However, if the private respondents have been wrongly appointed and their appointments have not been challenged, that will not be a ground to commit another wrong as laid down in M/s Faridabad CT Scan Centre v. DG Health Services, AIR 1997 SC 3801 which reads as under :  "3.
We fail to see how Article 14 can be attracted in cases where wrong orders are issued in favour of others.
Wrong orders cannot be perpetuated with the help of Article 14 on the basis that such wrong orders were earlier passed in favour of some other persons and, therefore, there will be discrimination against others if correct orders are passed against them.
In fact, in the case of Union of India (Railway Board) and others v. JV Subbaiah, 1996(2) SCC 258 : 1996 AIR SCW 705, the same learned Judge in his Judgment has observed in para 21 that the principle of equality enshrined under Article 14 does not apply when the order relied upon is unsustainable in law and is illegal.
Such an order cannot form the basis for holding that the other employees are discriminated against under Article 14" 13.
In view of the above, there is thus no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.