TS Doabia, J - Some of the undisputed facts are as under :  Petitioner was commissioned in the Indian Army in the year 1963.
He suffered injury during Indo-Pak war of 1965.
Petitioner lost one arm.
His disability was determined as 100%.
Petitioner was however, retained in service.
He retired as a Brigadier in the year 1995.
He has to get disability pension in addition to normal pension.
Further fact is that after recommendations were made by the Fourth Central Pay Commission, a circular was issued by the Ministry of Defence.
This is annexure P2.
This was done on 30th October, 1987.
Some of the paragraphs which are relevant for the purpose of disposal of this petition be noticed :-  Part-I, Paras 21 & 22 indicate the date from which benefits were to be given.
Other paragraphs which are relevant are 144. and 185.
For facility of reference, these paragraphs are noticed below :-  "21.
The provisions of this letter shall apply to the Armed Forces personnel who were in service as on 111986 or joined/join service thereafter."
"22.
Where pension has been sanctioned provisionally in cases occurring on or after 111986, the same should be revised in terms of these orders.
In cases where pension has been finally sanctioned under the pre-revised orders and if it happens to be more beneficial than the pension becoming due under these orders, the pension already sanctioned shall not be revised to the disadvantage of the pensioners."
"144.
In case a person belonging to the Armed Forces is found to have a disability which is (i) accepted by the competent authority as attributable to/aggravated by service factors, and (ii) assessed at 20% or more for life but the individual is retained in service, despite such disability, he shall be paid a compensation in lump sum (in lieu of the disability element) equal to the capitalised value of disability element.
For this purpose, the rank for disability element shall be the rank held at the time of onset of disability with loading to age, if any, recommended by the Medical Board.
Once a compensation has been paid in lieu of the disability element, there shall be no further entitlement to the disability element for the same disability.
Such disability shall also not qualify for grant of any pensionary benefit or relief subsequently."
"185.
Separate orders will be issued (i) for regulating commutation of War Injury Pension that would be admissible to Armed Forces personnel (who) are retained in service in spite of the disability due to war injury and retire subsequently."
Thus in pursuance of the aforementioned communication, personnel of the Armed Forces became entitled to receive commuted pension.
These were to be given to all officers who were in service on Ist of January 1986.
This was also applicable to all those persons who were continued in service thereafter.
Petitioner wanted this commuted pension.
This prayer was declined.
This was done on the basis of letter 30th of October, 1987.
It was indicated that the provisions of annexure-P2 shall apply to cases occurring on or after Ist January 1986.
The relevant para-9 reads as under :-  "The provisions of this letter shall apply to cases occurring on or after 111986."
Thus the stand of the respondent-Union of India is that the communication dated 30th of October, 1987, relevant portions whereof have been noticed above, would apply to those cases where war injury occurred on or after Ist January 1986.
It is the positive case of the Union of India that this has been done in furtherance of powers reserved under paragraph 185.
It be seen that paragraph 185 was meant only for regulating the manner in which pension is to be given.
Whether it was to be given or not was not the subject matter of the paragraph 185.
By incorporating condition No. 9 something which was not there in annexure-P2 has been added.
Earlier the intention was to grant benefit to all those persons who suffered war injury.
Only pre-requirement was that the officer should be in service as on Ist of January, 1986.
Fact that by letter dated 30th of October, 1987 retrospective benefit was given in the case of war injury cannot be ignored.
If the person was not to be given this benefit then letter annexure-P2 would have been differently worded.
Petitioner is, therefore, right in his submission that he is entitled to get the benefit in terms of annexure-P2.
He is entitled to commuted pension which he has to get on account of war injury.
Restriction imposed vide clause 9 is not in consonance in paragraph 185.
It has naturally to be ignored.
It has been pointed out that in pursuance of order passed by this Court, a draft was prepared in the name of Registrar High Court of Jammu and Kashmir.
This is on this file.
This draft would be returned to Union of India.
A fresh draft would be made available to the petitioner.
It is made clear that, if during the intervening period, the petitioner has been getting some war pension then that much pension would be refunded by the petitioner to the Union of India.
The petitioner is held entitled to commuted pension along with interest at the rate of 12%.
Let the payment be made within a period of three months.
In case payment is not made within aforementioned period, then the rate of interest would be 18%.
This would be payable by the official or officer on whose account delay occurs.
Petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Petition allowed.