Swatanter Kumar, J - Ms Rajwanti, petitioner, filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a direction, order or a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to permit the petitioner to join her place of posting at Asadpur Nandnaur in accordance with the order dated 1551998, will all consequential benefits.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed reply and during the course of hearing, counsel for the petitioner made a statement on 1121998, on which following order was passed :-  "From the stand taken on behalf of the Government in paragraph 7 of the written statement, transfer order of the petitioner was cancelled, but subsequently the cancellation order was revoked vide corrigendum order dated 1551998 Annexure R-II.
By virtue of the said corrigendum the petitioner was posted at Government Middle School, Lalheri Kalan.
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the grievance of the petitioner is now restricted only to non-payment of her salary for the period from May 2, 1998 to October 23, 1998.
The petitioner has placed on record, along with her replication, order dated 16th October, 1998 (Annexure P-7) issued by the District Education Officer S.N.P.
to the Sub Divisional Education Officer, Ganaur, where it is noticed that the petitioner had gone to Lalheri Kalan even on October 7, 1998 to join her duties but the Head master of the concerned school did not allow her to join.
Consequently, the District Education Officer had directed the Sub Divisional Education Officer to ensure that the petitioner was allowed to join duty at Lalheri Kalan.
Accordingly, the petitioner did join duty on October 23, 1998.
The respondent-Government may file additional written statement explaining as to why the salary should not be paid to the petitioner for the period from May 2, 1998 to October 23, 1998.
Adjourned to February 9, 1999."
3.
Thus, the controversy in the present writ petition now falls in a very narrow compass.
The petitioner claims that in furtherance to the order dated 1551998 Annexure P.2 to the writ petition, vide which the order of transfer dated 10.5.1998 Annexure P/1 to the petition was cancelled, she had made all efforts to join the Government High School, Asadpur Nandnaur, Sonepat, but respondent No. 4 did not permit her to join and instead permitted Ms. Sumitra Devi, Hindi Teacher, to join on the same date.
Having failed to persuade the respondent No. 4 to permit the petitioner to join her service, she claims to have reported to respondent No. 3, the District Education Officer, Sonepat and mark her presence from 2051998 to 27.5.1998 and requested the said authority to direct respondent No. 4 to comply with the order dated 1551998.
She claims to have made a representation on 2051998, served the legal notice through her counsel on 461998 and even made another representation on 171998.
Despite her efforts made in writing to all the concerned authorities, she was not permitted to join her duties, thus, resulting in the filing of the present petition.
4.
The respondent Nos. 1 to 5 filed a common reply.
The averments made by the petitioner in paragraph 9 of the writ petition were not disputed by the respondents.
On the contrary the same were admitted.
However, it was submitted that a corrigendum was issued on 1551998 posting the petitioner to Government Middle School, Lalheri Kalan and the petitioner did not join, thus, she is not entitled to salary for the said period on the principle of "no work no pay".
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length we are of the considered view that no fault can be attributed to the petitioner for not complying with the alleged corrigendum dated 1551998 as there is no record before us to show that the said corrigendum was served, upon the petitioner.
It is an accepted principle of service jurisprudence that an order takes effect from the date on which the said order is served or brought to the notice of the concerned official.
No reason has been stated before us as to why the said order was not sent to the petitioner by registered A.D. or even by ordinary post.
The representation and the legal notice issued by the petitioner remained un-replied.
It is also not averred in paragraph 9 of the reply, where it is admitted that the petitioner had been visiting the office of respondent No. 3, why the said order was not served upon her at that time.
6.
The order cancelling her earlier transfer was passed on 1551998 itself and if the corrigendum was passed on the same date, it would have easily been served upon the petitioner in normal course of business.
Another factor which the court cannot ignore is that normally the condition precedent to issue writ of Mandamus is service of notice of demand upon the authorities obliged to discharge such duties.
Admittedly, the notice was served upon the respondents.
The said notice and the representations which categorically stated that the petitioner was being harassed and was not being permitted to join the duties and her salary was intentionally not being paid, admittedly remained unreplied.
When a notice is served it is for the party on whom such a notice is served to respond to the notice expeditiously.
The legal notice was served upon the respondents on 461998 while the writ petition was filed on or about 15.7.1998.
7.
In these circumstances we are unable to draw any adverse inference against the petitioner for not complying with the alleged corrigendum.
If in reply to the representation or the legal notice the respondents would have informed by post or otherwise the petitioner of the alleged corrigendum order dated 1551998, there was no occasion for the petitioner to approach the Court.
Thus, the present situation could have been avoided by the respondent by a timely action.
The respondents, thus, cannot be obviously permitted to take advantage of their own error.
They cannot take benefit of not responding to the correspondence of the petitioner now adverse the interests of the petitioner, more particularly, when she had been admittedly visiting the office of the respondent No. 3.
8.
For the reasons aforestated, we are constrained to hold that the petitioner is entitled to receive salary and all other benefits for the said period as no fault or negligence is attributable to the petitioner.
An employer cannot take advantage of not permitting an employee to join and then turn back to say that the employee had failed to report for duty in furtherance to an order, which in the facts of the case, was not even served upon her.
Consequently, the writ petition succeeds to the limited extent aforestated, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.