VK Bali, J (Oral) - It is rather unfortunate that a justifiable claim of the petitioner, who devoted 21 years of his life with the respondent- department, had to rake the issue of pension through present writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, as the pension has been denied to him for the reasons which cannot possibly sustain.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner joined the respondent- department as JBT teacher on July 21, 1956 and remained in service upto 1977.
During his service as JBT teacher, petitioner improved his qualification by doing PhD In the year 1976, the Punjab School Education Board advertised the post of Research and Evaluation Officer/Assistant, Sub Expert (Punjab)/Subject Officer/Language Expert.
The petitioner applied for the same and appeared in interview.
He was selected as such vide appointment letter dated May 24, 1977.
After his selection on the post of Research and Evaluation Officer in the Punjab School Education Board, the petitioner applied for two years leave to join the above said job through the Head Mistress, Govt. High School, Chuni Kalan and he was duly allowed to proceed on leave according to rules by the District Education Officer, Ropar, vide letter dated July 28, 1977.
Since the petitioner had already completed 20 years' service with the respondent-Education department, after the expiry of two years of leave from 1977 to 1979, he decided to continue his services as Research and Evaluation Officer in the Education Board.
He, thus, applied for voluntary retirement from the post of JBT teacher to respondent No. 3 and for fixation of his pension as per Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
Thereafter, petitioner kept on repeating his requests for grant of pension which, as long as till date fell on deaf ears.
Constrained, petitioner had to file this writ petition for grant/fixation of his pension.
3.
During the course of arguments, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, has sought to oppose the cause of the petitioner on the sole ground that no request for voluntary retirement of the petitioner was ever received by the department.
It may be mentioned here that the cause of petitioner is being opposed in the written statement as well on the ground urged by learned State counsel.
It is for his precise reason, perhaps, that the petitioner had to file replication controverting the plea to the effect as mentioned above, in the written statement.
4.
The Division Bench consisting of the Chief Justice and HS Bedi, J, while issuing rule, directed the respondents to produce the original records.
The records, despite specific directions given by the Division Bench have, however, not been produced.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has taken me though the documents annexed by the petitioner with the petition, like Annexure P-3, whereby the petitioner had sought voluntary retirement vide his request dated June 30, 1979.
She has also taken me through the representation made by the petitioner and reminders sent for that purpose.
It is significant to note that the respondents did not give any reply to the representation made by the petitioner nor the receipt of reminders to representation made by the petitioner has been denied.
The petitioner's counsel has also taken me through letter, Annexure P-11 attached with the replication, addressed to the petitioner by the District Education Officer.
The letter aforesaid is dated February 28, 1983.
It clearly refers to the representation made by the petitioner on 21.7.1982.
It is recited in the letter aforesaid that if the petitioner was to send certified copy of the orders according to which, after 31.5.1979, he was working on deputation with the Board, further necessary action on his voluntary retirement would be taken.
To a significant question as to whether the respondent-department had taken any action against the petitioner if the stand of the respondents be that the petitioner had left the job without any intimation nor had sought voluntary retirement, the reply of the State Counsel is that no such action has been taken.
5.
From the facts and circumstances of the present case, coupled with documentary evidence that has been brought on records as also the adverse inference that has to be drawn against the respondents for not producing the original records, present is perhaps the case where a firm finding can be recorded that in fact and reality the respondents had received the request made by the petitioner for voluntary retirement and payment of pension.
It appears that no one cared for the miserable plight of the petitioner, who, after having served for 21 years with full devotion, was making requests for his right and was not asking for any bounty.
It is not disputed that if a person puts in 21 years' service he is entitled to all post-retiral benefits.
6.
In view of what has been said above this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to forthwith work out the pension of the petitioner under the Rules commensurate to the period of service put in by him and make over the payment on all heads to the petitioner with interest @ 6% per annum from the date the various amounts of arrears fell due till the date of actual payment, within a period of thirty days from today.
This petition deserves to be allowed with costs.
In view of this court the minimum costs should be Rs. 15,000/-.
So ordered.
Let the amount of costs be also made over to the petitioner along with his post-retiral benefits.
The amount of costs shall be paid by the State Government in the first instance.
But in ultimate analysis, the respondent-State shall be at liberty to fix the responsibility of person, who dealt with the case of the petitioner and to recover the said amount of costs from him, in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.