TS Doabia, J - Petition admitted.
With the consent of the parties taken up today for final disposal.
2.
The circumstances under which this petition has come to be filed in this Court, be noticed.
The three petitioners were keen to improve their educational qualifications.
An opportunity came in their way when an advertisement notice was issued by the respondent-authorities.
This happened on 1661997.
They submitted their applications.
Petitioner No. 1 wanted to join MD in the discipline of Paediatricts.
Petitioner No. 2 wanted to attain proficiency in MD in Medicine.
So far as petitioner No. 3 is concerned, the application was submitted for MD Course in the discipline of Gynaecology and Obstetrics.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 gave his preference, as under :  i. MD Paediatrics;  ii.
MD Medicine;  iii.
MD Anaesthesia;  Petitioner No. 2 gave his preference, as under :  i. MS Gynae and Obstetrics;  ii.
MD Anaesthesia;  iii.
MS Ophthalmology.
So far as petitioner No. 3 is concerned, the choice given by her is, as under :  i. MS Gynae and Obstetrics;  ii.
MD Paediatrics;  iii.
MS Ophthalmology;  Their applications were scrutinized by the Competent authority.
They were not granted admission in post graduate course but were allowed to join the diploma courses (Petitioner No. 1 in Child Health and petitioners No. 2 and 3 in Anaesthesia).
The further fact is that some vacancies arose.
This was on account of the fact that some candidates did not join the disciplines offered to them.
These vacancies were notified.
A notification was issued on 581997.
A choice was given to the candidates who had earlier offered themselves to apply for change of the discipline.
The petitioners felt that they would not come high in the merit.
They did not apply.
Later on, another notification came to be issued.
This was issued on 1721998.
For facility of reference, the operative portion thereof is being reproduced below :  "The candidates who applied for reshuffle in their allotted branches vide this authority Notification No. 32/MD/MS/95/CAEE of 1997 dated 581997 but could not get the stream in order of preference filled in by them in their application form submitted in pursuance of Notification No. 18/CAEE/MD/MS/Dip/95 dated 2391995 can apply afresh for the courses mentioned below which have been reported as shortfall vacancies by the Principals of Goverment Medical College Srinagar/Jammu".
A persual of the above indicates that only those candidates were allowed to take benefit of notification dated 17298, who had filed their applications when vacancies arose and which were offered on 581997.
It is this restriction imposed in the Notification dated 1721998, which is being challenged in this Court.
It is stated that imposition of this condition is arbitrary.
It has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
It is submitted that when vacancies have now become available, then all those candidates who are eligible and who can get admission in these disciplines should be given a chance to compete.
4.
The respondents have filed objections.
The stand taken by them is that the vacancies which have arisen were originally notified on 1661997, therefore, these would continue to be governed by the terms and conditions which are indicated in Notification issued on 1661997.
It is further submitted that Notification dated 581997 was issued in furtherance of the Notification issued on 16697.
It is, accordingly suggested that the vacancies which have so arisen and which were sought to be filled on 16697 are sought to be filled in terms of the earlier two Notifications.
What is sought to be argued is that when a candidate had not earlier applied then he ceased to have any fresh right to file his application.
5.
I am of the opinion that the placing of restriction and restricting the choice of selection to those candidates who had applied on 5897 has no nexus with the object sought to be achieve.
One of the objects behind the issuance of Notification is to see that best of the candidates are given admission in the higher disciplines.
By adopting the criteria in the Notification dated 1721998, this object would be completely defeated.
Not only this, the vacancies which have arisen in the present year should be available for being availed by all those persons who are eligible.
Everybody should be permitted to compete.
As the spirit of competition would be missing if choice is restricted, the petitioners appear to be right in their submission that this restriction is not in accordance with the spirit behind Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
This petition is accordingly, allowed.
6.
It be seen that a submission has been made at the Bar that till today, vacancies have not been filled.
As such, no vested right has accrued in favour of any third party.
The respondent-authorities would take notice of this aspect of the matter and fill the vacancies by considering the claims of all those candidates who have applied for the same.
In case, some decision has been taken by the competent authority, and this has been communicated to the successful candidates, the opportunity of hearing be afforded to those candidates also, before any change is made.
Petition allowed.