HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner having passed her BA from the Government College, Chandigarh, sought admission in the Post Graduate Course in History, or Public Administration or Sociology in the Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The counselling/interview for admission to the courses aforesaid was fixed for 2371998 in the premises of the Panjab University.
It appears, however, that the petitioner's grandmother passed away in her village Katehra, Tehsil Fazilka District Ferozepur, on 1771998, with the result that she could not attend the counselling on 2371998.
It is the admitted case that students lower to her in merit have been granted admission in one or the other of the three departments.
The petitioner, however, came to Chandigarh, on 3071998 and vide Annexure R-2, dated 3071998 made an application to the Vice Chancellor, explaining the circumstances in which she had been unable to attend the counselling on 2371998.
The Vice Chancellor marked the application on that very day to the Dean University Instructions (DUI) with the observation that the petitioner's case be considered as per rules applicable for late applicants.
This was endorsed by the DUI as well.
The petitioner subsequently moved another application Annexure R-3 with the reply, but it was again ordered that the earlier order of the DUI be complied with.
The net result is that the petitioner has been unable to get admission in any of the three departments.
Frustrated thereby, she has come to this Court.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she had been unable to attend the counselling in question for reasons beyond her control and as a death had occurred in her family on 1771998, she being a young student was not in a position to travel alone about 300 k.m.
from her village to Chandigarh.
She has also pleaded that though she has been denied admission by virtue of the orders passed on Annexures R-2 and R-3, yet two students Sukhwinder Singh and Balbir Singh had been granted admission in the Department of Laws although they too, had not appeared for counselling on the date fixed in their case which too was 2371998.
The plea, therefore, is that the petitioner had been unfairly treated in the matter vis-a-vis these two students.
3.
A reply has also been filed on behalf of the respondent-University and a reference has been made to Admission guideline No. 17 for the year 1998 which clearly bars admission of a candidate who has not appeared for counselling/interview and to guideline No. 21 which authorises the late admission of a candidate with high merit provided certain conditions are fulfilled by that candidate.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner does not fulfil the condition under this guideline.
While referring to the admissions granted to Sukhwinder Singh and Balbir Singh aforesaid, a reference has been made to Annexure R-1 dated 1091998, a communication addressed by Dr.
Veer Singh, Professor & Chairman of the Department of Laws, to the Chairman of the Admission Committee, in which it has been pointed out that these two candidates, who belonged to the Scheduled Caste Category were high up in merit and were to be granted admission in the General Category but they had failed to appear before the Interview Committee on the date fixed for this category and on a representation made by them to the Vice Chancellor, had pleaded their ignorance of the rules with regard to their admission also in the General Category and it was in this situation that the DUI and the Vice Chancellor had ordered that the Board of Control could consider their cases for admission in the General Category if the seats were available.
4.
Mr. SS Saron, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has urged that though Rule 17 placed an embargo on the grant of admission to a candidate, who had not appeared for the interview, but the petitioner's case was based on the question of discrimination vis-a-vis Sukhwinder Singh and Balbir Singh who had been granted admission, though they too had not appeared for interview on the stipulated date.
He has urged that the petitioner was on an even better footing for the reason that the circumstances in her family had made it impossible for her to have attended the interview on 2371998, whereas Sukhwinder Singh and Balbir Singh had committed default on account of their ignorance or negligence.
5.
Mr. Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the University has controverted Mr. Saron's argument by placing reliance on Guideline 17.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, and also keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and more particularly the factor that the University had itself chosen to relax the rigour of Guideline 17 in the case of Sukhwinder Singh and Balbir Singh aforesaid, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
There can obviously be no quarrel with the proposition that the admission must be made strictly as per the rules, but if the University itself had chosen to relax such a condition in respect of one candidate, it should do so in the case of other candidates as well.
It is also evident that the petitioner was prevented from attending the interview on 2371998 because of a bereavement in the immediate family and this additional circumstance cannot be ignored.
7.
The question now arises as to the Department in which the petitioner is to be granted admission.
Mr. Saron has stated at the bar that the petitioner is willing to accept admission in any one of the three Departments to which she had applied.
In the light of this submission, it is left open to the Admission Committee to grant her admission in any of the three departments and in case, no seat is available in any of them, an additional seat be created to adjust the petitioner.
It is made clear that this judgment is being rendered in the very peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and will not be taken as a precedent.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed in the aforesaid terms.
No costs.
Desti order.
Petition allowed.