GS Singhvi, J - The appellant was enrolled in the Indian Navy as Boy on September 3, 1965 after being found medically fit in the category Aye by the Military Medical Board.
After training, he was made Sig Boy.
He was promoted as 'Ordinary Signalman' w.e.f.
18.2.1967.
While on duty with INS Ajay, the appellant was operated in 1972 for Osteoclastoma-Lower end of Femur (left).
After the operation, he was permanently placed in category 'Bee' and was invalidated out of service on 1731977 with 20% disability.
The appellant's claim for grant of disability pension was rejected by the competent authority on the ground that the disability is neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service.
Having failed to get favourable result on the appeals filed by him, the appellant filed Civil Writ Petition No. 950 of 1986 which has been disposed of by the learned Single Judge by the impugned order with the direction that the respondents will consider his case for grant of invalidity pension.
2.
Aggrieved by the failure of the learned Single Judge to decide his claim for grant of disability pension, the petitioner-appellant has filed this appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent.
3.
Before we deal with the contention urged by the learned counsel, it is appropriate to mention that during the pendency of the appeal the appellant's claim for invalidity pension has also been rejected by the respondents vide communication dated 1551989 which has been placed as Annexure P-10 along with CM No. 1092 of 1997.
4.
Shri BS Sehgal argued that the order of the learned Single Judge should be set aside because it suffers from a patent error, namely, omission to decide the appellant's claim for grant of disability pension.
He invited the Court's attention to provisions contained in Regulation 101 of the Navy Pension Regulations and Appendix-V which contain entitlement rules and argued that the reasons contained in Annexures P-2, P.5, P7 and P10 for rejecting the petitioner's claim for grant of disability pension are totally irrelevant and extraneous to the scheme of the Regulations.
Shri Sehgal submitted that the respondents have refused to grant disability pension to the appellant without considering the relevant rules and, therefore, their decision should be quashed on the ground of arbitrariness.
Learned counsel submitted that the discharge of appellant from the service will be deemed to be on account of the disability suffered during his service with the Navy because he was placed in category `Aye' at the time of engagement and was boarded out of service by being declared in low medical category 'Bee'.
Shri Rajesh Gumber candidly admitted that the learned Single Judge has not decided the appellant's claim for disability pension but argued that in terms of the existing rules, the appellant is not entitled to get disability pension.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and agree with Shri Sehgal that the order of the learned Single Judge suffers from a patent error, inasmuch as the learned Single Judge failed to make adjudication on the appellant's claim for grant of disability pension.
A careful reading of the averments made in the writ petition and the written statement clearly shows that the appellant had prayed for quashing of Annexures P.5, P7 and P9 and for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to grant him invalidity/disability pension w.e.f.
1731977 but the learned Single Judge disposed of the writ petition without considering the issue relating to the appellant's entitlement to get disability pension.
6.
On the basis of the above finding, we may have remanded the case to the learned Single Judge but keeping in view the fact that the matter has remained pending in the Court for the last about 11 years and learned counsel have expressed agreement that the issue regarding the disability pension may be decided by the Appeal Bench, we have considered it appropriate to decide the matter on merits in the appeal itself.
7.
The appellant's claim for disability pension is dependent on the interpretation of Regulation 101 of the Navy Pension Regulations, extract of the provisions contained in Appendix-V and para 423 of the Regulations for Medical Services of Armed Forces, which are reproduced below :-  "Navy Pension Regulations:  101.
Conditions for the Grant of Disability Pension.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to a person who is invalidated from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by service and is assessed at twenty per cent or over.
Explanation (1) - The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by service shall be determined in accordance with the rules contained in Appendix V to these regulations.
Entitlement Rules:  Appendix V.  Rule 2.
Invalidment from service is a necessary condition for the grant of disability pension.
An individual who at the time of his release under the Release Regulations is in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalidated from service.
Sailors who are placed permanently in medical category other than 'A' and are discharged because no other alternative employment suitable to their low medical category can be provided as well as those who having been retained in alternative employment but are discharged before the completion of their engagement will be deemed to have been invalidated out of service.
Rule.
3 : Disablement or death shall be accepted as due to Naval Service provided it is certified that :-  (a) the disablement is due to a wound, injury or disease which :-  (i) is attributable to Naval Service : (ii) existed before or arose during naval service and has been and remains aggravated thereby; Rule 4.
There must be a casual connection between disablement and naval service for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
Rule 5.
In deciding on the issue of entitlement all the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt will be given to the claimant.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.
xx xx xx xx  Rule 8.
(a) Cases, in which it is established that conditions of Naval service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
(b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of individual's acceptance for naval service.
However, if medical opinion held for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
(c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of Naval service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in naval service.
(d) In considering whether a particular disease is due to naval service, it is necessary to relate the established facts, in the aetiology of the disease, and of its normal development, to the effect that conditions of service, for example, exposure, stress, climate, etc. may have had on its manifestation.
Regard must also be had to the time factor.
xx xx xx  Regulations for the Medical Services of the Armed Forces:  423.
Attributability to service.
(a) For the purpose of determining whether the cause of a disability or death is or is not attributable to service, it is immaterial whether the cause giving rise to the disability or death occurred in an area declared to be a field service/active service area or under normal peace conditions.
It is, however, essential to establish whether the disability or death bore a causal connection with the service conditions.
All evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken into account and benefit of reasonable doubt, if any, will be given to the individual.
The evidence to be accepted as reasonable doubt, for the purpose of these instructions, should be a degree or cogency, which though not reaching certainty, nevertheless, carries a high degree of probability.
In this connection, it will be remembered that proof beyond reasonable doubt does not mean proof beyond a shadow of doubt.
If the evidence is so strong against an individual as to leave only a remote possibility in his favour, which can be dismissed with the sentence "of course it is possible but not in the least probable" the case is proved beyond reasonable doubt.
If on the other hand, the evidence be so evenly balanced as to render impracticable a determinate conclusion one way or the other, then the case would be one in which the benefit of the doubt could be given more liberally to the individual, in cases occurring in field service/active service areas.
(b) The cause of a disability or death resulting from a wound or injury, will be regarded as attributable to service if the wound/injury was sustained during the actual performance of "duty" in armed forces.
In case of injuries which were self-inflicted or due to an individual's own serious negligence or misconduct, the board will also comment how far the disablement resulted from self-infliction, negligence or misconduct.
(c) The cause of a disability or death resulting from a disease will be regarded as attributable to service when it is established that the disease arose during service and the conditions and circumstances of duty in the armed forces determined and contributed to the onset of the disease.
Cases, in which it is established that service conditions did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will be regarded as aggravated by the service.
A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the armed forces.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have risen during service.
(d) The question whether a disability or death is attributable to or aggravated by service or not, will be decided as regards its medical aspects by a medical board or by the medical officer who signs the death certificate.
The medical board/medical officer will specify reasons for their/his opinion.
The opinion of the medical board/medical officer, insofar as it relates to the actual cause of the disability or death and the circumstances in which it originated will be regarded as final.
The question whether the cause and the attendant circumstances can be attributed to service will, however, be decided by the pension sanctioning authority.
(e) To assist the medical officer who signs the death certificate or the medical board in the case of an invalid, the CO unit will furnish a report on :- (i) AFMSF-81 in all cases other than those due to injuries.
(ii) IAFY-2006 in all cases of injuries other than battle injuries.
(f) In cases where award of disability pensions or reassessment of disabilities is concerned, a medical board is always necessary and the certificate of a single medical officer will not be accepted except in case of stations where it is not possible or feasible to assemble a regular medical board for such purposes.
The certificate of a single medical officer in the latter case will be furnished on a medical board form and countersigned by the ADMS(Army)/DMB/(Navy)DMB/Air."
A conjoint reading of the rules extracted above shows that invalidment from service is a necessary condition for the grant of disability pension.
Rule 2 of the Entitlement Rules contains a deeming clause regarding invalidment from service.
A reading of Rules 3 to 5 and 8 of Entitlement Rules and para 423 of the Regulations for Medical Services of the Armed Forces shows if no note to the contrary is made at the time of individual's acceptance for naval service, then the disease which led to individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service.
This presumption is rebuttable provided a reasoned medical opinion is given showing that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service.
8.
If we examine the documents placed on record in the light of these provisions, there is no escape from the conclusion that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of deemed clause regarding disability because the respondents have not shown that the disease which led to the operation of the appellant and his consequential invalidation from service was recorded at the time of the appellant's acceptance in naval service or that the medical opinion shows that the disease was such which could not ordinarily be detected at the time of his acceptance in the naval service.
In view of this, we agree with Shri Sehgal that the appellant is entitled to disability pension.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is modified by directing that the appellant shall be entitled to disability pension w.e.f., the date he was boarded out of service.
The amount payable to the appellant shall be calculated by the competent authority and payment of the arrears be made to him within 4 months of the presentation of the certified copy of this order.
Else he shall get interest @ 12% per annum from the date of discharge from service.
Appeal allowed.