Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Should the respondent who has continued to function as Principal since September 1988 be reverted to her substantive post after the lapse of ten years ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this Letters Patent Appeal.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The appellant as well as the first respondent are employed with the Hindu Girls Senior Secondary School.
The appellant had joined service as Lecturer in September 1966.
In August 1984, her services were terminated.
On June 10, 1985, the Director of Public Instructions had set aside this order under Rule 28 of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974 as the requisite show cause notice had not been given to her.
As against this, the first respondent has joined service as a Mistress (Trained Graduate Teacher) in September 1969.
In August 1983, the claim of the appellant as well as the first respondent was considered for appointment to the post of Vice Principal.
The respondent was selected.
3.
While the first respondent was acting as the Vice Principal of the School, the post of Principal had fallen vacant.
On September 8, 1988, the respondent was selected.
Feeling aggrieved by the selection and the consequential appointment of the first respondent, the appellant had filed a representation before the Director of Public Instructions.
She claimed that being senior, she had a right to be appointed as the Principal.
Vide order dated October 15, 1990, the appellant's claim was accepted by the Director.
Resultantly, he ordered that the appellant be appointed as the Principal.
Aggrieved by this order, the first respondent approached this Court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The writ petition was admitted.
The operation of the order passed by the Director was stayed.
4.
The writ petition was heard by a learned Single Judge.
Vide order dated May 5, 1992, the learned Single Judge held that:-  (i) The Executive of the Managing Committee of the School being the competent authority considered the claim of the petitioner (now respondent No. 1) alongwith that of respondent No. 3 (now the appellant) and in view of the unsatisfactory record of the latter, decided to promote the petitioner (respondent No. 1).
(ii) The Director "had no jurisdiction to entertain and decide such a representation.
Section 5 did not give him the power to adjudicate inter se disputes regarding seniority between staff members as this power is specifically vested in the District Education Officer in terms of Rule 9(2) of the Rules against whose decision, a statutory appeal is provided to the Director.
(iii) The learned Single Judge further rejected the contention that the appointment of the first respondent was void as she did not have three years experience as Head of the Institution.
It was held that she had "gained the experience of more than three years now as Principal of the School and, therefore, having become eligible in terms of Appendix A as amended, her appointment as Principal must be taken to have been regularised and she cannot be allowed to be reverted now."
Thus, the writ petition was allowed.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellant has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
5.
Mr. Malik, counsel for the appellant has contended that the first respondent was not eligible for appointment and, thus, her selection was void.
Secondly, it has been submitted that no Selection Committee had been constituted in accordance with the statutory rules.
Thus, the learned counsel submits that the continuance of the first respondent on the post of Principal is illegal and should be cut short.
The claim has been controverted by Mr. CL Sharma, who appears for the first respondent.
Mr. Bishnoi who appears for the State supports the claim of the appellant.
6.
The appointment to the various posts in the aided schools is governed by the provisions of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974.
These rules have been framed in exercise of the powers coferred by the provisions of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971.
Rule 5 inter alia provides that appointment to the posts of teaching staff "in the service shall be made by the management..." Rule 6 postulates that no person shall be appointed to the service unless he possesses the qualifications as specified in column 3 of Appendix `A'.
Rule 7 lays down the method of recruitment.
In Appendix `A', as initially promulgated, a person who possessed a post graduate degree with B.Ed.
was eligible for appointment to the post of Principal if he possessed eight years' teaching experience.
A Graduate with a degree of BT or B.Ed.
was eligible for promotion from the post of Master/Mistress on completion on 10 years' experience.
This provision was amended vide notification dated November 29, 1986.
In case of appointment by promotion, it was inter alia provided that out of the experience of 10 years, three years should be as Head of a High Senior Higher Secondary School or a training institute etc.
It is on account of this amendment in the qualifications as prescribed in the rules that the appellant contests the eligibility of the respondent.
7.
It is the admitted position that the first respondent had joined service as a Mistress in September 1969.
By the year 1988, she had admittedly completed 19 years of service.
She also fulfilled the requisite academic qualifications.
It is also not in dispute that since August 1983, she had been functioning as the Vice Principal of the School.
This post was certainly not that of the Principal or Head of the Institute.
Despite this, the management had considered it appropriate to select the respondent in preference to the appellant.
Undeniably, the action was not in consonance with the letter of law.
If the provisions of rules are literally construed, the first respondent was not eligible.
Yet, the learned Single Judge took the view that she having continued to function as Principal for more than three years, had attained eligibility and that it would not be fair to revert her.
This view of the learned Single Judge was in conformity with the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ram Sarup v. State of Haryana and others, 1978(2) SLR 836.
This view was further reiterated in Dr. MS Modhol and another v. Shri SD Halegkar and others, JT 1993(4) SC.
143 : 1993(4) SCT 226 (SC).
The latter was a case dealing with the post of Principal of a school.
In spite of the fact that the concerned person did not fulfil the requisite requirement of experience, their Lordships were pleased to observe in paragraph 5 that "at least as on date when his removal from the post of Principal is sought, he cannot be said to be disqualified on account of the lack of required teaching experience."
Still further in paragraph 6, it was inter alia observed that "the first respondent has continued to hold the said post for the last 12 years.
Now, it would be inadvisable to disturb him from the said post at this late stage particularly when he was not at fault when his selection was made."
In view of these precedents, we are unable to find any illegality in the view taken by the learned Single Judge so as to call for interference in this appeal.
8.
We should not be understood to have laid down that the managements are entitled to appoint ineligible candidates.
Far from it, in fact, the qualifications as prescribed under the rules must be strictly adhered to.
Rules must be followed in their letter and spirit.
However, in the present case, we are not interfering primarily for two reasons.
Firstly, the claim of the appellant had been duly considered.
In spite of her seniority, the first respondent was found to be better.
That being so, we think that the appellant had not suffered any prejudice which may call for interference.
Secondly, the respondent having continued as Vice Principal since 1983 and as a Principal since September 1988, we think it would be unjust to now order her reversion to the lower post.
It is on account of the peculiar facts that we are not interfering with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
9.
Mr. RK Malik then contended that the appointment was also in violation of Rule 7 as a selection committee had not been constituted.
10.
Rule 7 undoubtedly postulates that the management shall constitute "a selection committee consisting of such number of members as it may determine for the purpose of making recruitment provided that one of its members shall be an experienced educationist."
Thus, the selection committee has to be constituted by the management.
The only requirement is that one of the members should be an experienced educationist.
It also deserves notice that the power of appointment under Rule 5 vests in the management.
11.
Since the power of appointment vests in the management, it is inherent that it has the right to make the selection also.
Still further, Rule 7 only enables the management to get the advice of a selection committee.
Even if the management decides not to constitute a selection committee and chooses to make the selection on its own, it may not be possible to find fault if it is shown that one of the members was an educationist with experience.
In the present case, it has not been shown or even suggested that one of the members was not an experienced educationist.
12.
Mr. Malik contends that according the affidavit filed on behalf of the management, only usurpers were occupying the office at the relevant time.
That is a matter of dispute between the members of the management.
It can't cast a reflection on the selection.
Secondly, it deserves notice that no such point was actually raised before the learned Single Judge.
That being so, we are reluctant to allow the appellant to raise it at the stage of this appeal.
13.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration both the contentions raised on behalf of the appellants are rejected.
14.
No other point has been raised.
15.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
Resultantly, we dismiss the appeal.
However, in the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.