PK Misra, J - The Insurance Company has filed this appeal challenging the award of the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, awarding a sum of Rs. 40,53960 in favour of claimant-respondent No. 1.
2.
The claimant had filed WC Case No. 873-D/93 before the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, Cuttack, on the allegation that while he was performing his duty on 23.6.1992 as a helper of the truck bearing registration No. ORY-1770 belonging to the present respondent No. 2 and helping the welder at the time of repair of the truck, suddenly the gas pipe burst as a result of which, he sustained injury in the belly resulting in amputation of fingers.
It is further stated that the accident arose out of and in course of an employment.
The owner of the vehicle, present respondent No. 2, pleaded that the vehicle was covered with the present appellant and, as such, liability if any, should be fixed on the Insurance Company.
The Insurance Company in its written statement denied about the allegations.
3.
The Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, on an assessment of the evidence on record held that the claimant was working as a helper in the truck under the present respondent No. 2 and it was further found that the accident arose out of and in course of employment.
Assessing the loss of earning capacity to be 40% and taking the income of the claimant to be Rs. 900/- per month by applying the relevant factor, the Commissioner has awarded a sum of Rs. 40,53960.
Since the truck was insured, the Commissioner has directed the Insurance Company, the present appellant, to pay the amount to the claimant- respondent.
4.
In this appeal, the learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the Insurance Company has subsequently unearthed materials to the effect that the respondent No. 1 was not a workman under respondent No. 2 but he was an employee of a garage owner where the truck was being repaired.
In support of such submission, the report of the investigator and the statement given by the garage owner have been sought to be introduced in appeal as additional evidence.
The learned counsel for the appellant has also submitted that since the doctor, P.W.3, has not given any evidence regarding the loss of earning capacity, the Commissioner has fixed the loss of earning capacity arbitrarily merely on the basis of a certificate relating to percentage disability.
It is submitted in this context that the matter should be remanded to further examine the doctor with a view to ascertain the actual loss of earning capacity which cannot be equated with percentage of disability.
5.
The Insurance Company had filed a separate petition before the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation and had contested the case.
It was open to the Insurance Company to adduce adequate material in support of its contention that the present respondent No. 1 was not an employee under respondent No. 2.
It is true that the report of the Investigator subsequently appointed by the Insurance Company and sought to be adduced as an additional evidence supports the case of the Insurance Company.
However, it would not be proper to accept the petition for additional evidence and admit the report of the Investigator as well as the statement of the garage owner at this stage.
If the appellant would have exercised due diligence, he could have examined the garage owner at the time when the matter was pending before the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation.
Similarly, the Insurance Company could have appointed the Investigator earlier and could have produced all the relevant materials before the Commissioner.
The finding of the Commissioner that respondent No. 1 was an employee of respondent No. 2 is essentially a finding of fact.
Since no case has been made out for adducing additional evidence, such petition is rejected and the finding of the Commissioner on this score is confirmed.
6.
The next question relates to assessment of compensation payable to the claimant respondent No. 1.
It has been vehemently contended that the doctor, P.W.3, has not given any opinion regarding the loss of earning capacity and merely on the basis of evidence relating to loss of percentage of disability, the Commissioner should not have fixed the loss of earning capacity to be 40%.
The learned counsel for the appellant has, therefore, submitted that the matter may be remanded to the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation to re- assess the question of compensation after eliciting the opinion of the doctor on the actual loss of earning capacity.
Faced with the possibility of remand and the prolonged trial thereafter, the learned counsel for the claimant- respondent has submitted that the question of compensation may be finally determined here without remanding the matter and, if necessary, the matter may be disposed of finally by reducing the compensation payable.
Having regard to the aforesaid submissions and with a view to finally dispose of the appeal at this stage, instead of remanding the matter, I think interest of justice would be amply served by directing that the compensation may be reduced to Rs. 35,000/-.
The amount awarded by the Commissioner has been deposited in this Court and has been kept in a fixed deposit as apparent from the order dated 16.11.96.
A sum of Rs. 35,000/- along with the proportionate accrued interest may be paid to the claimant-respondent No. 1 and the balance deposited amount along with the proportionate accrued interest may be refunded to the appellant.
7.
In the result, the appeal is allowed in part to the extent indicated above.
There will be no order as to cost.
Appeal partly allowed.