Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner claims that the decision of the Maharshi Dayanand University to terminate his appointment as Director, Directorate of Distance Education, is violative of the principles of natural justice.
It is also mala fide.
Is it so ?
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner, a Gold Medalist at the Graduation as well as the Post Graduation level, started his career as a lecturer in July 1960.
Soon thereafter, he was selected and appointed as an Assistant Professor at the Saugar University in November 1961.
In 1970 the petitioner was awarded the PhD degree.
On September 16, 1978, he was selected and appointed as a Reader and Head of the Department of Psychology at the Kurukshetra University.
In July, 1983, the petitioner was appointed as a Professor at the Maharshi Dayanand University.
On June 6, 1992, he became the Dean of the Faculty of Social Science for a period of the three years.
3.
In addition to the above, the petitioner was a Commonwealth Academic Staff Fellow in the University of Sheffield (UK) in the year 1975-76.
He was a Senior Fulbright-Hey's Scholar at the University of California (USA) during the year 1979-80.
He held the assignment of UGC National Lecturer during the year 1985-86.
He was the recipient of the Psychology National Award in the year 1994.
He has published research papers and guided research at the Post Graduate and Doctoral level.
4.
A Committee was constituted for considering the revision of qualifications for the post of Director, Directorate of Distance Education at the University.
This Committee consisted of three senior Professors and the Registrar of the University.
Professor Sarabjit Singh, Dean Academic Affairs was the Convenor of this Committee.
The petitioner was nominated as member.
This Committee had made recommendations regarding the qualifications for the post of Director.
These recommendations were approved by the Executive Council in the meeting held on May 6, 1995.
Simultaneously, the post of Director was advertised along with various other posts.
5.
In response to the advertisement, the University received 11 applications.
These applications were screened by a Committee of which the petitioner was a member.
The Committee found that six applicants were eligible.
Presumably, to widen the field of choice, the University extended the last date for receipt of applications.
A corrigendum was published in the Daily Tribune vide which the last date for receipt of applications was extended from June 30, 1995 to October 16, 1995.
A notice was also circulated amongst the Professors and Readers of the University teaching Departments by which they were invited to submit their applications.
6.
The petitioner claims that he had been working as a Professor in the Respondent-University since the year 1983, in the pay scale of Rs. 4500-7300.
This was also the pay scale for the post of Director.
On receipt of the circular and the extension of the last date for submission of applications, he had decided to compete for the post and, thus, submitted his application.
7.
The Selection Committee had met on October 29, 1995.
The petitioner had appeared for interview along with various other candidates.
He claims to have pointed out ``to the members of the Selection Committee that he was due for retirement on superannuation at the normal age of 60 years on 30th September, 1996 and since he was already working on the post of equivalent status and pay scale, the new assignment, if offered to him would be acceptable only if his tenure would be kept upto the age of 63 years with pay protection....'' The petitioner has averred that this was necessary as the task of the Director was ``to improve the prevailing conditions in the Directorate and for induction of new courses.
a sufficient period was required....''  8.
The petitioner was selected.
A copy of the recommendation made by the Selection Committee has been produced as Annexure P.4 with the writ petition.
It was also recommended that the petitioner's pay be protected and the appointment be given upto the age of 63 years.
The recommendation of the Selection Committee was unanimously approved by the Executive Council on October 31, 1995.
Vide order of date, the petitioner was offered appointment as Director till he attained ``the age of 63 years.''
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition.
9.
While the petitioner was working as a Director, the Vice Chancellor of the Respondent-University proceeded on leave.
Respondent No. 3, Shri LN Dahiya, the Pro-Vice Chancellor was declared as the Acting Vice Chancellor.
The petitioner alleges that ``one of the immediate'' actions that Shri Dahiya took was to remove him ``from the office of Dean, Faculty of Education....'' This charge was given to ``Dr. MG Gandhi though he was already Dean, Faculty of Social Sciences.''
According to the petitioner Respondent No. 3 was ``biased and prejudiced''.
He was against his ``selection and appointment as Director.''
So ``he wanted to ......ensure removal of the petitioner from the aforesaid post.''
With this object, he placed an Agenda Item No. 30 before the Executive Council on February 7, 1997.
The proposal having been approved by the Executive Council, the petitioner was ordered to be relieved of the post of Director vide order dated February 8, 1997.
10.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the University is violative of the principles of natural justice.
It has been ``taken for mala fide reasons at the behest of respondent No. 3''.
He is ``prejudiced and biased.
He is hell bent to remove the petitioner from the University and to stall his personal friend namely Dr. MG Gandhi....a calculated attempt has been made to conceal material facts from the Executive Council and rather to mislead the said authority.''
The petitioner has also controverted the various observations made in the Agenda Note.
It has been suggested that the facts were not correctly stated in the Agenda Item.
The petitioner prays that the decision of the Executive Council on Agenda item No. 30 taken on February 7, 1997 and the consequential order dated February 8, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.8 with the writ petition, be set aside and that the respondents be directed to allow him to continue working on the post of Director till the age of 63 years.
11.
The respondents controvert the petitioner's claim.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Respondent-University and its Vice Chancellor by the Registrar.
It has been inter alia stated by way of preliminary submissions that the petitioner has no locus standi to file the present writ petition.
The qualifications for the post of Director were revised on the recommendations of a Committee without any reference to the Academic Council.
Dr. LN Dahiya, the Pro Vice Chancellor `` and ex- officio Vice Chairman of the Selection Committee raised this issue and wrote a notice dated 28.10.95 to the Registrar.
However, the interviews were not postponed and, therefore, Dr. Dahiya vide his note dated 29.10.95 disassociated himself from the Selection Committee.''
11 applications were received in response to the advertisement.
A Screening Committee consisting of the petitioner, Professor MG Gandhi, the then Director (Additional Charge) and the Registrar was constituted by the Vice Chancellor.
They had recommended to call six persons for the interview and ``rejected five persons on various grounds out of which Dr. SP Ahluwalia was rejected on the ground that he had already attained the age of superannuation i.e. 60 years.
These recommendations of the Screening Committee were approved by the Vice Chancellor and the process of interview was to be started......'' Suddenly, on August 21, 1995, the Vice Chancellor had ordered that :-  ``I find none of the Professors of the UTD has applied.
We may circulate the advertisement to all Deptts.
of UTD so that those who are interested may also apply.
However, all those applying will face the Selection Committee.
This be examined and put up.''
From this, it has been inferred that ``the then Vice Chancellor had some Professor of UTD in mind for this post.
The last date for receipt of applications was extended by 10 days.
In view of this extension, three more persons applied and one of them happens to be the member of the earlier Screening Committee himself i.e. the petitioner - Dr. IS Muhar which cannot be a coincidence.
These three applications were not got scrutinised from any Screening Committee on the plea that all the three applicants are in the rank of Assistant Professor and Professor possessing PhD Degree.
The interviews were held without satisfying and meeting the objection of the Vice Chairman of the Selection Committee Dr. LN Dahiya and the appointment was got approved from the Executive Council vide resolution No. 3 dated 311095.
The objection of the Respondent No. 3 was not accepted by the Executive Council on the plea that Respondent No. 3 was present in the meeting of the Executive Council which approved the revised qualifications of this post.''
It has been averred that the irregularities pointed out in the Agenda Item had been noticed.
The matter was referred to the Executive Council for re- consideration.
In terms of the resolution passed by the Council in its meeting held on February 7, 1997, the petitioner was relieved from the post of Director as ``his continuation on this post beyond the age of superannuation i.e. 60 years is in violation of the rules...'' He was, however, allowed to join his duties vide letter dated February 14, 1997 in view of the orders passed by the High Court on February 12, 1997.
12.
On merits, it has been pointed out that the qualifications recommended by the Committee ``were less to the standard of post...'' Besides repeating the objections raised in the preliminary submission, it has been averred that the offer of appointment ``upto the age of 63 years'' was ``in violation of the guidelines/criteria of re-employment of teachers.....'' It has been explained that the petitioner was not allowed to continue as Dean, Faculty of Education as he had superannuated.
As per orders passed by the Vice Chancellor on December 5, 1996, Dr. MG Gandhi, Professor of Political Science had been appointed in place of the petitioner.
It has been further stated that the action of the University in terminating the services of the petitioner as Director is in accordance with the statutory provisions.
The Executive Council was competent to review its earlier decision.
The petitioner's appointment was not in conformity with the rules.
Consequently, it was set aside.
13.
A separate written statement has been filed by Respondent No. 3.
He has averred that ``the petitioner has tried to confuse the Hon'ble Court for the sake of present petition to invoke a sympathetic consideration....'' A proposal in respect of ``qualifications....of teachers and academic staff'' can be considered by the Executive Council only on the ``recommendation of the Academic Council''.
The qualifications for the post of Director were approved by the Executive Council without the matter being referred to the Academic Council.
It was violative of the statutory provision contained in Statute 12(b).
It has been further stated that Dr. MG Gandhi ``is not a close friend in any way to the deponent.
However, being colleagues for many years they do enjoy cordial working relationship.
Dr. MG Gandhi was never given the additional charge of the Director, Directorate of Distance Education during the tenure of the deponent as Acting Vice Chancellor as wrongly alleged in this para.''
It has been further stated that the ``Agenda Item which was taken to the Executive Council was based on facts and factual position relating to this case.
As such, comments of the petitioner were not required in the matter particularly when his own appointment was a subject matter for re-consideration.''
The respondent admits that he was present in the meeting of the Executive Council in which the qualifications ``for the post of Director were amended.
But it was nowhere mentioned in the agenda that the qualifications ought to have been routed through Academic Council as per provisions of the Statute 12(b).
A fact of such vital importance was thus concealed from the Executive Council which is the highest decision making body of the University.''
On these premises, the respondent maintains that the allegations of mala fide are false and baseless and that the impugned orders have been rightly passed.
14.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It has been inter alia averred that Respondent No. 3 was present in the meeting of Executive Council held on May 6, 1995 when decision to amend the qualifications was taken.
He had not raised any objection.
However, when the proposal regarding the approval of the recommendations of the Selection Committee was considered, the respondent had raised the objection.
The matter was duly considered on October 31, 1995.
In this view of the matter, it could not be said that the Executive Council was not aware of the factual position.
It has also been pointed out that the Committee which had recommended the amendment of the qualifications for the post of Director had also recommended the amendment of the qualifications for the post of Coordinator in the Directorate of Distance Education.
Even that proposal had been approved by the Executive Council.
Respondent No. 3 had not raised any objection in respect of the post of Coordinator.
It has also been averred that ``the meeting of the Executive Council held on 7.2.97 was the last meeting which Respondent No. 3 was to chair in his capacity as the Acting Vice Chancellor.
Therefore, with ulterior motive, to dislodge the petitioner from the post of Director....a wholly destructive agenda note was prepared and put up in the meeting...'' The petitioner has also controverted various other averments.
Certain additional allegations have also been made against respondent No. 3.
15.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it was contended that there was no ground for reviewing the appointment which had been made after following the prescribed procedure.
The action was purely mala fide.
In any event, it was violative of the principles of natural justice and the impugned order could not be sustained.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the appointment of the petitioner was ``de hors the rules''.
Consequently, it was illegal and no hearing was required to be given to the petitioner.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Is the order terminating the petitioner's services as Director violative of the principles of natural justice ?
(ii) Was Respondent No. 3 acting mala fide?
Reg : (1) 16.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been selected and appointed.
He had to continue in service till the age of 63 years.
Indisputably, he would have continued to work as Director till September 30, 1999.
Yet, his tenure was cut short by the impugned orders without giving him any opportunity.
Could this be so done ?
17.
It was contended on behalf of the respondents by Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Senior Advocate that the appointment of the petitioner was illegal.
He had no right to continue in service beyond the age of 60 years.
The qualifications for the post had been modified by the Executive Council without any recommendation from the Academic Council.
Consequently, the modification in the qualifications was illegal.
As a result, the appointment itself was vitiated.
Is it so ?
18.
It is the respondents' own case that the petitioner had attained the age of 60 years in September, 1996.
Thus, he was less than 60 years of age on October 31, 1995 when the Executive Council had approved his appointment as Director.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the appointment itself was made after the petitioner had superannuated.
Still further, the provision relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents clearly provides for re-employment of a teacher after he has attained the age of 60 years.
Mr. Aggarwal had referred to Clauses (i) and (ii) of the ``Guidelines/Criteria for Re-employment of teachers after attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 60 years'' as embodied in Chapter XXIII of the University Calendar, Volume III.
These provisions read as under :-  ``(i) All whole-time teachers appointed by the University shall retire on attaining the age of 60 years.
Retirement of the University Teachers/Principals may be fixed as the last day of the month in which the date of retirement falls, provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, re-employ any teacher for a period not exceeding three years in the first instance followed by another two years, if it is satisfied that such extension is in the interest of the University and provided further that such a teacher is mentally and medically fit.
However, in very exceptional cases the University can re-employ a retired teacher even for five years in the first instance.
(ii) The re-employed teacher shall not be retained in service beyond the age of 65 years.''
A persual of the above provision shows that the Executive Council can ``re- employ any teacher for a period not exceeding three years in the first instance followed by another two years'' on the recommendation of the Vice Chancellor.
Of course, this power can be exercised only if the Council is ``satisfied that such extension is in the interest of the University and...that such a teacher is mentally and medically fit.''
Clause (2) clearly contemplates that a teacher can continue in service upto the age of 65 years.
Still further, the petitioner has been in the service of the University as a full Professor since July, 1983.
The respondents were aware of his age.
He was selected.
The recommendation of the Selection Committee was duly approved by the Executive Council.
It cannot be said that merely because he was to attain the age of 60 years in September 1996, the appointment itself was in violation of the rules.
19.
The second objection regarding the petitioner's appointment relates to the procedure followed by the Executive Council for the modification of the qualifications.
20.
Admittedly, the Executive Council is ``the Principal Executive Body of the University.''
Statute 12 prescribed the powers of the Council.
Clause (b) provides as under :-  ``12.
The Executive Council shall exercise the following powers, namely :- xx xx xx (b) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of professors, readers, lecturers and other academic staff and principals of colleges and institutions maintained by the University; Provided that in respect of the number, qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff, the Executive Council shall take action after consideration of the recommendations of the Academic Council.''
21.
It was contended that in view of the above provision, the Executive Council could take action for modification of the qualifications only on the recommendation of the Academic Council.
Since the proposal for modification of the qualifications had not emanated from the Academic Council, the entire process of selection and appointment was vitiated.
22.
The qualifications as initially prescribed for the post of Director were as under :-  ``Qualifications for the post of Director will be same as for the post of Professor with at least two years administrative experience in higher educational institutions preferably in handling of Correspondence Courses.''
These qualifications were modified by the Executive Council vide its resolution dated May, 6, 1995 as Under :- ``Essential PhD with at least 55% marks in Master's Degree of an Indian University or an equivalent Degree of a Foreign University with at least 10 years experience of Teaching/Research/Administration.
Desirable (a) Experience of Teaching/Research/Administration in a Directorate of Correspondence Courses/Distance Education/Institute of Correspondence Courses.
(b) Knowledge of Hindi.''
Significantly, Respondent No. 2 was not only a member of the Executive Council when it approved the above change in the qualifications but he was even present in the meeting.
He did not raise any objection that the matter should be sent to the Academic Council.
Secondly, it was not even alleged in the Agenda Item placed before the Executive Council in the meeting held on February 7, 1997 that the petitioner did not fulfil the qualifications as initially prescribed by the University.
In fact, it was specifically contended on behalf of the petitioner that he not only fulfilled the academic qualifications for the post of a Professor but having worked as such since the year 1983 and having remained Head of the Department both as a Reader and as a Professor, he had more than two years administrative experience in higher educational Institutions and was duly qualified.
The contention was not without substance.
Thirdly, the objection regarding the modification of qualifications was specifically raised by respondent No. 3 in the meeting of the Executive Council held on October 31, 1995.
It was not accepted.
Still further, it was pointed out that even in the past, the qualifications had been approved by the Executive Council.
It was not shown to be wrong.
Fourthly, it was pointed out that even the qualifications for the post of Coordinator in the Directorate of Distance Education had been modified by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Selection Committee and without any reference to the Academic Council.
Yet, only the petitioner's appointment was ordered to be reviewed.
Fifthly, it cannot be said that merely because the matter was not placed before the Academic Council, the decision of the Executive Council and the entire proceedings regarding selection and appointment of the petitioner are vitiated.
Even if it is assumed that it would have been appropriate to place the matter before the Academic Council, it cannot be said that the failure to do so would be enough to vitiate all subsequent proceedings regarding the advertisement, selection and appointment to the post.
In this situation, it is difficult to hold on the present material that the petitioner's selection and appointment was made in violation of the rules and, thus, it was void.
23.
It is true that the petitioner was a member of the Committee which had been constituted to reconsider the question of prescription of qualifications for the post.
He was also a member of the committee which had screened the applications.
However, it is the admitted position that the petitioner was working as a Professor for the last more than 13 years.
He was not trying to promote his own interest while suggesting the modification in qualifications or screening the applications.
In fact, it was not disputed that the petitioner had not submitted any application in response to the advertisement.
Thus, he had not offered his candidature.
Still further, the proceedings of the Sub-Committee constituted to review the qualifications had been duly approved by the Executive Council in the meeting held on May 6, 1995.
The proceedings of the Screening Committee had been approved by the Vice Chancellor.
It was only in August, 1995 that the Vice Chancellor had observed that ``none of the Professors of the University Teaching Departments has applied.''
It was thereafter that a circular was sent to all the departments.
The last date for submission of applications was extended.
At that stage, the petitioner had submitted his application.
Nothing was pointed out to justify the insinuation in the written statement that ``it is clearly evident that the then Vice Chancellor had some professor of UTD in mind for this post.''
There is not even a suggestion that the then Vice Chancellor was close to the petitioner or that he was interested in him.
It is the admitted position that in response to the circular and in view of the extension of the last date, the petitioner was not the only person who had offered his candidature.
There were two other persons.
Yet, it has been stated that the submission of application by the petitioner ``cannot be a co-incidence.''
It is not understood as to on what basis the Registrar has made these averments in the written statement.
Still further, it has been observed in the written statement that ``the interviews were held without satisfying and meeting the objection of the Vice-Chairman of the Selection Committee, Dr. LN Dahiya and the appointment was got approved from the Executive Council.....'' However, nothing has been pointed out by the respondents to indicate as to why respondent No. 3 had raised this objection only after the petitioner had offered his candidature or the Selection Committee had selected him.
Why did he not raise this objection when the recommendations of the Sub Committee were placed before the Executive Council on May 6, 1995 ?
Significantly, the fact that the Vice Chancellor had pointed out that the Executive Council had approved such changes in the past has been noticed but not controverted.
It has only been brushed aside as ``strange logic.''
Equally, no explanation for the selective review of the petitioner's appointment only has been offered.
24.
On an examination of the matter, it appears that the issues which arose in the case were not such as could have been decided unilaterally by the University without any notice to the petitioner.
He had admittedly been appointed by the competent authority.
The appointment was to last till he attains the age of 63 years.
The order passed by the Executive Council had been duly implemented.
After he had worked for more than a year, the tenure was suddenly interrupted without any notice to him.
If an opportunity had been granted, the petitioner could have shown that the action of the Executive Council in modifying the qualifications was in strict conformity with the law as also the past practice.
In any event, even if the resolution regarding modification of qualifications was ignored, the petitioner could have shown that he was qualified for the post.
The failure to grant him an opportunity resulted in avoidable injustice.
It prejudiced his interest.
The procedure adopted by the respondent was not just and fair.
The grievance made by the petitioner is not without substance.
25.
The principles of natural justice defy a precise definition.
The scope and application depend upon the facts of each case.
However, the necessity of allowing an individual to participate in the making of a decision which affects him has been recognised by Courts.
Principles of natural justice have now been recognised as a part of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In the circumstances of the present case, the petitioner deserved an opportunity.
The respondents erred in denying it to him.
26.
The first question is, accordingly, answered in favour of the petitioner.
It is held that the action was violative of the principles of natural justice.
It was unfair and arbitrary.
It was, thus, illegal.
27.
In view of the answer to the first question, it does not appear to be necessary to go into the second question.
We, consequently, refrain from doing so.
However, before parting with the case, we may also observe that ours is a land of Gurus and Gurukuls.
Respecting the teacher is a part of our tradition.
Today, in this land, a teacher is hardly respected and not at all trusted.
The petitioner was occupying a senior position.
The dignity and respect that this office deserves has not been accorded to it by the University.
We say no more.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order viz.
The resolution passed by the Executive Council in the meeting held on February 7, 1997 and the order dated February 8, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.8 with the writ petition, are set aside.
Since the Motion Bench (RS Mongia and ML Singhal, JJ.)
had stayed the operation of the order dated February 8, 1997, there appears to be no need for passing an order for consequential benefits.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition allowed.