THB Chalapathi, J - The Ist petitioner joined Indian Air Force on 821966 and he was invalided on 12.3.1990 on medical grounds because of the disability due to disease `Neuro Fibroma Lower Cervical Region (opted) with Paraparesis'.
The disability of the petitioner was declared as attributable to Air Force service and he was granted disability pension.
The second petitioner is the son of the Ist petitioner.
The prayer in this writ petition is that the 2nd petitioner be given employment in the Air Officer Commanding No. 3 Base Repair Depot, Air Force Station, Chandigarh on compassionate grounds under the Scheme framed by the Government of India.
It is further stated in the writ petition that the Ist petitioner has got an old mother, wife and two daughters and one son who are to be maintained by him and the second petitioner is the only son and he was born on 2051975.
According to the Ist Petitioner, he applied for appointment of the second petitioner on compassionate grounds.
The Ist petitioner was informed in September 1991 that he should apply for compassionate appointment of his son on his attaining the age of 18 years.
As the 2nd petitioner attained the age of 18 years on 2051993, the petitioner again applied to the Air Force Authorities for compassionate appointment of his son namely the 2nd petitioner.
As the second petitioner was not given compassionate appointment by the respondents, the petitioners filed this writ petition.
2.
In the written statement, the respondents admitted that the Ist petitioner has been invalided out of service on account of disablement "Neuro Fibroma Lower Cervical Reaction (Opted) with Paraparesis" with 100% disability.
It is further stated inter alia that one dependent of a service personnel, who dies in harness leaving his family in indigent circumstances, is eligible to apply for compassionate appointment to a Group `C' or Group `D' post, but it is also admitted that in exceptional cases, the concession is also extended to one dependent of service personnel, who is boarded out on medical grounds and is unfit for civil employment.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was declared fit for suitable civil employment and, therefore, he is not entitled to appointment of his son on compassionate grounds.
Therefore, they pleaded that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
3.
There is no dispute about the fact that the Ist petitioner served the Indian Air Force from 821966 to 12.3.1990 i.e. for a period of 24 years.
The denial of employment of his son on compassionate grounds on the ground that the Ist petitioner is declared fit for civil employment cannot be sustained because the Ist petitioner suffered 100% disability and he is now aged more than 54 years.
Therefore, it is too much to expect the Ist petitioner to get any civil employment when he suffered 100% disability and his age is more than 54 years.
4.
Admittedly, the scheme for providing employment on compassionate grounds had been framed by the Government of India on 3061987, Clause 1(b) of the said scheme reads as follows :-  "In exception cases, when a Department is satisfied that the condition of the family is indigent and is in great distress, the benefit of compassionate appoint may be extended to a son/daughter/near relative of a Government servant retired on medical grounds under Rule 38 of Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 or corresponding provisions in the Central Civil Services Regulations before attaining the age of 55 years.
In case of Group `D' employees whose normal age of superannuation is 60 years, compassionate appointment may be considered where they are retired on medical grounds before attaining the age of 57 year."
5.
Nothing has been brought on record to show that the condition of the family of the Ist petitioner is not indigent.
According to the Ist petitioner, he does not own any property except a small house where he is residing with his family.
It is not disputed that the Ist petitioner has got an aged mother, wife and two daughters to be maintained besides his son i.e. the 2nd petitioner.
During course of arguments, it was brought to my notice that the petitioner was getting a pension of little more than Rs. 2000/-.
It cannot be said that with the said meagre amount, the petitioner can maintain his family when he suffered 100% disability which is attributable to Air Force Service.
6.
On a consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that this is clearly a fit case where the son of the Ist petitioner namely the 2nd petitioner should be given an appointment on compassionate grounds commensurate with his qualifications.
He is under-Graduate.
Therefore, he is eligible to be appointed to group `C' post.
In my view, denial of appointment to the 2nd petitioner on compassionate grounds would be inhuman when the Ist petitioner served the Indian Air Force for more than two decades and when he suffered 100% disability which is attributable only to his service.
7.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, I allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to appoint the 2nd petitioner in Group `C' post in the establishment of 5th respondent.
8.
Before parting with the case, it must be highlighted that it was brought to my notice by Shri AP Balvade, Air Officer commanding, 3rd Base Repair Depot, Chandigarh that they have to get clearance in several cases for appointment on compassionate grounds from the Joint Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Defence and several cases are pending with the Ministry of Defence for clearance for appointment on compassionate grounds.
It has also been brought to my notice that several vacancies in the various Maintenance Depots since several years have not been filled up.
Though the sanctioned strength in the establishment is 10052, the existing strength is only 8856 and the Ministry of Defence is not taking any action to fill up those posts and thereby jeopardising the functioning of the Maintenance Air Wing of the Air Force.
If that is the case, it reflects the sorry state of affairs and lethargy on the part of the high officials functioning in the Ministry of Defence and it shows their slackness in taking the decisions on the proposals submitted to them by the Defence Forces including Air Force.
The officers including the Secretary of Defence working in the Ministry of Defence are expected to work promptly and make the subordinates also to work promptly without any undue delay.
The picture presented by the Officer present in the Court clearly shows that the Ministry of Defence is almost non-functional.
The Ist respondent is Union of India represented by its Secretary in the Ministry of Defence.
No care has been taken by the Ist respondent to file any written statement in this case.
In fact, none has instructed the Counsel for the respondents to argue this case which necessitated me to pass an order on 7.9.1996 summoning the Commander-in-Chief to appear before this Court, though on application filed later, his presence was dispensed with.
I hope and trust that the secretary in the Ministry of Defence will take some interest in clearing the proposals submitted by the Defence Forces as early as possible without leaving any scope for any comment or criticism that the Ministry is functioning in a casual and lethargic manner.
9.
A copy of this order is directed to be sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Defence for taking necessary and appropriate action and he is directed to issue necessary instructions to the authority concerned to comply this order by giving appointment on compassionate grounds to the 2nd petitioner in Group `C' post within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
No costs.