NK Sodhi, J - Civil Writ Petitions 2476, 3739, 5714, 5785 and 6207 of 1995 which were heard together raise identical issues which are being disposed of by this judgment.
Since the main arguments have been addressed in Civil Writ Petition 2476 of 1995, the facts are taken from that case.
2.
Shri Ram Phal Sub Inspector working in the Commando Wing of the Haryana Police at Karnal has challenged his transfer from the Government Railway Police (GRP) to the Commando Wing and also his subsequent reversion to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector on various grounds.
He has alleged malafides against Shri VN Rai the Deputy Inspector General of Police respondent 4 herein.
He joined the GRP as a Constable in November, 1970 and thereafter he was promoted as Head Constable.
After confirmation on this promoted post, he was further promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on August 30, 1986.
He passed the Upper School Course in September, 1989 and his name was put on list 'E' for promotion as Sub Inspector.
He was promoted on July 15, 1994 as Sub Inspector on temporary and ad hoc basis against an existing vacancy in the GRP and was posted as Station House Officer, GRP, Railway Station, Rewari, It is not in dispute that after about a month or so from the date when the petitioner was promoted, Shri VN Rai respondent 4 was posted as Deputy Inspector General, Railways and Operations and he was also given additional charge of the Commando Wing of the Haryana Police.
Shri MS Ahlawat was then posted as Superintendent of Police, Railways at Ambala and the petitioner was working under him in the Railway Police.
It is common ground between the parties that under the orders of the Supreme Court some inquiry was being conducted by the CBI against Shri MS Ahlawat.
It is alleged by the petitioner that respondent No. 4 called him and asked him to give some material to the CBI against Shri MS Ahlawat and make a statement against Shri Ahlawat in that Inquiry otherwise he (petitioner) would face serious consequences.
It is further alleged that because of the petitioner's refusing to act on the instructions of Shri VN Rai he was transferred from the post of Station House Officer to the Commando Wing as per order dated October 10, 1994 (annexure P-3 with the writ petition).
It is also pleaded that the petitioner was again called by respondent 4 at his residence on January 30, 1995 which was a Sunday and was told to make a statement against Shri MS Ahlawat to the effect that the latter was accepting illegal gratification from the petitioner when he was posted as Station House Officer, GRP Railway Station, Rewari.
The petitioner is again said to have said 'no' to Shri Rai as a consequence of which it is alleged that the petitioner was reverted to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector as per order dated February 10, 1995 (Annexure P-10 with the writ petition) passed by Shri Rai.
The petitioner has challenged the order dated October 10, 1994 transferring him from the GRP to the Commando Wing and also the order of his reversion dated February 19, 1995 both of which have admittedly been passed by Shri.
VN Rai respondent 4.
3.
In response to the notice issued to the respondents, two written statements have been filed one by Shri Shiv Shakti Rao, IPS, Superintendent of Police, Railways Haryana on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 and 5 and the other has been filed by Shri VN Rai on his own behalf.
Respondents 1 to 3 and 5 have admitted that the petitioner was transferred by Shri VN Rai who was then Deputy Inspector General, Railways and Commando and the orders is sought to be justified as being legal and in public interest.
Similarly, the order of reversion is also being justified as according to the respondents, the petitioner us promoted only on temporary and ad hoc basis and since he had no right to hold the post of Sub Inspector, it is claimed that he was validly reverted to his substantive rank of Assistant Sub Inspector.
It is pleaded that the order of reversion is an order of reversion simpliciter and that it casts no stigma on the petitioner.
As regards the allegations of malafides levelled against Shri VN Rai, respondents 1 to 3 and 5 have offered no comments as these are matters which pertain to Shri Rai.
In the other written statement Shri Rai has raised some preliminary objections alleging that the petitioner is indulging in mud throwing on him and it is pleaded that the transfer of the petitioner was ordered in public interest and since it is an incidence of service and the petitioner being a member of a disciplined force, he is liable to be transferred and deputed on duty any where in the State.
As regards the order of reversion, it is pleaded by Shri Rai that the petitioner was promoted on temporary and ad hoc basis and as such he had no right to the post.
It is stated that in a criminal case FIR 285 dated 25.8.1994 registered under Section 15 of NDPS Act at GRP Railway Station, Rewari in which 2 quintals and 55 kgs.
of poppy husk was recovered, the petitioner indulged in corruption and did not arrest the culprits immediately and delayed their arrest by at least 40 days.
Shri Rai has also referred to the advice given by the Deputy Inspector General to the petitioner and some others to refrain from corruption.
The order of reversion according to respondent 4 is according to law and deserves to be maintained.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length.
Shri Balhara learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged both the impugned orders on the following grounds :-  (i) That the petitioner could not be transferred from his parent department i.e. Railway Police to an ex-cadre post in the Commando Wing, as according to the learned counsel, Commando Wing is a different, cadre from the one in which the petitioner was working.
It is also contended that the transfer could not take place without the consent of the petitioner and without prior approval of the Director General of Police; (ii) That no person above the age of 30 years could be posted in the Commando Wing in terms of Clause 5 of Standing Order 49 of the Standing Orders of the Police department read with Head Note 20 thereof and since the petitioner was more than 44 years of age, his transfer is contrary to the aforesaid Standing Orders; (iii) That the order of reversion is stigmatic and amounts to punishment and since no departmental inquiry was held, the order is violative of Article 311 of the Constitution; (iv) That the impugned orders of transfer and reversion were passed by the Shri VN Rai on account of malice and are based on extraneous considerations and, therefore, they are liable to be quashed.
We shall now deal with each of these grounds in the order in which they have been noticed.
Re : Ground (i)  5.
Whether the petitioner could be transferred from GRP to the Commando Wing without his consent would depend on the question whether the Commando Wing of the Haryana Police is a separate cadre different from the GRP.
If it is, then obviously the consent of the petitioner was necessary but if it is held that the Commando Force was only a Wing of the General Police Cadre then no such consent and was required.
In order to answer this question, it is necessary to know how the Commando Force in the Haryana Police came to be created.
The Haryana Police Commando Force was created by the Haryana Government in the year 1987 by sanctioning four companies and the then Director General of Police, Haryana framed Standing Order 49 for regulation of the administration of this Force.
This standing order governs the raising, maintenance, general administration, training and operation of the force.
The Superintendent of Police, Operations is the head of these Commando companies and the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Operations is the Controlling Officer.
The Superintendent of Police, Operations has all the powers of a commandant of a battalion regarding recruitment, appointment, punishment, transfer and financial and administrative matters whereas Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Operations has the powers of a range Deputy Inspector General subject to general directions and control of the Director General of Police and Inspector General of Police.
Apart from the duties, responsibilities and obligations which this force has to carry out in terms of the Police Act and the Police Rules, it has been assigned a special task to contain the activities of the extremists, terrorists and other desperadoes posing serious threat to the life and property of the people in or travelling through the State of Haryana.
In the performance of this special task members of the force are required to investigate cases assigned to them and render assistance to District police in detection and prevention of crimes being committed by terrorists and extremists and to conduct raids on the known and suspected hideouts of the criminals and upon their sympathizers and harbourers.
The force is required to carry out patrolling in vulnerable areas of Haryana borders with other States including the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
It was with a view to instil confidence in the minds of the people at large and to collect intelligence about the crime and criminals specially and terrorists, that this force was created.
It can also be deployed for the security and protection of specific vulnerable points/areas/installations and VIPs.
Its members can be required to deal with emergent law and order situation in exceptional cases.
Standing Order 49 also deals with the manner in which the members of the force are to be recruited.
It will be seen that the force is under general control and superintendence of the Director General of Police.
A perusal of Rule 1.1 of the Punjab Police Rules (for short the Rules) makes it clear that the entire police force in the state is divided into two 'General Police Districts' namely :-  (a) the General Police District; and  (b) the Railway Police District and the responsibility for the command of the police force, its recruitment, discipline, internal economy and administration throughout the General Police Districts vests in the Inspector General of Police now designated as Director General of Police.
Since the Commando Force was set up to deal with special task assigned to it, it is a part and parcel of the General Police District and can be termed as another wing of the Police force.
There is nothing on the record to show that a separate cadre was created and it must, therefore, be held that the Commando Force is not a separate cadre within the police force.
The petitioner has been transferred from the Railway Police to the General Police District of which the Commando Force is a unit and even though the Commando wing is separate from the Railway police yet both these establishments are under the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Haryana and the transfer could take place in terms of Rule 1226 of the Rules and no consent of the petitioner was necessary.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the approval of the concerned Superintendent of Police or Assistant Inspector General of Police was not obtained as is the requirement of Rule 1226.
The order of transfer cannot, therefore, be struck down on the ground that the consent of the petitioner was not obtained.
6.
It was also urged that the prior consent of the Director General of Police was necessary and the same not having been obtained, the impugned order of transfer was liable to be set aside.
This argument too is without any substance.
It appears that the police department was not quite certain whether any non-gazetted officer or any other rank who was taken in the Commando Wing of the police force from others units was to join the force on deputation or by way of transfer.
In order to clarify the position, the Director General of Police who is the over-all in-charge of the General Police District of which the Commando Force is a unit issued instructions on 181994 to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Commando, Haryana informing the latter that all other gazetted officers and other ranks taken in the Commando Force from others units should be treated on transfer and not on deputation and that such transfers should be made with the prior approval of the Director General of Police, Haryana.
It is true that the petitioner alongwith two Assistant Sub Inspectors namely, Virender Singh and Harbans Lal was transferred from the GRP to the Commando Wing of the Police force by respondent 4 on 10101994 (Annexure P3 with the writ petition).
It was stated in the order of transfer that these officials were being transferred as there was acute shortage of non-gazetted officers in the Commando Wing of the Haryana Police though it is not admitted before us that there was shortage of these officials even in the Railway police from where they were being transferred.
Shri MS Ahlawat the then Superintendent of Police, GRP, Ambala Cantt (respondent 6) had sent a memorandum to the Deputy Inspector General of Police requesting cancellation of the transfer of these three officials on the ground that there was shortage of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspectors in the GRP and with the transfer of these hard working officials the working in GRP would suffer.
A copy of this letter was endorsed to Director General of Police, Haryana.
The request was acceded to and the order of transfer was cancelled on 25101994 (Annexure P4 with the writ petition) on the ground that prior permission of Director General of Police had not been obtained and the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Commando was told not to transfer any Assistant Sub Inspector from GRP to the Commando Wing without the prior permission of the Director General of Police.
After the order of transfer was cancelled, Shri VN Rai the then Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Commando on the same day i.e. 25101994 addressed a memorandum to the Director General of Police, Haryana regretting that the prior approval of the latter could not be obtained before transferring the petitioner and two others and he requested that the transfer orders in respect of the three officials may be allowed to take effect.
It was stated in the memorandum that the transfers were effected in public interest because the three officials were indulging in corruption in connivance with Shri MS Ahlawat the then Superintendent of Police, Railways, Haryana.
This emorandum was processed in the office and the concerned Deputy Inspector General suggested that the Director of Police may review his earlier order cancelling the transfer of the petitioner and two others and that the same may be allowed to take effect.
The Director General of Police then directed that the three officials including the petitioner be advised to refrain from corruption and agreed to the suggestion made by the Deputy Inspector General.
Consequently, their transfer was allowed to take effect and the office of the Director General of Police informed the Superintendent of Police, Railways, Ambala that they stand transferred as ordered earlier.
From the narration of facts stated above which have been gathered from the original record that was produced before us at the time of hearing, it is manifestly clear that before the transfer of the petitioner was finally allowed to take effect the permission of the Director General of Police had been obtained.
This being so, the argument of the petitioner that transfer took place without prior permission of the Director General of Police has to be rejected.
7.
To conclude on the first point, it must be held that the petitioner had been transferred to the Commando Force which is another unit of the General Police Force and since that is not a separate cadre his consent was not necessary.
In terms of the instructions issued by the Director General of Police his prior permission was required but that had been obtained before the transfer order was allowed to take effect.
Re : Ground (ii)  8.
Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate then contended that his client was more than 44 years of age and, therefore, in terms of the Standing Order 49 governing the administration of the Commando Police Force, he could not be posted in the Commando Wing being more than 30 years of age.
He referred to Head Note 20 of Standing Order 49 in this regard which is reproduced in para 22 of the Writ Petition and reads as under :-  "20 Liability to serve : All Police personnel specially recruited for the Commando Police Force shall be obliged to serve in the said force till they are transferred/absorbed in other units of Haryana Police.
After attaining the age of 30 years, no member of this force shall be transferred to the other units except by the approval of the Director General of Police, Haryana before attaining the age of 30 years."
A plain reading of the aforesaid Head Note makes it clear that persons specially recruited for the Commando Force shall be obliged to serve in that force at least till the age of 30 years whereafter they can be transferred/absorbed in others units of Haryana Police.
However, if any person before he attains the age of 30 years is sought to be transferred to any other unit, the prior approval of the Director General of Police is necessary.
This Head Note nowhere says that a person who has attained the age of 30 years cannot be posted in the Commando Wing as was sought to be argued before us by Shri Balhara.
The second argument of the learned Counsel is also without any substance and is, therefore, rejected.
Re : Ground (iii) :  9.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioner along with two others was promoted as Sub Inspector of Police on temporary and ad hoc basis against existing vacancies in the GRP.
The order is published in the Police gazette Part II Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It is not in dispute that respondent 4 by an order dated 921995 directed the Superintendent of Police, Commando, Haryana, Karnal to revert the petitioner to his substantive rank of Assistant Sub Inspector under intimation to the former but without any reference to the order passed by respondent 4.
It terms of the aforesaid directions, the Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal reverted the petitioner on 1021995 under intimation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Commando (respondent 4).
This order was innocuously worded though the Deputy Inspector General in his order dated 921995 had stated that there had been a number a confidential complaints of corruption against the petitioner and that he had also been warned by the Director General of Police from refraining from corruption and therefore, he did not prove himself worthy of retaining the rank of officiating Sub Inspector.
The order of reversion has been challenged on the ground that the petitioner is being punished for some alleged complaints received by the department without holding any inquiry under Article 311 of the Constitution nor has he been informed about those complaints.
The respondents have produced the original filed before us and we have perused the same.
An FIR dated 25.8.1994 registered against the petitioner under Section 15 of the NDPS Act at the GRP, Railway Station, Rewari in which 2 quintals and 55 kgs.
of poppy husk is stated to have been recovered.
The allegation is that the petitioner indulged in corruption and was instrumental in not letting the culprits being arrested immediately and caused delay in their arrest by about 40 days.
There is nothing on the record to show as to what happened after the registration of the case.
The Superintendent of Police, Railways, Ambala had also complained to respondent 4 on 30121994 that the former had received some secret information that the petitioner was offered Rs. 1 lac to protect the accused in the aforesaid case but instead he had demanded Rs. 2 lacs and it was only when the accused were unable to pay the amount demanded by the petitioner that the accused were arrested on 6.10.1994 and 12101994.
Taking note of these complaints, respondent 4 directed the Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal to revert the petitioner.
The relevant part of the order passed by the respondent 4 reads as under :-  "Since his promotion there have been number of complaints of confidential nature of corruption against SI Ram Phal No. 331/GRP.
In this regard he was served vide this office No. 9301/A-1 dated 14111994 with an advice of the Director General of Police, Haryana for refraining from corruption.
Thus Offg.
SI Ram Phal No. 331/GRP has proved himself unworthy of retaining the rank of offg.
Sub Inspector.
You are, therefore, directed to revert offg.
Sub Inspector Ram Phal No. 331/GRP to his substantive rank (ASI) under intimation to this office without quoting the reference of this office."
A reading of this order makes it abundantly clear that respondent 4 was influenced by the complaints which were received against the petitioner and it was because of those complaints that he was being reverted.
The order passed by respondent 4 on the face of it is not only stigmatic but also in breach of Article 311 of the Constitution since no inquiry has been held against the petitioner nor has he been afforded with an opportunity to defend himself.
He has been reverted with a view to punish him for the serious misconducted alleged against him without holding an inquiry.
The order of reversion is clearly by way of punishment.
It is true that the order passed by the Superintendent of Police, in pursuance to the directions of respondent 4 was an innocuous order but that was again because of the directions of respondent 4 contained in the order itself.
The Superintendent of Police had been told not to make any reference to the order passed by respondent 4.
It is by now well settled that the form of the order is not decisive as to whether it is by way of punishment.
Even by an innocuously worded order an official can be reverted by way of punishment as it the case here.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in accepting the third contention advanced by Mr. Balhara, Consequently, the order dated 921995 passed by respondent 4 and the order dated 1021995 passed by the Superintendent of Police (Annexure P-10) with the writ Petition) are hereby quashed being in violation of Article 311 of the Constitution  Re : Ground (iv)  10.
This brings us to the allegations of malafides made by the petitioner against respondent 4.
As already mentioned above, the Central Bureau of Investigation was conducting an inquiry against Shri MS Ahlawat, IPS, respondent 6 under the orders of the Supreme Court.
In paragraph 23 of the writ petition, the petitioner has stated that he was called by the Deputy Inspector General (respondent 4) and was asked to give some material and make a statement against Shri Ahlawat in that enquiry, failing which the petitioner would face serious consequences.
It is further alleged that the petitioner politely said 'no' to the Deputy Inspector General as he (petitioner) had no concern with Shri Ahlawat except that he had served under him.
The petitioner goes on to state in para 24 of the writ petition that on his failure to oblige Shri VN Rai (respondent 4) the first step which the latter took was to transfer the petitioner from the post of Station House Officer, GRP, Rewari to the Commando Wing of the police, force.
Although the petitioner has not mentioned in para 23 of the petition the date on which he was called by Shri VN Rai but since he was admittedly transferred by respondent 4 on 10101994, it can be presumed that it must have been before that date.
These averments made in para 23 of the writ petition have not been specifically denied by Shri VN Rai in the corresponding para of his written statement.
It will be useful to reproduce the averments made in paras 23 and 24 of the petition and the corresponding reply given by Shri VN Rai :  "23.
That from the above mentioned standing order it is quite clear that no person who is above the age of 30 years can be posted in the Commando force and the petitioner who had completed more than 44 years at the time of his posting/transfer in Commando Force.
The petitioner was called by the D.I.G.
and asked to give some material against the Superintendent of Police, Railways, Shri MS Ahlawat, IPS otherwise the petitioner is to face the serious consequence.
the petitioner told the D.I.G.
Shri VN Rai politely that the petitioner had no concern with Sh. MS Ahlawat except that the petitioner is serving as subordinate to him but Sh. VN Rai asked the petitioner either to give some statement against the Superintendent of Police Sh. MS Ahlawat or the petitioner had to face the dire consequences.
24.
That the first step taken by the D.I.G.
Sh. VN Rai was to transfer the petitioner from the post of S.H.O.
GRP Station, Rewari to Commando even through the Savingram and in it has been written that there is an acute shortage of NGO's in the Commando wing of Haryana Police.
It is worthwhile to mention here that at that time there was also shortage of NGO's in Haryana Railways Police and about 10 posts of NGO's were lying vacant.
The transfer order of the petitioner was void ab initio and the petitioner was more than 44 years of age and the petitioner had not been asked to give his consent and as the petitioner belongs to a different cadre and cannot be posted by violating service rules and without taking consent of the petitioner and the transfer was made only because of the petitioner's refusal to make a false statement against Sh. MS Ahlawat.
Copy of the transfer order is attached herewith as Annexure P-3."
"Reply to para 23 : The contents of para 23 are wrong as stated, hence denied.
The age limit of 30 years prescribed is only for those specially recruited for the Commando Force.
The petitioner does not fall in this category.
This case is based on wrong interpretation of the standing order.
Even otherwise as already stated, there is no bar in the standing order regarding transfer from other unit including GRP to the Commando Force.
The petitioner's age being more than 44 years is not disputed.
In view of the above submissions it is evident that he transfer of the petitioner is legally valid and maintainable.
Reply to para 24 : That in reply to para 24 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the transfer order dated 10101994 of the petitioner from the post of SHO/GRPS of Commando Wing of Haryana Police along with ASI Harbans Lal, ASI Varinder Singh all of GRP is not disputed being a matter of record and the contents of the transfer order Annexure P-3 are also admitted as correct.
However, the contents of para No. 24 regarding approximate shortage of posts of NGOs lying vacant in the Haryana Railway Police as stated by the petitioner is admitted as correct.
The salary is drawn from head of account No. 2255 in the office of the Director General of Police, in the office of the Superintendent of Police in the Districts in the Haryana Railway Police and in the office of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways & Commando as well as office of Superintendent of Police, Commandos, Haryana.
Although, the Commando Wing is separate from the Railway Police, Haryana establishment yet both these establishments are under the DIG Railways and Commando and Director General of Police, Haryana as already explained and stated in para No. 21 of this affidavit.
No consent was required to be taken from the petitioner before transferring him to the Commando Wing.
The transfer of the petitioner is legally valid being in accordance with the provisions of the PPR and the relevant standing order.
In view of the submissions made in paras 21 to 23 above of this affidavit, the plea of the petitioner is devoid of any merit, legal force and hence is untenable.
The remaining contents of para 24 of the writ petition are also wrong in view of submission made in preliminary objection paras 1 and 2 and reply on merits para No. 20 to 23 of this affidavit and hence are denied."
It will be seen that the allegation that the petitioner had been called by Shri VN Rai and was told to make a statement against Shri MS Ahlawat and supply some material against him to the CBI has not been specifically denied by Shri VN Rai in his written statement though he has said that contents of para 23 are wrong as stated and hence denied.
The law of pleading is by now well settled.
The written statement must deal specifically with each allegation of fact in the petition and when a respondent denies any such fact, he must not do so evasively but answer the point of substance and every allegation of fact, if not denied specifically shall be taken to be admitted.
It is not sufficient for any respondent in his written statement to deny generally the grounds alleged by the petitioner but the former must deal specifically with each allegation of fact of which he does not admit the truth.
This is clear from the provisions of Order 8 Rules 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure which apply to proceedings under Article 226 as well.
Since Shri Rai has not denied the allegation that he sent for the petitioner and asked him to make a statement against Shri MS Ahlawat and supply some material against him to CBI, the allegations made by the petitioner in para 23 of the writ petition will have to be taken as correct for the purpose of disposing of this petition.
This being so, we cannot escape from the conclusion that the order of transfer was passed as a result of the petitioner having said 'no' to respondent 4.
Since the petitioner did not oblige Shri Rai in supplying any material to the CBI against Shri MS Ahlawat, the consequence which he suffered was the order of transfer which was admittedly made on 10101994 by Shri Rai.
Again in paras 34 and 35 of the writ petition, it is alleged that Shri VN Rai called the petitioner on 3011995 through a VT message and the latter appeared before the former on 3011995 at his residence, it being a Sunday.
It is further pleaded that Shri Rai again told the petitioner to make a statement against Shri MS Ahlawat to the effect the Shri Ahlawat was taking monthly illegal gratification from the petitioner when the latter was posted as Station House Officer, GRP Station, Rewari.
The petitioner is said to have denied having given any money to Shri Ahlawat and, therefore, he expressed his unwillingness to make such a statement.
The petitioner alleges that on his refusal to oblige Shri VN Rai, the latter then passed the impugned order on 921995 directing the Superintendent of Police.
Commando, Karnal to revert the petitioner.
In his written statement Shri VN Rai has admitted the fact that the sent for the petitioner on 3011995.
The case of Shri Rai is that since he was inquiring into some complaints of corruption against Shri Ahlawat, he asked the petitioner about his role in Shri Ahlawat's deals.
Such an inquiry is said to be a purely fact finding effort and it has been vehemently denied that the petitioner was asked to make any statement against Shri Ahlawat as alleged in paras 34 and 35 of the writ petition.
Even though the allegations have been categorically denied by the Shri Rai a fact that stands proved is that the petitioner was called on Sunday and some queries were made pertaining to Shri Ahlawat.
The fact that Shri Rai and Shri Ahlawat were not seeing eye to eye with each other is amply borne out from the record.
Admittedly, Mrs. Meena Rai wife of Shri Rai had gone to Jammu from Ambala Cantt on 17.8.1994 in Happa Express (Super Fast Train).
The petitioner alleges that one Head Constable Avtar Singh without obtaining permission from his superiors had accompanied Mrs. Rai on this journey though this fact has been vehemently denied by Shri Rai and it is averred that the Head Constable proceeded for Delhi and Jammu on Government work and came back on 18.8.1994 at 1620 hrs.
Shri Ahlawat who was the Superintendent of Police, Railways, at Ambala Cantt, is said to have sought the explanation of Head Constable Avtar Singh for having accompanied Mrs. Rai without permission.
Shri Rai in his reply has stated that he conducted an inquiry and found that the order dated 30.8.1994 vide which the explanation of Head Constable Avtar Singh was sought had been forged by Shri Ahlawat as according to Shri Rai, Shri Ahlawat was away to Pune on a course from 2281994 to 3.9.1994 and he could not have, therefore, issued the order dated 30.8.1994 seeking the explanation of the Head Constable.
We are not concerned with any of these incidents but they do go to show that the relations of Shri Ahlawat and Shri Rai were not good.
This fact is further borne out from the letter dated 15111994 addressed by the Director General of Police to Shri MS Ahlawat in which the latter was advised to cooperate with Shri Rai.
What happened was that Shri Rai wanted Head Constables Avtar Singh who was working in the office of Superintendent of Police, Railways to be posted in his office but Shri Ahlawat who was Superintendent of Police, Railways, did not allow Avtar Singh to go to the office of Deputy Inspector General and instead called his explanation for unauthorisedly visiting Jammu and ordered a departmental inquiry against him.
The Deputy Inspector General then complained to the Director General of Police who in reply thereto addressed the aforesaid communication dated 15111994 to Shri Ahlawat.
Again the letter dated 1.11.199 addressed by Shri Rai to the Director General of Police, Haryana complaining about alleged high -handedness of Shri Ahlawat in his day to day dealings with his subordinate ranks and his unprofessional and undignified behaviour goes to show that Shri Rai and Shri Ahlawat had strained relations.
Since Shri Rai had called the petitioner and some others to make some queries regarding their role in Shri Ahlawat's deals, it is obvious that Shri Rai was carrying the impression that the petitioner and others were mixed up with Shri Ahlawat and were his men.
It may be mentioned here that when the petitioner along with Two Assistant Sub Inspectors Varinder Singh and Harbans Lal (petitioners in CWP 6207 and 5785 of 1995 respectively) was transferred from the GRP to the Commando Wing on 10101994, Shri Ahlawat addressed a communication to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Railways and Commando on 12101994 requesting cancellation of the transfer describing these officials as hard-working persons and stated that with their transfer the working in the GRP would suffer.
A reading of this letter shows that Shri Ahlawat was interested in these officials and Shri Rai could well have been justified in drawing an inference that they were his men.
As already noticed earlier, the Director General of Police cancelled the transfer on the ground that his prior permission had not been obtained as was required in terms of the instructions issued on 181994.
The transfers were cancelled on 25101994 and Shri Rai immediately on the same day wrote a letter to the Director General of Police pleading for the transfer of these officials.
It is interesting to note that the reason mentioned in this letter for the transfer of the three officials was that they were indulging in corruption in connivance with Shri Ahlawat.
On receipt of this letter, the Director of Police agreed to allow the transfers to take effect and further gave a directions that the officials be told to refrain from corruption.
Interestingly in the order of transfer, respondent 4 had mentioned a different reason.
A reading of that order shows that the reason for the transfer of the petitioner and two others was that there was acute shortage of these officials in the Commando Wing.
It is a different matter that there was acute shortage of these officials in the GRP as well as but that was for the police officials to decide on administrative side as to where the petitioners were to be posted.
The different reasons mentioned by Shri Rai in the order of transfer and in his communication addressed to the Director General of Police on 25101994 pleading for their transfers to take effect go to show that some extraneous considerations did weigh with him in transferring the petitioner and two others whom he thought were Shri Ahlawat's men.
11.
We are painfully constrained to point out that from the material on the record, one is irresistibly driven to the conclusion that the relations between Shri VN Rai and Shri MS Ahlawat (respondents 4 and 6 respectively) were not cordial and the petitioner and some others seem to have suffered on that score.
The order of transfer appears to have been made for extraneous considerations.
Since the reasons for the transfer as given by Shri.
VN Rai in the transfer order are different from those mentioned by him in his memorandum dated 25101994 addressed to the Director General of Police, Haryana in which it was stated that it was necessary for the petitioner to be transferred as the was indulging in corruption in connivance with Shri Ahlawat.
However, in the order of transfer the only reason given was that there was acute shortage of NGOs in the Commando force.
It is interesting to note that it is admitted by the official respondents that there was such shortage in the Railway Police as well from where the petitioner and two others were being transferred.
In view of our aforesaid discussion, we have no hesitation in quashing the order of transfer as well.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed with costs and the impugned orders of transfer reversion (Annexure P3, P5 and P10) are quashed.
12.
Civil Writ Petition 5785 of 1995 : -  Petitioner herein was working as Assistant Sub Inspector since 7.11.1990 and was posted as Reader to Shri Ahlawat from February, 1994 till 13101994.
He was transferred by Shri Rai on 13101994 to the Commando Wing posting him at Panchkula under his control.
After being transferred he reported for duty at Panchkula on 26101994 (FN) and even before he joined, he had been placed under suspension by Shri Rai on 24101994.
The allegations levelled against the petitioner was that he in connivance with Shri Ahlawat had been instrumental in fabricating false evidence against Head Constables Avtar Singh to be used against him in the departmental proceedings ordered against him by Shri Ahlawat.
It may be mentioned that Head Constables Avtar Singh is the same person against whom it was alleged that he had unauthorisedly accompanied Mrs. Rai to Jammu on 18.8.1994 and whose explanation was called and against whom departmental inquiry was ordered by Shri MS Ahlawat.
One Daulat Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Commando who was under the control of Shri Rai was appointed the Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner represented to the Director General of Police that the Enquiry Officer who was directly working under Shri Rai would not be able to hold an independent and unbiased inquiry.
He, therefore, requested that some other senior officer be appointed and the inquiry be transferred to him.
Earlier when the order of transfer was issued on 13101994, Shri Ahlawat intervened and got the same cancelled from the Director General of Police on ground that the prior permission of the latter had not been obtained.
The order of transfer was cancelled on 25101994.
On the same day i.e. 25101994, Shri Rai intervened and addressed a communication to the Director General of Police informing the latter that the petitioner along with two others were indulging in corruption in connivance with Shri Ahlawat and requested the Director General of Police to allow the order of transfer to take effect.
The Director General of police acceded to the request of Shri Rai and the transfer order was allowed to take effect.
For the reasons already recorded in CWP 2476 of 1995 and after having persued the original record, we are satisfied that Shri V.N Rai was nursing a feeling that the petitioner was aligned with Shri Ahlawat and it is for this reason that the not only transferred him but also placed him under suspension.
The impugned orders of transfer and suspension are held to have been passed for extraneous reasons and the same are hereby quashed.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed with costs.
13.
Civil Writ Petition 6207 of 1995 :  Petitioner was working as Assistant Sub Inspector in the GRP with effect from 1111989 and had worked as a Reader to Shri MS Ahlawat from 16.2.1983 to 2.5.1984.
He was transferred by Shri Rai to the Commando Wing on 13101994.
Soon thereafter Shri Ahlawat intervened and got his transfer orders along with the transfer orders of two petitioners in Civil Writ Petitions 2476 and 5785 of 1995 cancelled by the Director General of Police on the ground that the prior permission of the latter had not been obtained.
Shri Ahlawat stated that these official were hard working and that their transfer from the GRP would adversely affect the working.
The Director General of Police cancelled the transfer orders on 25101994.
On the same day, Shri VN Rai intervened and requested the Director General of Police of allow the transfers to take effect as these officials was indulging in corruption in connivance with Shri Ahlawat.
The Director General of Police accepted his request as well and allowed the orders of transfer to take effect.
The officials were also directed to be informed that they should refrain from indulging in corruption.
Shri Rai made a surprise visit to the Police Post, GRP, Palwal Railway Station on 15101994 and found that the roznamcha had been kept blank.
He recorded statements of some of the witnesses who were found present and concluded that the petitioner who was Incharge was the main culprit.
He was immediately placed under suspension there and then.
Shri Rai also found that there was an entry in the daily diary register at serial No. 34 dated 12101994 at 6 pm to the effect that the petitioner had left for Agra in connection with an inquiry regarding complaint No. 20005 dated 2161994.
Shri Rai also found that the said complaint had not been entered in the complaint register and took the view that the petitioner who was under orders of transfer was trying to avoid his departure to the Commando Wing and it was for this reason that he had proceeded for the inquiry.
Curiously enough in the order of suspension, Shri Rai also observed that he had warned Shri Ahlawat, Superintendent of Police, GRP both verbally and in writing regarding the state of affairs under him in the GRP and that he had failed to take notice of his warnings.
He also observed that Shri Ahlawat was mixed up with the petitioner and others like him.
After placing the petitioner under suspension, Shri Rai wanted the Deputy Superintendent of Police, GRP to hold a departmental inquiry regarding the role of the petitioner in causing delay in completing the roznamcha.
Here again, in his letter dated 17101994 (Annexure P7 with the writ petition) he warned Shri Ahlawat to take immediate corrective measures and tone up things in the GRP.
There might have been some delay in completing the roznamcha but the entry regarding petitioner's departure for Agra stood entered therein on 12101994 and he left on that day at 6 pm The transfer orders were passed on 13101994 which were subsequently cancelled and then allowed to take effect.
In these circumstances, how could the petitioner be blamed for having left for Agra with a view to avoid compliance of the transfer orders.
Be that as it may, we have already held that Shri Rai was not well disposed towards Shri Ahlawat and some subordinate officials suffered on account of their strained relations.
Petitioner is one of them.
For the reasons already recorded above, we hold that the transfer orders as well as the orders of suspension have been passed for extraneous reasons.
Consequently, the writ petition stands allowed with costs and the impugned order of transfer as also the order of suspension (Annexure P5 and P6 with the writ petition) stand quashed.
14.
Civil Writ Petition 3739 of 1995 :  The petitioner herein has challenged not only his order of transfer from GRP of Commando Wing but also the order by which he was charge-sheeted for having remained absent from duty.
Appointment of the Enquiry Officer who held a regular departmental inquiry has also been impugned.
It was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the transfer could not be effected without the consent of the petitioner.
This argument has already been repelled by us in Civil Writ Petition 2476 of 1995 and for the same reasons as given therein the order of transfer cannot be interfered with on this ground.
15.
The impugned orders have also been challenged on the ground of mala fides of Shri VN Rai respondent 4.
The petitioner who was working as Head Constable in the GRP was transferred by the then Superintendent of Police, Railways to the traffic staff on 17.2.1994.
While he was working on traffic duty, it is alleged that he had been sent to MMPSI Staff, Ambala on 20111994, under the orders of the Superintendent of Police, Traffic, Karnal but the petitioner instead remained absent for 31 days and reported in the office at Karnal on 21121994.
According to the respondents, the petitioner not only disobeyed the orders of the Superintendent of Police, Traffic but also remained absent from duty and it is for this reason that he is being proceeded against in the departmental inquiry.
It is further alleged by the respondents that the petitioner was sanctioned 30 days' earned leave 16.1.1995 and he was to return back on duty on 1621995.
During this period he was transferred to the Commando Wing.
It is further submitted that the petitioner instead of joining his duty again remained absent.
Shri Shiv Shakti Rao, IPS, the then Superintendent of Police, Railways, ordered the departmental inquiry against the petitioner and also appointed the Enquiry Officer.
It is not even alleged that these departmental proceedings were ordered at the behest of respondent 4.
No meaningful argument could be advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner while challenging the departmental proceedings.
We consequently find no merit in the challenge to these proceedings.
16.
The petitioner was transferred from GRP to the Commando Wing, Karnal on 921995.
It is alleged that this transfer order was passed by respondent 4 with a view to harass the petitioners.
It is not in dispute before us that respondent 4 had called the petitioner to appear before him on 14111994 in connection with some inquiry and that the petitioner made a statement in writing before the said respondent against Shri MS Ahlawat.
The petitioner alleges that respondent 4 coerced him to make the said statement which was recorded by his Reader and he was made to sign the same.
Respondent 4 in the written statement has vehemently denied these assertions stating that he did not pressurise the petitioner who made the statement of his own.
There is no material on the record to show that respondent 4 in any way acted in a vindictive manner while ordering the transfer of the petitioner to the Commando Wing.
We find that the petitioner has made some wild allegations against respondent 4 mentioning some incidents with which the petitioner is not at all concerned.
No doubt, the relations between Sarvshri VN Rai and MS Ahlawat was strained but that by itself will not mean that every order of transfer passed by Shri VN Rai was actuated by extraneous reasons.
May be, the petitioner is trying to take advantage of their strained relations.
In the result, we hold that the petitioner has not been able to substantive the allegations of mala fides and consequently the writ petition stands dismissed with costs.
17.
Civil Writ Petition 5714 of 1995 :  In this petition the order transferring the petitioner from the GRP to the Commando Wing is being challenged on the ground that the same was passed without the consent of the petitioner and also on the ground of malafides of Shri VN Rai respondent 4.
A perusal of the writ petition shows that there is hardly any allegation of mala fides levelled against respondent 4 except that a general averment has been made that Shri VN Rai was out to harass the officials who according to him were being favoured by Shri MS Ahlawat.
There is nothing on the record to show that the petitioner was ever supported by Shri MS Ahlawat or that Shri Rai had transferred the petitioner on account of any malice.
The allegations in this regard are as vague as they could be.
The plea that the transfer was effected without the consent of the petitioner has no force in view of what we have held in Civil Writ Petition 2476 of 1995.
In the result, this writ petition also stands dismissed with costs.