VK Vali, J. (Oral) - Miss Minakshi Gandhi, even though raised larger issues challenging prescription of minimum age for a private candidate to take 8th Class examination when concededly no such age has been prescribed for a regular student, limited her claim during the course of argument to permit her to appear, in 8th class examination on the facts peculiar to her alone.
She claims right to appear in 8th class examination that, in fact, commenced on 16th February, 1996, on the sole basis that she was entitled and, thus, was permitted to appear for 5th class examination three years earlier to when she requested to appear in the 8th class examination and therefore the cut off date of minimum of 12 years was fixed by completely ignoring the claim of those who like the petitioner had appeared three years earlier in the 5th class examination.
Before the contentions raised by Mr. Aman Kashyap, learned Counsel representing the petitioner are noticed, it shall be useful to give brief facts constraining the petitioner to file the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Petitioner appeared for 5th class examination conducted by the Department of Education, Punjab.
That she cleared the examination is evidenced from Annexure P-2 certificate issued to her by the Department of Education, Punjab (S.C.E.R.T).
The petitioner being regular student in a private school was promoted to Class 6th, 7th and 8th during the three years preceding her attempt to appear in the 8th class examination.
Her candidature was, however, cancelled vide letter Annexure P-1 on the ground that she did not complete three years studies as on 31st of October, 1995.
Before the matter might proceed any further, it is relevant to mention here that when the petitioner appeared for 5th examination in 1993, the prescribed minimum age was 9 years as on 7th January of the year when the candidate was to appear in the said examination.
3.
As mentioned earlier, in the petition filed on behalf of the petitioner, the basic contention was that no such minimum age has been prescribed for candidates studying in Government school, therefore, no such age could be prescribed for a candidate studying in a private school and a distinction made on the basis of a candidate studying in a private or Government school had not rationale and no object to be achieved.
The same was arbitrary and against the equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
During the course of arguments, however, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner did not press this point and confined his contentions to the second point mooted out in the petition.
The same, as referred to above, is that if for appearing in the 5th class, the minimum prescribed age was to be considered from l7th January of the concerned year, the same could not be changed for the 8th class which had an obvious result of depriving eligible candidates who, in fact and reality had put in three years of regular studies.
The prescription of the cut off date i.e. 31st of October, of the year concerned was fixed without application of mind, contends the learned Counsel.
5.
The only opposition to the contention raised by the learned counsel, as noted above, coming from the side of the respondent is that the cut off date i.e. 7th of January of the concerned year was prescribed by the Punjab Government which conducts the 5th class examination whereas 31st of October of the concerned year was prescribed cut off date by the Punjab School Education Board and that since these two departments are separate entities, no grouse can be raised on that count.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and examining the record, this Court is of the considered view that in the facts and circumstances of this case, prescription of a cut off date as 31st of October, 1995, preceding the year when the petitioner was to appear for 8th class examination has worked injustice to the petitioner.
It has resulted into a loss of year to the petitioner.
The petitioner did appear and was concededly eligible to appear for her 5th class examination if she was to be of minimum of 9 years of age on 7th of January of the year when she was to appear in the examination.
She had been regularly studying even though in a private school for three years and while finding out eligibility i.e. minimum age, the authorities concerned ought to have seen that those who have been studying for three years and were eligible to appear for the 5th class examination on a particular date should be entitled to appear for the 8th class examination after three years of regular studies.
It is true that whereas 5th class examination is conducted by the Punjab Government, the 8th class examination is conducted by the Punjab School Education Broad but concededly the Board is an instrumentality of the State.
While working out the details of cut off date, the Board ought of have taken into consideration the cut off date so fixed for 5th class examination as prescribed by the Punjab Government.
In view of this Court, educational authorities if are different at a particular stage must consult each other with regard to such vital issues which might have a great deal of bearing on the career of the students.
If such a consultation was made, it had not been difficult for the Punjab School Education Board to prescribe a cut off date of minimum age that might have coincided with the one prescribed by the Punjab Government while conducting 5th class examination.
If this course was perhaps to be adopted, number of students like the petitioners might have not wasted their one valuable year.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, therefore, it has to be held that the petitioner has been wrongly deprieved of appearing for the 8th class examination.
Inasmuch as the 8th class examination in which the petitioner wanted to appear is over, the question now arises as to what meaningful relief can be granted to the petitioner.
The Motion Bench while admitting the petition passed the following orders :-  "The prayer by learned counsel for the petitioner is that the respondent be directed to hold special examination of class 8th for the petitioner as the examination which started in February, 1996, is already over.
We leave it to the learned single Judge, who would hear the petition, to grant appropriate relief in case he finds favour with the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner for grant of the relief as prayed for in the petition.
Considering the nature of controversy involved in the case the office is directed to post the main case for hearing on 841996 high -up in the list."
7.
The only objection raised by the Counsel representing the respondent-Board is that it will be difficult to prescribe the same standard of question papers as was set out for the students who had already appeared in examination which commenced with effect from 16th February, 1996.
This, in my view, should not pose any problem to the respondent-Board as it is not difficult for the paper setters to find out the standard in those papers and prescribe an equivalent one for the petitioner.
Once the syllabus for the students who then appeared and for the petitioner is the same, the standard can be found out by examiner/paper setters who are expert in the line.
8.
This writ petition is allowed and a direction is, thus, issued to the respondent-Board to take such examination for the petitioner by setting out papers that might be equivalent in standard of the papers that were set out for students who appeared in the examination starting with effect from 16th of February, 1996.
Let this exercise be done within two months from today.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.