RB Misra, J - Heard Sri RK Tiwari, learned Counsel, holding brief of Sri PS Baghel, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Sri Sandeep Mukherjee, learned Standing Counsel for the State respondents.
2.
In this petition prayer has been made for quashing the impugned order dated 30-12-2000 (Annexure No. 8 to the writ petition), whereby the petitioner while working as Sub-Inspector (Teacher) in Mirzapur has been transferred to Recruitment Training Centre, Chunar, Mirzapur with immediate effect, subsequent prayer has been made for issuance of writ of mandamus commanding the respondents not to interfere in the functioning of the petitioner as Sub- Inspector, Civil Police, Police Station Mirzapur.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned transfer order dated 30-12-2000 on the ground that the petitioner was initially promoted on 19-4-1995 after completing recruitment training and the petitioner's transfer amounts to punishment as he is being sent to a separate cadre.
The impugned transfer order is flouting the legitimate expectations and assurances given to the petitioner before he was sent for training that after completing the RTC assignment, he will be posted in civil police and shall be given promotion also in the civil police.
According to the petitioner he has excellent service record and if he is allowed to work as Sub-Inspector (Teacher), he will lose his future promotion as the post, to which he has been directed to go and join, is a different cadre post, where his promotional avenue shall be jeopardised.
4.
When this petition was filed, this Court on 2-2-2001 while issuing notices stayed the operation of the impugned order.
5.
Counter-affidavit has been filed and the respondents are referring and relying on the judgment dated 4-10-2002 passed by this Court in Writ Petition No. 19616 of 2002 (Mahesh Chandra Sharma v. Inspector General of Police (Karmik), Lucknow and others), whereby other batch of the writ petitions were decided.
In the case of Mahesh Chandra Sharma, the writ petitioners were initially recruited as Constable and promoted as Head Constable, and subsequently after undergoing training of Pedagogy Course they were allowed to work on sanctioned posts of Sub-Inspector (Teacher), but were not directed to be given promotion as Sub-Inspector (Civil Police).
The relevant paragraph of the above judgment reads as below :-  "A perusal of para 191 as above, shows that powers are given to Superintendent of Police to promote available under Officers as Officiating Sub-inspectors only for the exigency of service provided in the para, namely to fill up casual and clear vacancies only for specific purposes and for period until the trained Sub-Inspectors are available or the number of sanctioned posts are filled up.
Petitioners were promoted for the purposes and objects specified in para 191.
They were given purely temporary promotion for specific period to meet the special exigency of training of 3000 recruits in five new Recruit Training Centres.
They were selected only on account of the fact that they have completed Pedagogy Training Course.
They cannot, therefore, have a right and claim to continue as officiating Sub-Inspector in Civil Police.
By the same order of promotion their services were allotted to the UP Police Training Directorate at Lucknow.
The condition in the order that after completion of recruit training course, they will be sent back to their district was an apparent error, which crept in the order and was rightly corrected by subsequent order dated 30-6-1996 by which it was reiterated that they have been allotted to Training Headquarters, Lucknow.
In case they were not willing to accept the posts of Sub-Inspectors (Teacher), they could have applied to be reverted back to their original post of Head Constable.
However, they cannot claim any right to be appointed and to continue as Officiating Sub-Inspectors (Civil Police).
The fact that a number of posts of Sub-Inspectors (Civil Police) are vacant in police force cannot give petitioners any right to be appointed as Officiating Sub-Inspectors inasmuch as no such right can be given to them out of turn, discriminating Head Constables, senior to them, awaiting promotion.
Petitioners are not senior-most Head Constables nor they are eligible to be appointed as Sub-Inspector as they were not selected and have not passed Rankers Examination.
By the impugned orders, petitioners are not sought to be reverted to their original post of Head Constables.
They have been allotted the cadre of Sub- Inspectors (Teacher) under the UP Police Training Directorate, Lucknow and are getting the same pay and allowances as are admissible to Sub-Inspector (Civil Police).
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that petitioners have suffered any legal injury.
The question of availability of avenues of further promotion in police training college is a separate matter and on this ground they cannot be given promotion as Sub-Inspector (Civil Police).
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find any error of law or violation of petitioners' right in the order of the Inspector General (Establishment), UP dated 18-4-2002."
6.
In B Varadha Rao v. State of Karnataka, AIR 1986 SC 1955, their Lordships of the Apex Court laid down as follows (Paragraph 4 of the said AIR) :  ".....We agree with the view expressed by the learned Judges that transfer is always understood and construed as an incident of service.
The words 'or other conditions of service' in juxtaposition to the preceding words 'denies or varies to his disadvantage his pay, allowances, pension in Rule 19(1)(a) must be construed ejusdem generis.
Any alteration in the conditions of service must result in prejudice to the Government Servant and some disadvantage, touching of his pay, allowances, pension, seniority, promotion, leave etc.
It is well understood that transfer of a Government Servant who is appointed to a particular cadre of transferable posts from one place to another is an ordinary incident of service and, therefore, does not result in any alteration of any of the conditions of service to his disadvantage.
That a Government Servant is liable to be transferred to a similar post in the same cadre is a normal feature and incident of Government service and no Government servant can claim to remain in a particular place in a particular post unless, of course, his appointment itself is to a specified, non-transferable post..." 7.
In Mrs. Shilpi Bose v. State of Bihar, 1993(3) SCT 564 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 532, their Lordships of the Supreme Court laid down as follows (Paragraph 4 of the said AIR) :  "4.
In our opinion, the Courts should not interfere with a transfer order which are made in public interest and for administrative reasons unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any mandatory statutory Rule or on the ground of mala fide.
Government servant holding a transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to the other.
Transfer orders issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal rights.
Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions or orders the Courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party should approach the higher authorities in the Department.
If the Courts continue to interfere with day-to-day transfer orders issued by the Government and its subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the Administration, which would not be conducive to public interest.
The High Court overlooked these aspects in interferring with the transfer orders."
8.
In Union of India v. NP Thomas, 1994(1) SCT 46 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 1605, their Lordships of the Supreme Court laid down as follows (Paragraph 8 of the said AIR) :  "8.
In the present case, it cannot be said that the transfer order of the respondent transferring him out of Kerala Circle is violative of any statutory Rule or that the transfer order suffers on the ground of mala fide.
The submissions of the respondent that some of his juniors are retained by Kerala Circle and that his transfer is against the policy of the Government posting the husband and wife in the same station as far as possible cannot be countenanced since the respondent holding a transferable post has no vested right to remain in the Kerala Circle itself and cannot claim, as a matter of right, the posting in that Circle even on promotion."
9.
In Union of India v. SL Abbas, 1995(4) SCT 455 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 2444, their Lordships of the Supreme Court laid down as follows (Paragraphs 7 and 8 of the said AIR) :  "7. Who should be transferred where, is a matter for the appropriate authority to decide.
Unless the order of transfer is vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of any statutory provisions, the Court cannot interfere with it.
While ordering the transfer, there is no doubt, the authority must keep in mind the guidelines issued by the Government on the subject.
Similarly, if a person makes any representation with respect to his transfer the appropriate authority must consider the same having regard to the exigencies of administration.
The guidelines say that as far as possible, husband and wife must be posted at the same place.
The said guideline, however, does not confer upon the Government employee a legally enforceable right.
8.
The jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal is akin to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in service matters.
This is evident from a perusal of Article 323-A of the Constitution.
The constraints and norms which the High Court observes while exercising the said jurisdiction apply equally to the Tribunal created under Article 323-A (We find it all the more surprising that the learned Single Member who passed the impugned order is a former Judge of the High Court and is thus aware of the norms and constraints of the writ jurisdiction).
The Administrative Tribunal is not an Appellate Authority sitting in judgment over the orders of transfer.
It cannot substitute its own judgment for that of the authority competent to transfer.
In this case the Tribunal has clearly exceeded its jurisdiction interfering with the order of transfer.
The order of the Tribunal reads as if it were sitting in appeal over the order of transfer made by the Senior Administrative Officer (Competent Authority)."
10.
In State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh Dhatt, 1995(4) SCT 225 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 2486, their Lordships of the Supreme Court laid down as follows (Paragraph 3 of the said AIR) :  "3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
This Court has time and again expressed its disapproval of the Courts below interfering with the order of transfer of public servant from one place to another.
It is entirely for other employer to decide when, where and at what point of time a public servant is transferred from his present posting.
Ordinarily the Courts have no jurisdiction to interfere with the order of transfer.
The High Court grossly erred in quashing the order of transfer of the respondent from Hoshiarpur to Sangrur.
The High Court was not justified in extending its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in a matter where, on the face of it, no injustice was caused."
In NK Singh v. Union of India, 1995(1) SCT 269 (SC) : (1994)6 SCC 98 : AIR 1995 SC 423, the Lordships of the Supreme Court laid down as follows (Paragraph 23 of the said SCC) :  "23...... Assessment of worth must be left to the bona fide decision of the superiors in service and their honest assessments accepted as a part of service discipline.
Transfer of a Government Servant in a transferable service is a necessary incident of the service career.
Assessment of the quality of men is to be made by the Superiors taking into account several factors including suitability of the person for a particular post and exigencies of administration.
Several imponderables requiring formation of a subjective opinion in that sphere may be involved, at times.
The only realistic approach is to leave it to the wisdom of that hierarchical superiors to make that decision.
Unless the decision is vitiated by mala fides or infraction of any professed norm or principle governing the transfer, which alone can be scrutinized judicially, there are no judicially manageable standards for scrutinizing all transfers and the Courts lack the necessary expertise for personnel Management of all Government departments.
This must be left, in public interest, to the departmental heads subject to the limited judicial scrutiny indicated."
11.
In Abani Kanta Ray v. State of Orissa, 1996(1) SCT 22 (SC) : 1995 (Supp) 4 SCC 169, their Lordships of the Apex Court laid down as follows (Paragraph 10 of the said SCC) :  "10.
It is settled law that a transfer which is an incident of service is not to be interfered with by the Courts unless it is shown to be clearly arbitrary or vitiated by mala fides or infraction of any professed norm or principle governing the transfer.
(See NK Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1995 SC 423)."
12.
As held in Riaz Ahmad v. Additional Registrar (Administration), Co- operative Societies, UP Lucknow, (2003)1 UPLBEC 262, this Court has declined to interfere the transfer order by saying that transfer is an incident of service and the Court does not interfere normally in the transfer orders unless there is violation of any statutory Rules or the transfer is mala fide.
13.
The scope of judicial review of transfer under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has also been settled by the Supreme Court in view of the decisions of Rajendra Roy v. Union of India, 1993(2) SCT 65 (SC) : (1993)1 SCC 148 : AIR 1993 SC 1236, National Hyderoeletric Power Corporation Ltd v. Shri Bhagwan, 2002(1) SCT 236 (SC) : (2001)8 SCC 574 : AIR 2001 SC 3309, State Bank of India v. Anjan Sanyal, 2001(2) SCT 817 (SC) : (2001)5 SCC 508 : AIR 2001 SC 1748.
This Court following the aforesaid principles laid by the Supreme Court in Vijay Pal Singh v. State of UP, 1998(1) SCT 723 (Allahabad) : 1997(3) ESC 1668 : 1998 All LJ 70 and Onkarnath Tiwari v. The Chief Engineer, Minor Irrigation Department, UP, Lucknow, 1997(3) ESC 1866 : 1998 All LJ 245, has held that the principle of law unfold in the aforesaid decisions is that an order of transfer is a part of service conditions of an employee and is not required to be interfered with lightly by a Court of law in exercise of its discretionary jurisdiction unless the Court finds that either the order is mala fide or that the service rules prohibit, such transfer or that the authorities, who issued the orders, were not competent to pass the orders.
14.
I have heard learned Counsel for the parties.
I find that since in view of the order passed by this Court in Mahesh Chandra Sharma (supra) and in view of the observations made by the Supreme Court in catena of decisions in respect of the transfer, it is clear that the transfer has been made in the interest of administration, service and also in the public interest.
It is not by way of punishment or by way of degradation or by way of mala fide.
In view of the above observations this Court is not inclined to invoke its extra-ordinary discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution to make a judicial review, therefore, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.