Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Association and members of the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) claim that the State Govt. having sanctioned higher scales of pay for the posts of District Development and Panchayat Officer as well as Block Development and Panchayat Officers (which are one of the sources for recruitment to the Punjab Civil Services), they are entitled to the grant of a higher scale of pay with effect from January 1, 1996.
The petitioners further pray for the grant of arrears of salary with interest @ 18 per cent per annum.
The representation submitted by the Association having yielded no fruitful results, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
The respondent-State contests the petitioners' claim.
It is pointed out that recruitment to the service is made from different sources and only 4 per cent posts are filled up from amongst the District Development & Panchayat Officers as well as the Block Development & Panchayat Officers.
The two services being independent of each other, the action of the State Govt. in granting different scales of pay is just and fair.
The claim made by the petitioners that the appointments to the Punjab Civil Service are made by promotion has been controverted.
It has been pointed out that the posts are either filled by direct recruitment or by selection/nomination from amongst the members of different services.
It has been admitted that the pay scales of the posts of District Development & Panchayat Officers and Block Development & Panchayat Officers were revised in August, 1993.
However, it has been pointed out that these scales are still lower than "the selection grade of Rs. 4125- 5600 which has been allowed to the officers of the PCS (EB) after 12 years of service on 90 posts...".
It has been further stated that "the officers appointed to the service do not suffer any financial loss due to the lower starting scale of PCS (EB) vis-a-vis that of DDPO/BDPO because their pay is protected under the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I".
On this basis, it is claimed that the writ petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
3.
The petitioners have filed a replication controverting the claim made on behalf of the respondents.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that when appointments are made to the Punjab Civil Service by selection from amongst the members of different services including those working as District Development & Panchayat Officers/Block Development & Panchayat Officers, it is inherent in the very nature of things that such selected persons are granted a scale of pay higher than the one in which they are already working.
He has placed reliance on certain decisions of this Court which shall be presently noticed.
Claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by Mr. DS Dhillon, who has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
5.
Since the entire claim made by the petitioners is based on the revision of the pay scales of the posts of District Development & Panchayat Officers and Block Development & Panchayat Officers, it is apt to notice the exact position as disclosed in the writ petition.
It is as under :-  Year PCS (Executive Branch) D.D.P.O.
B.D.P.O.
111986 2200-4000 3000-4500 after 8 years 
4125-5600 for 90 posts after 12 years and beyond that after 18 years.
2200-4000 2100-3700 20.8.1993 No revision 3000-4500 2400-4000 3000-45000 after 8 years 3700- 5300 after 18 years.
It is the admitted position that till December 31, 1985 the posts in the PCS (Executive Branch) were in the scale of pay higher than that sanctioned for the posts of District Development & Panchayat Officers and Block Development & Panchayat Officers.
This disparity continued even thereafter except to the extent that the initial pay scale for the Punjab Civil Service and the posts of District Development & Panchayat Officers was brought at par.
It was only on August 20, 1993 that the pay scale of the posts of District Development & Panchayat Officers as well as the Block Development & Panchayat Officers were revised.
In spite of this revision, the scale of pay admissible to a member of the Punjab Civil Service after 12 years of service viz. 4125- 5600 was higher than the scale of 3700-5300 allowed to a Block Development & Panchayat Officer after 18 years of service.
It is in the background of this factual position that the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners has to be seen.
6.
The recruitment and conditions of service relating to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) are laid down in the rules called the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class I) Rules, 1976.
A perusal of these rules shows that the recruitment has to be made from different sources.
Rule 8 provides for the maintenance of various Registers in which the names of the candidates selected for appointment to the service from the prescribed sources are recorded.
On a persual of the provisions contained in rule 8, it is clear that persons who are working as Naib Tehsildars, Tehsildars, Members of ministerial establishment like Clerks, Assistants or Deputy Superintendents etc., the Excise & Taxation Officers, the District Development & Panchayat Officers, the Block Development & Panchayat Officers and members of various other services are eligible to be considered and appointed.
Still further, it is also clear that 50 per cent posts are filled up by direct recruitment and only 4 per cent posts are allocated to the category of District Development & Panchayat Officers/Block Development & Panchayat Officers.
It is also not disputed that the pay scales of the various categories of posts are different.
Admittedly, the persons who are working as mere clerks or senior assistants but are eligible for appointment are placed in far lower scales of pay than the pesons who are working as Exicse & Taxation Officers or as District Development & Panchayat Officers.
Still further, on a perusal of rule 18, it is clear that in a slab of 100 vacancies, slots have been allocated to the various sources.
To illustrate, the vacancies at serial Nos. 18, 36, 60 and 84 have been allocated to the categories of District Development & Panchayat Officers and Block Development & Panchayat Officers.
It has also been conceded that members of different services including the District Development & Panchayat Officers and Block Development & Panchayat Officers are eligible for promotion in their respective services.
Nominmation for appointment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) is only an additional avenue available to the members of different services.
In case any person feels that he has better prospects in the parent service/cadre, he can easily refuse to accept the offer of appointment to the Punjab Civil Service.
7.
Still further, on a perusal of the rules it is clear that the different authorities/Heads of Departments 'nominate' persons for consideration and appointment to the Punjab Civil Service.
It is after selection from amongst the nominees that the appointment to the service is made.
As a result, a clerk who may hae an outstanding record of service may be appointed to the Punjab Civil Service and others who are working on higher posts may be rejected.
In other words, it is not a promotion, but an appointment by selection from amongst the persons who are already serving in connection with the affairs of the State.
Admittedly, the post of Clerk carries the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 while the scale of pay sanctioned for the members of the Punjab Civil Service is much higher.
It is thus a quantum jump for atlest a few of the various categories of the employees.
Equally, there are other categories of posts like those of the Block Development & Panchayat Officers where the increase in salary on appointment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) is much lower and may be none at all.
8.
On a cumulative consideration of all these factors, it appears that in a case where members of different services are considered for selection and appointment to a particulasr service which is not in the normal line of promotion, there cannot be an insistence on an increase in pay scale or salary.
9.
It is also the admitted position that the Punjab Civil Service is the premier service in the State.
It carries a higher status.
It opens new vistas for the persons appointed to it.
They become eligible to be considered for promotion to the Indian Administrative Service.
Money may be an important factor in life.
It is not all.
Rank, respect and status can be even more important to a contented mind.
And then, one rupee in a University is worth much more than a rupee in jail.
Those who place money above other considerations can continue to work as District Development & Panchayat Officers/Block Development & Panchayat Officers and others who have some element of contentment can join the civil service.
However, after having joined the service, they cannot insist that they are entitled to a higher scale of pay because the pay scales attached to one of the sources have been revised by the Government.
10.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram was very emphatic in submitting that the action of the State Govt. in not granting a higher scale of pay to the members of the Civil Service as compared to the persons working as District Development & Panchayat Officers is arbitrary and unfair.
Though apparently attractive, the contention cannot be accepted.
As already observed, an appointment to the Punjab Civil Service is one of the additional avenues available to an employee.
If he is not satisfied with the scale of pay, he has the option to remain in his parent service and avail of the scale as well as the chances of promotion within that service.
11.
The case can be looked at from another angle.
The members of the State Civil Service are eligible to be considered for promotion to the Indian Administrative Service.
It can happen that a State Govt. may sanction an extravagantly high scale of pay for the members of the State Service.
This would not mean that every time a State Govt. revises the pay scales of the officers of the provincial Civil Service, the Union of India shall have to revise the scales of the members of the Indian Administrative Service so as to ensure that it is higher than the pay scale enjoyed by the members of the State Civil Services.
Similar is the position here.
12.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram referred to the decisions in Har Kishan v. State of Punjab, 1987(5) SLR 539, PL Goyal v. State of Haryana, 1990(5) SLR 108, Raj Kumar Kalra v. State of Punjab, 1990(1) RSJ 42 and Govt. of Andhra Pradesh v. Bala Musalaiah and others, 1995(2) RSJ 644 to contend that whenever a person is appointed from the lower post to a higher post, he is entitled to an upward revision of pay scale and the action of the State Govt. in rejecting the claim of the petitioners suffers from arbitrariness and discrimination.
All these cases relate to promotion within the normal channel.
In Har Kishan's case (supra) the claim of a Patwari for a higher scale of pay on promotion to the post of Senior Revenue Clerk was upheld.
In PL Goyal's case (supra) the claim of a member of the Subordinate Judicial Service to a higher scale of pay on promotion to the Superior Judicial Service was sustained.
Similarly, in Raj Kumar Kalra's case (supra) the claim of Laboratory Attendants to the scales of Junior Lecture Assistants or that of Lecture Assistant on promotion to the posts of Senior Lecture Assistants was sustained.
None of these cases involved appointment to a totally different service.
These are, therefore, of no assistance to the learned counsel for the petitioners.
13.
Numerically, we are next only to China and can claim to be the second largest nation of the world.
However, economically, we are one of the poorest.
We are rich in natural resources.
Our man-power is almost ten times that of Japan.
Yet, our gross national product is not even 1/10th of that of Japan.
This is because we have not developed a work culture.
We are craving for more without producing adequately.
So it is with civil service.
Speaking broadly, it can be said that the total expenditure on bureaucracy would be equal to the revenue collected by it.
Resultantly, the tax payers' money goes into the pockets of the civil servants.
Instead of being served, the citizen is harassed by the delays and red-tapes.
14.
The size of the bureaucracy is increasing at a regular pace.
So, is the burden on the State Exchequer.
The periodic agitations by the employees and the consequential appointments of Pay Commissions are no solution.
Time has come for all of us to realise that till we work hard and produce more, we cannot be prosperous or happy.
Increase in salaries only leads to more taxes and adds to the existing burden on the tax payer.
This is no solution.
We must work more.
Produce more.
Reduce the red-tape.
Eradicate corruption.
The State shall then have enough to spare.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.