VK Jhanji, J - This shall dispose of CWP Nos. 471 of 1993 and 13068 of 1992.
2.
In these petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, petitioners who are Masters and Mistresses in the various government educational institutions in the State of Punjab, are seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing letter dated 1831992 issued by the Government of Punjab, whereby Government of Punjab has disbanded the Departmental Selection Committee for teaching and non-teaching personnel as well as cancelling the selection of the petitioners to various posts in the District Institutes of Education and Training at various places in the State of Punjab made by the Selection Committee in the year 1989-90.
3.
Petitioners before joining the District Institute of Education and Training (in short, the DIET) were employed as Masters/Mistresses in the various government educational institutions in the Department of Education in the State of Punjab.
After the adoption of the National Policy on Education in 1986, a Centrally sponsored Scheme for Restructuring and Reorganisation of Teacher Education was got implemented by the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Education, New Delhi.
One of its components was establishment of DIETs.
Under the said scheme, number of DIETs were started in the entire State of Punjab.
The Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource and Development, Department of Education, New Delhi issued guidelines in respect of working of the said DIETs and the same were circulated to all the States and Union Territories in the month of October, 1987.
For making recruitment to the five posts of Principals, four posts of Senior Lecturers and 108 posts of Junior Lecturers which were lying vacant in the DIETs at Verka, Gurdaspur, Jalandhar, Ferozepur, Kapurthala, Jagraon, Nabha and Faridkot, various circulars inviting applications for the said posts in the DIETs faculty were issued from time to time asking the desirous candidates to appear before the High Powered Committee headed by the Education Secretary on the dates mentioned in the said circulars along with their respective bio-data in original and attested copies of their respective degrees/certificates/testimonial and experience certificates.
In response to these circulars, some of the petitioners applied for the post of Senior Lecturer and some applied for the post of Junior Lecturer.
Along with the petitioners, various other Lecturers and Masters/Mistresses working in the Department of Education in the State of Punjab also applied.
It has been averred in the petition that there were 600 applicants who applied against these posts.
Petitioners were called for interview by the Committee and after selection were appointed against various posts to which each petitioner had applied in the faculty of DIETs at various places.
Some of the appointment orders dated 20111989, 781990, 881990 and 2281990 issued by the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) Punjab, Chandigarh have been annexed as Annexures P-5 to P-8 to this petition.
In the appointment orders, it was made clear to the petitioners that they would initially be appointed in their own pay and grade and would be on deputation till further orders.
They were not to be paid any deputation allowance.
4.
The grievance made in the petitions is that the Government of Punjab, Department of Education vide order dated 1831992 not only decided to disband both the departmental selection committee for teaching and non-teaching personnel but also cancelled the selection made by these committees, meaning thereby that the selection of the petitioners had been cancelled without giving them an opportunity of hearing.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate for the petitioners has contended that the petitioners were recruited against the posts in question after having been selected by the High Powered Committee, though initially on deputation but with an intention to absorb them permanently as and when the Government decided to make these institutes as permanent ones.
He also contended that after passing of order dated 1831992, persons who are similarly situated i.e. masters and mistresses and lecturers in schools in the State of Punjab have been selected in the year 1992, 1993 and 1994 by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The selection has been made on regular basis.
He contended that there is no distinguishing feature between the selection 1 made in the case of the petitioners and the persons who have been selected in 1992, 1993 and 1994.
In answer to these submissions, learned State Counsel has contended that the petitioners were taken in the faculty only as stop-gap arrangement and it was made clear to them that they would be on deputation in their own pay scale.
Petitioners were also told at the time they were appointed that they will not be entitled to any monetary benefits or deputation allowance.
He contended that after having accepted the terms and conditions so contained in their appointment orders, petitioners cannot be allowed to turn around and say that the order whereby departmental selection committee has been disbanded or selection made has been cancelled, is bad in law.
He also contended that no hearing was required to be given while terminating the deputation as the petitioners were in their own pay scale and were on deputation by transfer.
With regard to selection made in the years 1992, 1993 and 1994, State counsel has stated that in absence of pleadings in this regard, he is not in a position to rebut the argument of Mr. Patwalia.
6.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that it is not necessary to go into the various contentions raised by learned counsel for the parties and the writ petitions can be disposed of with a direction to respondents 1, 3 and 4 to decide the representation which the petitioners undertake to make within a fortnight from today in regard to grievance that the petitioners who are similarly situated have been selected in the years 1992, 1993 and 1994 by the departmental selection committee and there is no distinguishing feature between the persons who have been selected and the petitioners.
In case respondents 1, 3 and 4 find that there is no distinguishing feature as contended by learned counsel for the petitioners, then they would reconsider the order dated 1831992 which has been impugned in the writ petitions.
Representation shall be decided within two months from the date of its receipt by passing a speaking order and if need be, an opportunity of hearing may be afforded to some of the petitioners.
The State Counsel can possibly have no objection to the course being adopted by this Court.
Interim order whereby operation of order, Annexure P-9 was stayed shall continue till the decision of representation.
7.
Accordingly, both the writ petitions, C.W.P.
No. 471 of 1993 and 13068 of 1992 stand disposed of.
No costs.
Order accordingly.