Lingaraj Rath, J - The writ petitioner is the appellant.
He was placed under suspension, while holding the post of Stores Officer, by the respondent by its order dated 13.9.1979.
A charge-sheet was communicated to him on 2021980 under seven heads.
His explanation to the charges having not been satisfactory, show-cause notice dated 1291980 was served on him as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
Considering his reply final orders were passed by the respondent on 941981 imposing punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect and treating the period of suspension as on duty.
It is the appellant's case that the order became final he having not challenged it.
Again on 3081982 a notice was issued to him to show cause as to why the loss of Rs. 13,66589 caused to the respondent-Corporation due to under-valuation of selling prices should not be recovered from him.
After his explanation was submitted on 29.9.1982, orders were passed on 16/1851983 directing recovery of Rs. 13,66589 from the arrears of pay and allowances payable to him.
The order was impugned in the writ petition but that having been dismissed, this appeal has been preferred.
2.
The only submission urged by Mr. V Venkata Ramana, learned Counsel for the appellant is that as the subject-matter of both the proceedings were identical and once disciplinary proceedings were carried out and was concluded by imposition of penalty, a second penalty which was also imposable then under the rules but had not been imposed was not available to be inflicted by a later notice.
3.
Comparing the charges of the proceedings initiated on 2021980 with the allegations made against the appellant in the notice dated 3081982 it is seen that charge No. 6 of the earlier proceedings which consisted of three parts as (a), (b) and (c) were almost identically reflected in the details given in the notice on the second occasion in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 thereof.
There was another allegation in paragraph 4 of the details of an instance of short collection of Rs. 4,82448.
As pointed out this shortfall was not the subject matter of the earlier notice.
4.
It is the common case of the parties that in the respondent- Corporation, whenever its own staff regulations in force since 131961 is inadequate, the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal), Rules, 1991, hereinafter referred to as `the Rules', apply.
The impugned notice issued on 1651983 specifically referred to instruction No. 17 of the Rules.
It has been brought to our notice by Mr. ML Prem Rao, the learned standing Counsel appearing for the respondent-Corporation that clause No. 43 of the Staff Regulations deals with penalties to be imposed on a delinquent employee and also lays down the procedure for imposition of the penalties.
The powers so reserved under Regulation No. 43 however are in no way in conflict with the provisions of the Rules which only make more detailed provisions relating to the procedure and as such would hold the field where the provisions of the Regulations are inadequate.
Under Regulations No. 43, the penalties imposable are : (a) reprimand; (b) delay or stoppage of increments or promotion; (c) degradation to a lower post or grade or to a lower stage in his incremental scale; (d) recovery from pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Corporation by the employee; and (e) dismissal.
There is no dispute that at the time of conclusion of the proceedings against an employee any one or more of the punishments can be imposed and that along with the punishment of stoppage of increment, either cumulative or otherwise, the punishment of recovery from the pay either wholly or in part of the loss sustained by the Corporation could also be imposed.
But it is the submission of Mr. V Venkata Ramana that such punishment having not been imposed when the proceedings were closed it is not available to be imposed at a later point of time by reopening the proceedings.
Even though regulation No. 43 does not refer to any power of review or revision of punishments imposed a power of revision is available in Rule 40 of the Rules which for convenience sake may be extracted:  "40(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules - (i) The Government, or (ii) the head of the department directly under the Government, in the case of a Government servant serving in a department or office under the control of such head of department or departments, or  (iii) the appellate authority within six months of the date of the order proposed to be revised, or (iv) any other authority specified in this behalf by the Government by a general or special order, and within such time as may be prescribed in such general or special order may at any time, either on his or its own motion or otherwise, call for the records of any inquiry and revise any order made under these rules or under the rules repealed by rule 45 after consultation with the Commission where such consultation is necessary, and may (a) confirm, modify or set aside the order; or  (b) confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by the order, or impose any penalty where no penalty has been imposed; or (c) remit the case to the authority which made the order or to any other authority directing such authority to make such further inquiry as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the case; or (d) pass such other orders as it may deem fit."
5.
A reading of the Rule shows that the revisional power is available to different authorities but, unless the authority is the Government itself or a Head of Department directly under it, the power is not given to the same authority which passed the order of punishment or unless he has been specified as an authority for that purpose in a general or special order in that behalf of the Government and when so notified, he can exercise the power within such time as may be prescribed in the same order.
In the present case, the order was passed by the Executive Director of the Corporation and nothing has been disclosed before us that the Managing Director of the Respondent-Corporation who issued the notice on the second occasion is an authority higher than the Executive Director.
As a matter of fact, the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the Executive Director and the Managing Director are the same authorities.
Rule 40, hence, would not come to the aid of the respondent-Corporation even if the Rule would apply as far as possible, in vesting any power of revision in the Managing Director as even the Board of the respondent-Corporation which is the highest authority, is not stated to have notified conferment of any such power.
Admittedly under the regulations, the Board is the appellate authority against punishments imposed but the order has not been issued by the Board.
The order shows the decision to revise the order to have been taken for the following reason:  "Subsequent to the issue of final orders, it has been brought to the notice of the Corporation that a loss of Rs. 20,000/- has been caused to the Corporation due to the miscalculation and lower fixation of sale price of various items of raw material and due to various other irregularities committed by Sri KS Sastry.
As such, the question of recovery of losses arose and after due examination, it is decided that although orders have been issued stopping one increment of the delinquent officer, there is no objection to proceed against him for the recovery of the loss from the delinquent by revising the original order, in view of the heavy loss caused to the Corporation.
As per instruction 17 under CCA Rules, there is no need to hold an elaborate enquiry before imposing the punishment of recovery and in the first instance itself, the delinquent officer can be asked to show-cause against the penalty of recovery which is a minor punishment and orders passed after taking into account the explanation given by him.
Thus, it has been concluded that the loss caused to the Corporation has to be recovered and that it would not amount to double punishment."
6.
Such reasons show that in reality the proceeding was sought to be reopened to recoup the loss caused to the respondent-Corporation.
The course of action adopted is either a revision or a plain intendment to impose a new punishment in addition to the one already imposed.
As no power of revision is vested either under the Regulations or the Rules, we are of the view that so far as the fresh charges are identical neither a revision nor infliction of a second punishment was permissible.
7.
Even otherwise it is fundamental jurisprudence that a man once proceeded against on a set of allegations and penalised having been found guilty for it by one forum, would not be visited with fresh penalty for the same set of allegations again by the same forum.
In Civil law where it is not a question of punishment but of cause of action for civil reliefs, the comparable principle is that of res judicata.
More directly, in criminal law the principle is that of autrefois acquit and the constitutional safeguard in Article 20 that a person is not to be tried twice for the same offence.
The very principle finds nomenclature in service jurisprudence as theory of double jeopardy.
The underlying principle is the same that nobody can suffer punishment twice for the same delinquency.
It is true that in a disciplinary proceedings any one or more of the punishments imposable can imposed and that there can be no argument that for any misconduct only one of the punishments can be imposed.
But once the authority has considered the gravity of the offences proved and select the punishment or punishments to be imposed, it has to be taken that the punishments are adequate subject to the results of any appeal or review.
It is for such reason that it has been consistently held that the adequacy or inadequacy of the punishments imposed by the competent authority is not available to be disturbed by the High Court in exercise of its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
But once a particular set of penalty has been found to be adequate, it is not open to have a second thought at a later point of time and impose an additional penalty again.
Conceding to such proposition would be giving premium only to arbitrariness.
On the premises a situation can be well conceived that after a penalty has been imposed by a competent authority, any successor to him in office may have a second thought and can impose fresh punishment which was not in the contemplation of the first one.
That would be plainly a travesty of justice.
Keeping such considerations view we have no hesitation to hold that so far as the attempt was to reopen and impose punishment of recovery as regards items 1, 2 and 3 of the order dated 1651983, there was no competency for the same and to that extent the order must be quashed.
8.
However so far as the amount of Rs. 4,82448 as stated in paragraph 4 of the order is concerned, it was never subject matter of the charge of the first proceeding.
Merely because the shortfall occurred during the period for which first disciplinary proceedings were commenced, it cannot be said that the authorities were powerless to ask him to show cause against the recovery of loss or damage that occurred.
Initiating of the proceedings was also not so far removed in point of time so as to treat it as having become inordinately delayed and to have become stale.
As such we would uphold the order of recovery so far as direction has been issued in paragraph 4 of the impugned order dated 1651983.
9.
It is brought to our notice that by interim orders passed by this Court on 2811988 in WAMP No. 2837 of 1988 recovery at the rate of Rs. 200/- per month is being made from January, 1988 subject to the decision in the Writ Appeal.
Having come to conclusions as discussed earlier, we also direct that the respondent is to refund, within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order, all such amounts that have been received by it in excess of Rs. 4,82448.
10.
In the result the appeal is partly allowed and recovery of the amounts as per paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the order dated 1651983 are quashed.
No costs.
Appeal partly allowed.