GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer that respondents be directed to give him two advance increments in accordance with the policy decision of the Government of Haryana contained in Annexure P.1 on account of his having acquired higher qualification of LLB  2.
Reply to the writ petition has not been filed by the respondents during the last over five years and, therefore, the case is being decided only on the basis of the averments made in the petition.
3.
The petitioner joined service of the Government of Haryana in the Education Department on being appointed as Social Studies Master in the Government High School, Mandola, district Bhiwani.
While in service, the petitioner sought permission of the SDEO Bhiwani to undertake the study of Law Course from the Kurukshetra University and he passed the LLB examination from the said University on 771980.
The petitioner also passed the Master of Arts examination from the Maharishi Dayanand University in the year 1988.
After having acquired higher academic qualifications, the petitioner represented to the respondents for grant of the benefit of advance increments in lieu of higher qualifications.
He claimed that in similar cases the Government has sanctioned advance increments.
However, no such benefit was given to the petitioner and, therefore, by claiming that he has been subjected to discrimination the petitioner has filed this petition.
4.
The only argument advanced by the learned counsel, for the petitioner is that in terms of the policy decision of the Government of Haryana as contained in the circular Annexure P.1 dated 2691972, the petitioner is entitled to get two advance increments for his having acquired the degrees of LLB and MA and that by denying this benefit to the petitioner, the Government has subjected him to discrimination.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General submitted that she has not received any instructions from the department authorities.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel in the context of the averments made in the writ petition.
6.
The undisputed facts which have come on record show that the petitioner sought permission of the competent departmental authorities to undertake study of LLB and MA examinations.
He passed these two examinations from the Kurukshetra University and the Maharishi Dayanand University respectively.
Both these qualifications are higher than the minimum qualifications on the basis of which the petitioner entered the Government service.
The policy decision of the Government as circulated vide Annexure P-1 is intended to give incentive to the Government employees to acquire higher qualifications, which ordinarily adds to their efficiency.
Paragraphs (1) to (v) of Annexure P.1, which are reproduced below, show that if a candidate fulfils these conditions, he is entitled to the grant of advance increments :  "(1) The scale on which the advance increments will be given in all departments should be as follows :  Diploma of at least one year duration : One advance increment.
LLB or Master's Degree : Two Advance increments.
Doctorate: Three advance increments.
Only those diplomas/degrees which are higher than the prescribed minimum qualifications for the posts should be considered for grant of advance increments and no distinction should be made between technical and non- technical diploma/degree.
(ii) Advance increments should be given for only such recognised diplomas degrees from recognised institutions which involve study for more than one year and which are obtained on the basis of examination and not otherwise.
Further the diplomas/degrees should be such as are considered by the Government to be directly beneficial to the efficiency of the Government employee concerned in this particular post of line.
(iii) Only those diplomas/degrees should be considered in this context which are obtained after availing of study leave or leave of this kind due.
If the period of study is treated as duty and full pay is drawn for it, then evidence increments will not be allowed.
(iv) Only those higher qualifications which have been obtained by the employees concerned after his entry into Government service should be considered while deciding upon the question of grant of advance increments.
(v) Work of the employee concerned with the Government must be at least good."
Though circular Annexure P.1 does not have the force of law, it cannot but be treated as an administrative decision of the Government of general applicability.
On the basis of Annexure P.1 a right has come to vest in the petitioner to get advance increments in lieu of his higher qualifications.
Though administrative in character, the instructions contained in Annexure P.1 are binding on the Government and the Government cannot ignore or deviate from its own policy decision without any cogent reason.
Such deviation or violation of the policy decision amounts to violation of equality clause enshrined in the Constitution.
This proposition of law is clearly borne out from the decisions of the Supreme Court in Dr. Amarjit Singh Ahluwalia v. The State of Punjab and others, AIR 1975 SC 1984; and Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628.
For the proposition that the administrative orders can confer rights in favour of individuals reference can appropriately be made to Union of India v. KP Joseph and others, AIR 1973 SC 303.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to give benefit of two advance increments to the petitioner in terms of Annexure P.1.
Necessary action for grant of monetary benefit in terms of this order shall be taken by the respondents within a period of three months from today.
The petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% P.A.
from the date of this order in case payment is not made to the petitioner within the said period of three months.
Petition allowed.