Sudhir Narain, J - The petitioner has sought a writ of certiorari quashing the order of the Deputy Director of Education, Meerut Region, Meerut dated 2121983 rejecting the proposal of the Committee of Management to promote the petitioner to the post of Senior Lab.
Assistant and the letter dated 4101983 directing the petitioner to refund the excess amount paid to him on account of the increment in the salary.
2.
I have heard Sri A.R.
Dubey, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri.
AK Dwivedi, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2, and the learned Standing Counsel.
3.
The facts in brief are that one Sri Som Dutt, respondent No. 2 was appointed as Laboratory Bearer on 2181960 in Chaudhary Chhoturam Degree College, Muzaffarnagar, 4 posts of Laboratory Assistants fell vacant in the year 1975 in the College.
An advertisement was published on 25121975 inviting the applications for the said posts.
The petitioner and respondent No. 2 both applied for the post and both were appointed on 611976 to the post of Laboratory Assistant.
A post of Senior Laboratory Assistant was created in the year 1982 in the College.
The Committee of Management of the College passed a resolution on 13111982 recommending to the Deputy Director of Education, Meerut Region, Meerut, respondent No. 1 the name of the petitioner for promoting him to the post of Senior Lab.
Assistant.
The Deputy Director of Education, Meerut respondent No. 1 made certain queries and the proposal was rejected by order dated 2181983 holding that respondent No. 2 was senior and was entitled to be promoted to the post of Senior Lab.
Assistant in preference to the petitioner.
The Principal of the College sent letter to respondent No. 1 for reconsideration of the order but the same was rejected by respondent No. 1 on 4101983 and further directed that the salary paid in excess to the petitioner on account of his illegal promotion be recovered.
These orders have been challenged in this writ petition.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the respondent No. 2 was not qualified for being appointed as Laboratory Assistant by order dated 611976 as on the date of appointment he did not possess the necessary qualification.
A person who was not qualified to be appointed as a Lab.
Assistant could not be promoted to the post of Senior Lab.
Assistant.
5.
Clauses 2701 and 2702 of the 1st Statute of Meerut University lays down the following qualifications for appointment to the post of Laboratory Assistant:  "(ii) Laboratory Assistant:- For the post of Laboratory Assistant, Intermediate or an examination recognized by the State Government as equivalent thereto, in subject with which the Laboratory is concerned, or High School or an examination recognized by the State Government as equivalent thereto, with atleast five years' experience as Laboratory Bearer in the Laboratory of the subject concerned."
The respondent No. 2 had passed High Court examination in the year 1957.
He was appointed as Laboratory Bearer in the College on 2181960 and was holding the same post on the date of his appointment as Laboratory Assistant.
He had completed 5 years experience as Laboratory Bearer.
Respondent No. 2 was thus fully qualified for appointment of post of Laboratory Assistant on the date of his appointment.
The mere fact that he had not passed Intermediate Examination on the said date was not a disqualification.
Respondent No. 2, however, passed intermediate examination in the year 1970 and BA Examination in the year 1978.
It is not disputed that he was qualified for being considered to the post of Senior Laboratory Assistant for the purpose of promotion.
6.
The next submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that it was for the Management to decide as between the two persons, who should be promoted on the post of Senior Lab.
Assistant.
The criteria of promotion to the post of Senior Lab.
Assistant is seniority subject to rejection of unfit.
The Committee of Management recommended the name of the petitioner for promotion which has not been accepted by respondent No. 1.
7.
The criteria for promotion is seniority subject to rejection of unfit.
The Committee recommended the name of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner was more qualified and more suitable for the job".
There was no material to come to this conclusion.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as Laboratory Bearer in the year 1960 and Laboratory Assistant in the year 1976 in the College.
There was no adverse entry in his character roll.
The respondent No. 1 called an explanation from the Committee Management as to on what grounds it recommended the name of the petitioner.
The Committee of Management sent letter dated 1511983 giving the details of qualification of the petitioner and respondent No. 2 mainly relied upon the fact that respondent No. 2 was permitted to appear for selection on the post of Laboratory Assistant on the ground of his experience.
It was an exemption.
In fact respondent No. 2 was fully qualified for being appointed as Lab.
Assistant on the qualification as laid down under the statute referred to above.
There was no allegation against respondent No. 2 to show that work and conduct was for below of the normal expectation or there was any adverse entry in his character roll.
The view taken by respondent No. 1 cannot be held to be illegal.
8.
The second submission of the counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 1 has recorded a finding that respondent No. 2 was confirmed on the same post on 1st May, 1977, and considering seniority from the date of confirmation of service on promoted post respondent No. 2 is senior to the petitioner.
He further found that date of birth of respondent No. 2 is 261940 and that of petitioner is 111949.
Even if it be accepted that the age is not a criteria for determining the seniority, still the date of confirmation of the service is relevant criteria for determining the seniority.
9.
Thirdly, the statute was enforced on 151977 when the petitioner and respondent No. 2 had been appointed as Lab.
Assistant on 611976.
10.
The last submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that respondent No. 1 has directed for recovery of the amount against the petitioner for the payment which has already been made to him.
The petitioner was confirmed in service w.e.f.
151977 but the Principal paid the salary as confirmed employee since 711977 without any specific order.
The petitioner has been directed to pay the difference of the salary for the period between 711977 on 1st May, 1977.
The petitioner was neither given an opportunity to explain the position nor this was an issue before respondent No. 1.
In these circumstances the order of respondent No. 1 for recovery of the amount was unjustified.
In the result the writ petition is partly allowed.
The order directing for promotion of respondent No. 2 as Senior Lab.
Assistant is maintained.
The direction of respondent No. 1 for recovery of amount as against the petitioner is hereby quashed.
11.
The parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.