GS Singhvi, J - This appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against order dated 911997 vide which the learned Single Judge allowed C.W.P.
No. 108 of 1983 filed by the respondents and quashed the award passed by Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala (respondent No. 3) in Reference No. 644 of 1980 for reinstatement of the appellant with continuity of service and 50% back wages.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the appeal are in a narrow compass.
Appellant-Nazar Singh (hereinafter described as `the workman') was appointed as Conductor in the service of Punjab Roadways at Moga (hereinafter described as `the employer') on 4.3.1974.
His services was terminated on 8.10.1978 because he was found guilty by the employer of the charge of issuing tickets of less denomination after collecting the prescribed fare from the passengers.
He challenged the action of the employer by raising an industrial dispute which was referred by the Government of Punjab under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act') to Labour Court, Patiala.
3.
In his statement of claim, the workman pleaded that his service had been terminated without holding a proper enquiry and the penalty imposed by the employer was totally unjustified.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the employer, it was pleaded that service of the workman had been terminated after holding an enquiry in accordance with the rules of natural justice and the punishment imposed on him was just and proper.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  "1.
Whether there has been a fair and proper enquiry ?
2.
Whether the order of termination of service of the workman is justified and in order ?
3.
Relief."
6.
Respondent No. 3 decided issue No. 1 in favour of the employer.
He referred to the statement of the workman that full opportunity of defence was given to him and held that enquiry was fair and proper.
On issue No. 2, respondent No. 3 accepted the suggestion made by the representative of the workman that the punishment imposed by the employer was harsh and ordered his reinstatment by invoking the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act.
7.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 challenged the award in C.W.P.
No. 108 of 1983 mainly on the ground that in view of his finding on the issue of fairness of enquiry, respondent No. 3 did not have the jurisdiction to order reinstatement of the workman by invoking Section 11-A of the Act.
8.
The learned Single Judge referred to the judgments of the Supreme Court and this Court in Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, Ahmedabad v. Jamnadas Becharbhai, 1983 LAB IC 1349; The State of Punjab and another v. Surat Singh and another, 1985 LAB I.C.
10; Wimco Bramik Union v. Seventh Industrial Tribunal and others, 1987 LAB I.C.
77; Ganga Ram v. Pepsu Road Transport Corpn., 1995(2) SCT 635; and Gurmail Singh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala, 1995(4) RSJ 264 : 1995(3) SCT 437 (P&H) and held that in a case involving misappropriation of public fund, respondent No. 3 was not justified in setting aside the penalty imposed by the employer.
9.
Shri G.S.
Bal assailed the order of the learned Single Judge by arguing that while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court cannot interfere with the discretion exercised by the Labour Court/Tribunal under Article 11-A of the Act.
He then argued that the finding recorded by respondent No. 3 on the issue of fairness of the enquiry is per se erroneous and is liable to be upset.
Shri Bal pointed out that while holding that the enquiry was fair and proper, respondent No. 3 over-looked the fact that the enquiry officer had also performed the role of Prosecutor and thereby disqualified himself from acting as an independent arbiter.
He relied on the judgment of this Court in State of Punjab and another v. Mam Chand, 1993(3) RSJ 238 : 1993(2) SCT 781 (P&H), and argued that the assumption by the enquiry officer of the role of Presenting Officer should have been treated as sufficient for drawing an inference of bias and for invalidation of the action taken by the employer.
10.
Smt. Chru Tuli, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Punjab supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that he did not commit any legal error by setting aside the award of reinstatement passed by respondent No. 3 without assigning any reason for interfering with the punishment imposed by the employer.
She then argued that the finding recorded by respondent No. 3 on the issue of fairness of the inquiry is a pure finding of fact and in the absence of any challenge to the said finding, the learned Single Judge was not required to examine its correctness.
Smt. Tuli emphasized that the workman has participated in the enquiry proceedings without raising any objection regarding the absence of the Presenting Officer and submitted that he will be deemed to have waived the objection of so-called bias of the enquiry officer.
She pointed out that the workman had been given full opportunity of defending himself and argued that at this belated stage, he should not be allowed to resurrect the plea of bias.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
11.
The first question which requires consideration is whether the learned Single Judge erred in interfering with the discretion exercised by respondent No. 3 under Section 11-A of the Act.
A perusal of the award shows that respondent No. 3 invoked the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act by making the following observations :-  "Shri Maghar Singh representative of the workman suggested that the punishment was harsh in nature and it was fit case to invoke the provision of Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputed Act, 1947 towards less punishment.
I am also satisfied that the order of dismissal from service was a harsh step which was taken by the respondent.
Therefore, I am also of the view that it is a fit case to invoke the provisions of Section 11-A of the said Act of 1947, to award lesser punishment.
As a result, I hold that the order of termination of services of the workman was not justified and in order.
Finding on this issue is hereby returned in favour of the workman and against the respondent."
12.
The learned Single Judge relied on the judgments to which reference has been made hereinabove and quashed the award by observing that there was no warrant to reinstate an employee found guilty of mis-appropriation of public money.
In our opinion, once the workman/employee is found guilty of embezzlement, misappropriation or fraud, there is little scope for interference by the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal with the punishment imposed by the employer and smallness of the amount embezzled by the workman can not justify exercise of power under Section 11 of the Act.
In Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, Ahmedabad v. Jamnadas Becharbhai (supra), the Supreme Court allowed the appeal against the reinstatement of the workman and observed :  "If a bus conductor has been dismissed in such circumstances, his reinstatement in the same post would enable him to indulge in the same malpractice in future.
Everyday he has to collect fare and issue tickets.
Reinstatement in the same post would therefore involves grave risk because of the repetitive opportunity that he would get to indulge in the malpractice and the daily temptation that he would face.
Perhaps he would be tempted to repair the past losses."
13.
In Wimco Bramik Union v. Seventh Industrial Tribunal and others (supra), the invoking the Section 11A by the Labour Court for reinstating the workman, who was found guilty of theft, was disfavoured by the Court.
14.
In Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd v. Kala Singh, (1997) 6 SCC 159 : 1997(3) SCT 580 (SC), the Supreme Court considered the case of a workman who was working as a Dairy Helper-cum-Clearner for collecting milk from various centers.
He was charged with the allegation that he inflated the quantum of milk supplied in the milk centres and also inflated the quality of fat contents where there were less contents.
Their Lordships held that in view of the proof of misconduct, a necessary consequence was that the management had lost confidence and the Labour Court was justified in refusing to exercise discretion under Section 11-A of the Act.
15.
In UP State Road Transport Corporation v. Basudeo Chaudhary, (1997) 11 SCC 370, the Supreme Court set aside the judgment of the High court whcih had interfered with the punishment imposed by the employer on a Conductor who had caused loss of Rs. 650/- to the Corporation.
16.
In Janatha Bazar (South Kanara Central Cooperative Wholesale Stores Ltd.) and others v. Secretary Sahakari Noukarara Sangha and others, (2000) 7 SCC 517 : 2000(4) SCT 630 (SC), the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of Karnataka High Court which had upheld the award passed by the Labour Court for reinstatement of the workman by invoking Section 11-A of the Act.
The facts of that case were that four employees were found guilty of breach of trust and misappropriation of the goods.
After holding a domestic enquiry, all the four employees were dismissed.
In a reference under Section 10 of the Act, the Labour Court found that the charges have been clearly established.
However, by taking note of their past record, the Labour Court applied Section 11-A of the Act and ordered their reinstatement with 25% back wages.
The award of the Labour Court was upheld by the High Court.
While allowing the appeal, the Supreme Court held :  "After finding that charges against the workmen for breach of trust and misappropriation of funds entrusted to them for the value mentioned in the charge-sheet had been established, the Labour Court materially erred in setting aside the order passed by the management removing the workmen from service and reinstating them with 25% back wages, Once an act of misappropriation is proved, may be for a small or large amount, there is no question of showing uncalled for sympathy and reinstating the employees in service.
In cases of proved misappropriation there is no question of considering past record, it is the discretion of the employer to consider the same in appropriate case, but the Labour Court cannot substitute the penalty imposed by the employer in such cases."
17.
In Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation v. BS Hullikatti, (2001) 2 SCC 574 : 2001(1) SCT 787 (SC), the Supreme Court held that where a bus conductor carries passengers without tickets or issues tickets of less denomination within the prescribed rate, his act would amount to dishonesty or gross negligence and he is not fit to be retained in service.
18.
In UP State Road Transport Corporation v. Mohan Lal Gupta and others, (2000) 9 SCC 521 : 2000(1) SCT 430 (SC), the Supreme Court allowed the appeal filed by the employer against the award of reinstatement and held :  "The question of award of any minor punishment in the facts of this case does not and cannot arise, and neither Labour Court could alter punishment of termination, having regard to its assessment of facts and contentions as regards validity of the inquiry proceedings.
The employee had been found guilty of misappropriation and in such an event, if the appellant Corporation loses its confidence vis-a-vis the employees, it will neither be proper nor fair on the part of the Court to substitute the findings and confidence of the employer with that of its own by allowing reinstatement.
The misconduct stands proved and in such a situation by reason of gravity of the offence, the labour Court cannot exercise its discretion and alter the punishment."
19.
In Regional Manager, RSRTC v. Ghanshyam Sharma, (2002) 10 SCC 330, the Supreme Court relied on the earlier judgment in BS Hullikatti's case (supra) and held :  "In the present case the Labour Court was not justified in interfering with the punishment of dismissal.
Though under Section 11-A the Labour Court has jurisdiction and powers to interfere with the quantum of punishment, however, the discretion has to be used judiciously.
When the main duty or function of the conductor is to issue tickets and collect fare and then deposit the same with the Road Transport Corporation and when a conductor fails to do so, then it will be misplaced sympathy to order his reinstatment instead of dismissal."
20.
In Gurmail Singh v. PO Labour Court, Patiala (supra), a Division Bench of this court considered the question whether Section 11-A can be invoked by the Labour Court/Tribunal for ordering reinstatement of the workman found guilty of embezzlement or misappropriation of funds and answered the same in negative by making the following observations :  "Every public servant holds a public post as a trustee of public confidence and faith and once he is held guilty of committing breach of this trust or faith, he loses the right to continue in service.
Courts of law do protect the employee against the arbitrary acts of the employer, but if, the employee is found guilty of misappropriation, fraud, embezzlement, cheating etc., he has no right to serve as public employee."
21.
We may add that once an employee is found guilty of embezzlement of funds, the public employer has no option but to bring an end to the relationship of master and servant.
It need no emphasis that the public servant is entitled to remain in service so long he does not violate the basic postulate of public service, namely, honesty and unquestionable integrity.
22.
On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that the learned Single Judge did not commit any illegality by setting aside a patently erroneous award passed by respondent No. 3 for reinstatment of the workman.
23.
We shall now consider whether the finding recorded by respondent No. 3 on the issue of fairness of domestic enquiry is legally sustainable.
In this context, it is appropriate to mention that after noticing the plea of the workman's representative that the enquiry officer had acted both as Prosecutor and as Judge, respondent No. 3 decided issue No. 1 in favour of the employer by making the following observations :  "Shri Maghar Singh representative of the workman pointed out that there was no Presenting Officer admitted by MW1 Sh. Sewa Singh in his cross- examination.
The representative of the workman therefore suggested that the enquiry officer acted both as prosecutor and as Judge.
He, therefore, canvassed that the enquiry held was not fair and proper.
In the case in hand, the workman in examination chief stated that he was afforded full opportunity to produce his defence.
In his cross-examination, he admitted that he had been appearing before the Enquiry Officer.
He further admitted that he was served with show cause notice after enquiry and he had filed reply.
He further admitted that he was given personal hearings, by the General Manager.
From the admission of the workman, it is disclosed that the workman was afforded full opportunity during the enquiry proceedings and he had been afforded opportunity to produce his defence.
The workman has not been able to show me that the enquiry officer was carrying animus against him so as to say that the enquiry held was not fair and proper.
The workman was afforded full opportunity during the enquiry proceedings.
So in such circumstances of the case, I hold that the enquiry was fair and proper.
Finding on this issue is hereby returned in favour of the respondent and against the workman."
24.
The argument of Shri GS Gal that the enquiry officer will be deemed to be biased because he had also performed the role of Prosecutor appears attractive but on a deeper consideration, we find no merit in it.
A perusal of the award shows that the while appearing as a witness in support of his cause, the workman did not assert that the enquiry officer was biased against him.
Rather, he categorically stated, in examination-in-chief, that he had been afforded full opportunity to produce his defence.
He also admitted that he was served with show cause notice and was afforded opportunity of personal hearing by the General Manager.
It is, thus, clear that the workman had not objected to the procedure adopted by the enquiry officer and willingly participated in the proceedings held by him.
Therefore, we do not find any valid ground to interfere with the finding recorded by respondent No. 3 that the enquiry held against the workman was fair and proper.
25.
This issue deserves to be considered from another angle.
The question whether the enquiry held against the delinquent employee is vitiated due to bias is essentially a question of fact.
The burden to prove the charge of bias is primarily on the person who makes an allegation on this score.
It is for him to specifically plead and prove that the enquiry officer was biased.
The Court cannot draw a dubious inference of bias by simply relying on bald and vague assertions.
The facts of the case before us show that during the course of enquiry, the workman did not raise any objection about the absence of the Presenting Officer or that the enquiry officer had preformed dual roal.
Rather, he volunteered to participate in the proceedings conducted by the enquiry officer.
He not only cross-examined the witnesses examined on behalf of the employer but also produced defence evidence.
Even in reply to the show cause notice issued by the General Manager, he is not shown to have raised an objection to the alleged dual role performed by the enquiry officer.
Therefore, he will be deemed to have given up the objection, if any, to the alleged bias of the enquiry officer.
26.
In Manak Lal v. Dr. Prem Chand Singhvi and others, AIR 1957 SC 425, the Supreme Court considered the question as to whether the proceedings held against the appellant, who was an advocate practising in Rajasthan High Court was vitiated due to the bias of the members of the Tribunal constituted under the Advocates Act.
It was urged on behalf of the respondent that by having failed to raise an objection to the constitution of the Tribunal at the stage of enquiry, the appellant will be deemed to have waived his right to challenge the ultimate decision taken by the Tribunal.
The Supreme Court accepted the plea set up by the respondent and observed :  "The case the appellant knew the material facts and must be deemed to have been conscious of his legal rights in that matter and therefore his deliberate failure to raise the objection to the constitution of the Tribunal on ground of bias before the tribunal at the earlier stage of the proceedings created an effective bar of waiver against him and he was precluded from raising it before the High Court for the first time.
It seems clear that the appellant wanted to take a chance to secure a favourable report from the tribunal which was constituted and when he found that the was confronted with an unfavourable report, he adopted the advice of raising the present technical point."
27.
In G Sarna v. Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428, the Supreme Court upheld the order passed by Allahabad High Court and rejected the appellant's challenge to the selection of respondent No. 8 as Professor of Anthropology on the ground of bias by making the following observations :  "Where a candidate for selection knowing fully well the relevant facts about the members of the selection Board voluntarily appeared for interview without raising any kind of objection against the constitution of the Selection Board and took a chance of favourable recommendation in his favour, it was not open to him to turn round and question the constitution of the Board when the decision was unfavourable to him."
28.
There is another reason for our disinclination to accept the argument of Shri Bal, namely, that no prejudice was caused to the workman on account of the absence of Presenting Officer.
In the course of enquiry, the workman neither pleaded nor produced any evidence that his cause has been prejudice on account of absence of the Presenting Officer.
Even before the Labour Court, he did not raise such a plea.
Therefore, it is not possible to agree with Shri Bal that the enquiry held against the workman was vitiated due to bias.
In this connection, we may usefully notice the judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Managing Director, ECIL v. B Karunakar, (1993) 4 SCC 727 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC).
The main question considered in that case was whether the employer was duty-bound to furnish a copy of the enquiry report before imposing penalty.
While answering the question in the affirmative, their Lordships held :  "Hence, in all cases where the enquiry officer's report is not furnished to the delinquent employee in the disciplinary proceedings, the courts and tribunals should cause the copy of the report to be furnished to the aggrieved employee if he has not already secured it before coming to the court/tribunal and give the employee an opportunity to show how his or her case was prejudiced because of the non-supply of the report.
If after hearing the parties, the court/tribunal comes to the conclusion that the non-supply of the report would have made no difference to the ultimate findings and the punishment given, the court/tribunal should not interfere with the order of punishment.
The court/tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is regrettably being done at present.
The courts should avoid resorting to short cuts.
Since it is the courts/tribunals which will apply their judicial mind to the question and give their reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment, (and not any internal appellate or revisional authority), there would be neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of the reasonable opportunity.
It is only if the court/finds that the furnishing of the report would have made a difference to the result in the case that it should set side the order of punishment.
Where after following the above procedure, the court/tribunal sets aside the order of punishment, the proper relief that should be granted is to direct reinstatement of the employee with liberty to the authority/management to proceed with the inquiry, by placing the employee under suspension and continuing the inquiry from the stage of furnishing him with the report.
The question whether the employee would be entitled to the back wages and other benefits from the date of his dismissal to the date of his reinstatement if ultimately ordered, should invariably be left to be decided by the authority concerned according to law, after the culmination of the proceedings and depending on the final outcome.
If the employee succeeds in the fresh inquiry and is directed to be reinstated, the authority should be at liberty to decide according to law how it will treat the period from the date of dismissal till the reinstatement and to what benefits, if any and the extent of the benefits, he will be entitled.
The reinstatement made as a result of the setting aside of the inquiry for failure to furnish the report, should be treated as a reinstatement for the purpose of holding the fresh inquiry from the stage of furnishing the report and no more, where such fresh inquiry is held.
That will also be the correct position in law."
This view was reiterated in Union Bank of India v. Vishwa Mohan, (1998) 4 SCC 310 : 1998(2) SCT 382 (SC).
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by setting aside the award passed by respondent No. 3 and the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
Appeal dismissed.