Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On February 8, 1991 the petitioner who is working as a teacher, approached this Court with a prayer that the Department of Education be directed to release the 'grant' for her post and to regularise her services.
On February 19, 1991, her services were terminated.
She, consequently, amended this petition to impugn the action of the respondents in terminating her services.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Shri Guru Hargobind Sahib High School, Ambala City (hereinafter referred to as the School), issued an advertisement inviting applications for the post of teacher in Hindi.
According to this advertisement, a person with Prabhakar and Oriental Training was eligible for appointment.
It was also provided that MA in Hindi with Degree of Bachelor of Education can also apply.
The petitioner who possesses the qualification of MA in Hindi and Bachelor of Education, applied for the post.
She was selected and appointed.
She joined duty on April 21, 1987.
Upto February 28, 1989, the Department of Education continued to release the aid in respect of the post held by the petitioner.
However, with effect from March 1, 1989, the said was not released, when in spite of repeated requests by the School as well as the petitioner, the department did not release the aid, the petitioner approached this Court.
The petitioner avers that soon after the filing of this writ petition, her services were terminated vide letter dated February 19, 1991 on the ground that it was not possible to 'get her appointment approved from the Government.'
Accordingly, the petitioner has amended the petition and challenged the order dated February 19, 1991 by which her services have been terminated.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that "the post of Hindi Teacher is governed by Haryana Education Service Class III School Cadre Rules, 1955 and the qualification prescribed for the post of Hindi teacher in the said rule is.... Prabhakar, OT from any institution in Haryana or its equivalent.
As the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualification, and thus, she is not eligible for the post of Hindi OT" On these premises, it is claimed that the petitioner's appointment could not be approved.
It has been admitted that the petitioner had passed examinations leading to Degree of MA in Hindi and Bachelor of Education.
Reference has also been made to the instructions issued vide letter dated March 27, 1985 to point out that "no person who does not fulfil the prescribed qualification shall be appointed to a post without obtaining prior permission from the Department."
Along with the written statement, a copy of the advertisement issued by the Institution on September 4, 1986 for appointment of Hindi Teacher has been produced as Annexure R-1.
Furthermore, a copy of the letter dated January 9, 1991 issued by the Director of Secondary Education to the District Education Officer informing him that it is not possible to approve the petitioner's appointment has been produced as Annexure R-2/2.
It has also been observed in this letter that the institution be advised to appoint a candidate fulfilling the qualifications prescribed under the 'Security of Services Act, 1974.'
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The primary contention raised by Mr. Gurrattan Pal Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, is that the action of the respondents is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
On behalf of the respondents, Mr. Jaswant Singh has contended that the petitioner did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications and was, as such, not eligible for appointment.
He submits that the action of the respondents in refusing to approve the appointment is perfectly just and fair.
5.
The question that arises for consideration is :  Was the petitioner eligible for appointment as a Hindi Teacher ?
6.
The legislature enacted the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971.
Section 8 of this Act empowers the State Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
The Rules called 'The Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974, have been framed.
Rule 6 provides that "no person shall be appointed to the service unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix 'A' to these rules."
In appendix 'A' various categories of posts starting from that of the Principal of a Higher Secondary School to a JBT Teacher, have been mentioned.
For the post of a Principal, the prescribed qualifications are MA or MSc.
with B.Ed.
or other equivalent qualifications.
The pay scale mentioned in the Rules for the post of Principal as originally prescribed was Rs. 400-800.
The next post in the cadre is that of Head Master, for which the qualifications are BA/B.Sc.
with BT/B.Ed.
This post carried the pay scale of Rs. 300-600.
There is provision for appointment of lecturers for whom the minimum qualification is only MA or MSc.
The posts of lecturers are also in the scale of Rs. 300-600/250-500.
The next category is of Master/Mistress for which the qualification is BA, BT with a pay scale of Rs. 220-400 with selection grade of Rs. 400-500.
The post of Language Teacher like Hindi, Punjabi and Urdu Teachers is fairly low in the cadre and carries the pay scale of Rs. 125-250.
For the post of Hindi Teacher, the qualifications prescribed in the rules, are Matric and Prabhakar with OT It is admitted that Prabhakar is a course of study in Hindi and OT (Oriental Training) is a course of training with a duration of one year.
7.
A perusal of the rules clearly shows that the post of Teacher is at the lowest rung in the service with the minimum qualifications of Matric and proficiency in language.
Even the pay scale as originally fixed reflects this position.
These pay scales have since been revised but still, the post of Principal continues to be the highest while that of a teacher is the lowest in the teaching cadre in the Service.
It is also clear that a person with the qualifications of M.A and B.Ed.
is eligible for appointment to the post of Principal.
In spite of this, the respondents maintain that a person possessing the same qualifications is not eligible for appointment to the post of a teacher.
This appears to be wholly arbitrary and unfair.
A mere Matriculate with training to acquire proficiency in a language is considered as eligible while a person who possesses a post-graduate qualification in the subject of Hindi with a degree of B.Ed.
is considered as ineligible.
Nothing has been produced on the record which may show that a person who qualified the courses of 'Prabhakar' and 'Oriental Training' learns something which a person who passes MA and B.Ed.
does not.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has, in fact, conceded that MA is a higher qualification than Prabhakar and B.Ed is a better qualification than OT and that the courses of study for M.A and B.Ed are more comprehensive than those for Prabhakar and OT In this view of the matter, the plea raised on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner is not qualified for the post of Hindi Teacher, cannot be sustained.
It is, consequently, rejected.
8.
Furthermore, it also appears that the action of the respondents is even otherwise arbitrary.
The petitioner has clearly averred that in the year 1986, Miss Damyanti Walia had been appointed as a teacher in Hindi.
She also possessed the qualifications of MA (Hindi) and B.Ed.
The Department had released aid for the duration she held the post.
After she had left the service of the School, the petitioner had joined on April 21, 1986.
For almost 22 months, the Department continued to release the aid in respect of the post held by the petitioner.
Thereafter, without indicating any reason or conveying any order, the aid was stopped.
Still further, without giving the petitioner any opportunity whatsoever, her appointment was disapproved.
If an opportunity had been granted, the petitioner could have pointed out that she fulfilled qualification for the post and that the Department had approved similar selections in the past.
9.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The advertisement provides that persons possessing the qualification of MA (Hindi) & BEd are eligible.
The petitioner fulfils these qualifications.
She was, thus, eligible.
No other point has been urged.
10.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the order dated January 9, 1991 Annexure R-2/2 issued by the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana and the consequential order of termination of services of the petitioner, passed by respondent No. 4 on February 19, 1991 (Annexure P-3 with the writ petition), are held to be illegal and quashed.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner and release the arrears of her salary.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 fail to release the grant within the prescribed period of three months and respondent No. 4 does not disburse it to the petitioner, in spite of its having been released by respondent Nos. 1 to 3, the petitioner will be entitled to the payment with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment from the defaulting party.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to her costs which are assessed at Rs, 2,000/-.
Appeal dismissed.