Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The learned Single Judge while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 2616 of 1992 has directed that the claim of the petitioners for appointment to the post of P.C.S.
(EB) (Class-I) from Register A-II be considered and appointments to be made.
Needful be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
The State of Punjab is aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
It has consequently filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 56 of 1993.
Simultaneously, Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 785 and 3768 of 1993 have been filed for the grant of similar reliefs.
The basic issue in all the three cases being identical, these can be disposed of by one order.
A few facts as emanating from the record of the Letters Patent Appeal may be briefly noticed.
2.
The three respondents are holding ministerial appointments in different offices in the Punjab State.
On December 19, 1990, the State of Punjab issued a Circular to the various authorities requesting them to recommend the names of persons in the prescribed form for filling up of seven vacancies in the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class I) (hereinafter referred to as the Service).
The names of the three respondents were recommended by respective authorities.
A total of 15 names were recommended for the seven vacancies which had to be filled up from amongst the persons holding ministerial appointments.
These names were forwarded to the Punjab Public Service Commission along with the character rolls of the employees.
The Commission held an interview on December 18, 1991.
The result of the interview was declared on January 6, 1992.
It was published in the Daily Tribune on January 7, 1992.
The Commission recommended the names of seven persons whom it considered suitable for appointment to the Punjab Civil Service.
The names of the three respondents were not included in this list.
3.
In the year 1991, Mr. Raj Pal Gupta, District Transport Officer, Sangrur who was a member of the Punjab Civil Service expired.
As a result, a vacancy became available in the service.
In addition to this, two more vacancies had become available prior to December 18, 1991.
As such, three vacancies had occurred before the date of interview.
Further more, two vacancies had become available on account of the retirement of officers on April 30, 1992 and May 31, 1992.
According to the respondents, the five vacancies had to be filled up from amongst the members of Class III Services holding ministerial appointments.
Relying on the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab vide letter dated March 22, 1957, the three respondents claimed that they were entitled to be considered for these additional vacancies which had become available within six months of the recommendation made by the Commission.
This claim having been up held by the learned Single Judge, the State had come up in this appeal.
4.
We have heard Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, for the appellant, Mr. M L Sibal, has appeared on behalf of the three respondents.
5.
The recruitment to the Service is governed by the Rules called the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) (Class I) Rules, 1976, (hereinafter referred to a 'the Rules').
Rule 4 provides that "all appointments to the Service shall be made by the Government in consultation with the commission."
Rule 8 contemplates that Registers A-I, A-II, A-III, B and C shall be maintained by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab for making recruitment to the Service.
6.
In the present case, we are concerned with Register A-II.
This is the Register in which shall be entered the names of temporary members of Class II and members of Class III Services serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab and holding ministerial appointments accepted as candidates.
The other Registers relate to different categories of officers/employees as well as those "accepted as candidates as a result of the main competitive examination."
The Rules contain provisions for the method of selection of candidates for different Registers.
In so far as selection of candidates for inclusion in Register A-II is concerned, the provision has been made in Rule 10.
It provides as under :-  "10.
(1) Each of the authorities specified in the first column of the table below may submit to the Government in Form I attached to these rules the nomination rolls of such number of persons as is specified in each case in the second column of the said table from amongst the temporary members of Class II Services and members of Class III Services, holding ministerial appointments and working in its office or in the offices subordinate to it :  Nominating Authority Number of nominations 1 2  1.
Chief Minister 2 2.
Speaker, Punjab Vidhan Sabha 1 3.
Chief Justice of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana 2 4.
Ministers and Ministers of State 1 (each) 5.
Deputy Ministers 1 (each) 6.
Chief Parliamentary Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary 1 (each) 7.
Chief Secretary 5 8.
Financial Commissioners 1 (each) Provided that during the operation of a Proclamation issued under clause(1) of Article 356 of the Constitution of India in the State, the Governor may nominate two persons from amongst the temporary members of Class II service and members of Class III Services holding ministerial appointments and working in his office or in the offices subordinate to him.
(2) No nomination roll in respect of a person shall be submitted under the provisions of sub-rule (1) unless such person-  (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed 10 years' continuous service under the Government;  (b) was under the age of forty-five years on the first day of November immediately preceding the date of submission of names by the nominating authorities; and  (c) is a graduate of recognised University.
(3) The nomination rolls submitted under sub-rule (1) along with the service record of the candidates shall be forwarded to the commission which shall consider the merits of each such candidates and recommend such of the candidates as are considered (4) The names of persons recommended by the Commission under Sub-rule (3) shall be entered in Register A-II in the order in which they are recommended by the Commission."
Rule 18 provides the Roster according to which "the Government shall make appointments to the Service in pursuance of Rule 7 from amongst the candidates entered on the various Registers in a slab of 100 vacancies.....".
Rule 19 lays down that "candidates on the same Register shall be appointed to the Service in the order of merit assigned to them by the Commission while selecting as a batch for that particular Register."
7.
In this case, we are primarily concerned with the provisions of Rule 10 (supra).
Clause(1) inter alia enumerates the authorities which can nominate persons from amongst the temporary members of Class II Services and members of Class III Services holding ministerial appointments.
Clause (2) lays down the condition of eligibility.
Clause (3) provides that the nomination rolls received under sub-rule (1) along with the service record of the candidates shall be forwarded to the Commission "which shall consider the merits of each such candidates and recommend such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the Service.
According to Clause (4) the names of the persons "recommended by the Commission under sub-rule (3) shall be entered in Register A-II in the order in which they are recommended by the Commission."
It is thus apparent that the commission has to consider the merits of each candidate and recommend only those as are considered suitable for appointment to the service.
Thereafter, in accordance with Rules 18(iii) and 19, the Government has to fill up the 4th, 10th, 16th......vacancies from amongst the candidates borne on Register A-II in the order of merit assigned to them by the Commission.
What is the position in the present case ?
8.
The Government had called for recommendations from the authorities specified in Rule 10(1) for inclusion of the names of seven persons in register A-II.
As a result of this requisition, a total of 15 persons were nominated by various authorities.
The Commission after interviewing these 15 candidates including the three respondents recommended seven persons on January 6, 1992 whom "it considered suitable for appointment to the Service."
The names of the respondents were not included in this list prepared by the Commission.
In spite of this, they claimed that they had a right to be considered and appointed to the vacancies which had become available upto July 6, 1992.
This claim is based on the letter dated March 22, 1957 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab to all Administrative Secretaries.
Since the main controversy in this case hinges around the interpretation of this letter, it is apt to notice its contents.
It reads as under :-  "Subject : Procedure to be observed by Administrative Departments of the Punjab Government in their dealing with the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Will the Administrative Secretaries to Government, Punjab kindly refer to the procedure noted above as subject, circulated with Punjab Government letter No. 814-GS-37/3237-S, dated June, 1937 and subsequent correspondence contained in Punjab Government letter No. 4596/1178-G.S.- 37/9276, dated the 10th September, 1937 and letter No. 475 P.S.C.
37, dated the 12th July, 1937, from the Secretary, Punjab and North West Frontier Province, Joint Public Service Commission, reproduced on pages 29 to 35 of the booklet entitled "Regulation and Instructions Governing the work of the Provincial Public Service Commission in the Punjab."
2.
In Paragraph 5 of the Public Service Commission letter No. 475 P.S.C.
37, dated the 12th July, 1937, at page 35 a time limit of 6 months has been prescribed for filling up, out of the names recommended by the Public Service Commission, additional vacancies which were not intimated to the Public Service Commission when inviting recommendations.
After the expiry of six months a fresh reference to the Public Service Commission will be necessary to fill up an additional vacancy not intimated to the Commission earlier.
Government have noticed that there is no uniformity regarding the observance of this time limit.
They desire that the procedure outlined above should be rigidly adhered to.
The time limit of six months will not, however, apply to a case where a candidate had declined to accept the post offered to him against a vacancy which was intimated to the Public Service Commission.
Such a vacancy can be filled up even after the expiry of six months out of the approved list of candidates initially received from the Commission."
Neither of the parties has produced before us the communications referred to in paragraph 1.
Counsel for both the parties have relied on paragraph 2 in support of their respective claims.
9.
On a consideration of the matter, we find that these instructions enable the Government to fill up "additional vacancies which were not intimated" to the Commission within a period of six months "out of the names recommended by the Public Service Commission."
The instructions contain merely an enabling provision.
Even by the most liberal construction, these instructions do not postulate that the Government has to call upon the Commission to make recommendations against the additional vacancies.
In fact, it is only when the Commission has recommended persons beyond the number of vacancies intimated to it that the Government can consider and include the names of the persons found suitable by the Commission in Register A-II.
This has to be done within a period of six months.
Otherwise, the vacancies have to be notified to the Commission for making fresh recommendations.
However, the instructions cannot be interpreted to mean that if any additional vacancies become available, the Government is bound to call upon the Commission to recommend additional names and to make appointments from amongst the candidates as may be recommended by the Commission.
10.
As noticed above, under Rule 10(3), the Commission has to "consider the merits of each such candidate and recommend such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the Service."
In a given case, the Commission may find that none of the candidates is suitable.
In another case, the Commission may find that all the candidates whose nomination rolls have been submitted are suitable for appointment to the Service.
It may even find that only one person is suitable though the vacancies are more than one.
The Rule does not impose any restriction on the Commission.
It requires the Commission to recommend only such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the Service.
11.
In the present case, the Commission has found that out of 15 candidates whose nomination rolls have been submitted under Rule 10(1), only seven were suitable.
That is the end of the function of the Commission under Rule 10.
The Government has to enter the names of those seven persons in Register A-II in the order in which they have been recommended by the Commission.
Even if additional vacancies are available the Rule does not empower the Government to call upon the Commission to recommend more names.
However, if in a case like the present one, the Commission had recommended 10 persons as suitable for appointment to the Service, then in view of the instructions dated March 22, 1957 it would have been open to the Government to consider and enter the names of three more candidates in Register A-II.
This had, however, to be done within the specified period.
In the present case no such occasion arose as the Commission had not recommended more than seven candidates.
12.
Mr. Sibal, however, contended vehemently that in view of the instructions dated March 22, 1957 the candidates had a legitimate expectation for being considered against the vacancies which had become available within six months of the recommendation made by the Commission and the Government was bound to ask the Commission to consider and decide if certain other persons besides those recommended by the Commission were suitable for appointment to the Service.
We find nothing in the Rules or the instructions to up hold this contention.
In our view, no such duty was imposed on the Government or on the Commission.
The claim is wholly untenable.
Such an expectation was wholly illegitimate.
13.
In Harjit Singh Sidhu v. State of Punjab, 1989(4) SLR 403, a Full Bench of this Court observed that the instructions dated March 22, 1957, "can be held to be only for administrative convenience and of directory nature and cannot supersede the service rules which are statutory and of binding nature."
Respectfully following this Rule, we hold that under the provisions of Rule 10, the Commission has to recommend the persons it considers suitable for appointment to the Service.
The instructions have to be read as subservient to the rules.
These are meant for administrative convenience and enable the Government to make appointments against additional vacancies if the names of certain persons have been recommended by the Commission.
These confer no right on the citizen to claim that the Government should ask the Commission to recommend more names.
14.
The learned Single Judge has also referred to the decision in Gursharan Singh Sadhu & anr. v. State of Punjab and another, 1991(5) SLR 415 : 1991(3) SCT 222 (P&H).
The situation in that case was entirely different.
Twelve posts in the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police had been advertised.
The two petitioners in that case were at Nos. 13 and 14 in the merit list.
The Government had made offer of appointment to the 12 persons in order of merit.
Two out of them had not joined the posts offered to them.
It was in that situation that a direction for the consideration of the claims of the two petitioners was issued.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
The learned Single Judge has also referred to the decision in Rohtas Singh Kharub v. State of Haryana, 1989(6) SLR 45.
The learned Single Judge had only interpreted the instructions to mean that if an additional vacancy has become available "within a period of 6 months from the date of selection made by the Commission, it should be filled up out of the approved list of candidates in order of merit....." It appears that the name of the petitioner was in the approved list of candidates.
In the present case, the position is entirely different.
Accordingly, even this decision is of no assistance to the claim made by the three respondents.
15.
It also deserves mention that according to the Scheme of the Rules as well as Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the eligible candidates have a right to be afforded equality of opportunity.
If the vacancies which have not been notified to the authorities specified in Rule 10(1) are allowed to be filled up without obtaining recommendations from the appropriate authorities, the rights of a large number of employees may be adversely affected.
Such is not the intention behind the instructions of March 22, 1957.
In fact, the instructions deserve to be construed strictly so as to ensure that the equality of opportunity to eligible candidates is not denied.
16.
Accordingly, we are of the view that the decision given by the learned single Judge is not in conformity with the Rules and the instructions referred to above.
We, accordingly, allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
17.
Learned counsel for the petitioners in the two writ petitions were agreed that if the appeal is accepted, the writ petitions have to be dismissed.
18.
In view of our decision to allow the appeal, there is no alternative but to dismiss the two writ petitions.
We order accordingly.
However, even in the writ petitions, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.