GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus to Army Institute of Law (for short, `the Institute') (erroneously described as Army Law College in the cause title of the petition) to admit him in the Ist year of BA, LL.B., 5 Year Degree Course (for short, the course) and to quash the admissions of respondents No. 6 to 9.
2.
The Institute was established under the aegis of Army Welfare Education Society in July, 1999.
It is affiliated with Punjabi University, Patiala and approved by the Bar Council of India.
3.
For making admissions in the Ist year of the Course for the session 2003- 2004, an entrance test was conducted by the Institute on 2642003.
The petitioner appeared in the test.
He passed the test and was placed at No. 8 in the merit list of Punjab Residents Civil Category (hereinafter referred to as `Punjab Category').
However, his merit placement was treated provisional because he had got compartment in the paper of Physics in 10+2 examination.
4.
After the declaration of result, the Institute issued letters to the eligible candidates to appear for interviews on 2372003 and 25.7.2003.
The petitioner was not called for interview because by that time, he had not passed the compartment examination.
Those selected were admitted against the 60 seats specified in the prospectus.
Thereafter, the Institute decided to increase the number of seats from 60 to 80 and then to 100.
Consequently, the number of seats reserved for Punjab Category also got increased from 9 to 15.
5.
For filling up the additional seats, interviews were held on 2282003 and 2382003.
By that time, the petitioner had cleared the compartment examination and submitted the required documents.
Notwithstanding this, his candidature was not considered and respondents No. 7 to 9, who were lower in the merit among Punjab Category candidates, were admitted against the additional seats.
Respondent No. 6, who had applied against the seats earmarked for Army Category but was not considered for admission in the first phase on account of having compartment in 10+2 examination, was also admitted against the vacant seat of his category because in the meanwhile he had passed the compartment examination.
6.
The petitioner has questioned the admissions of respondents No. 6 to 9 on the ground of violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and the provisions contained in the prospectus.
He has averred that respondents No. 6 to 9, who were placed below him in the merit list, could not have been granted admissions on priority basis.
7.
In their written statement, respondents No. 2 and 5 have raised an objection to the maintainability of the writ petition by asserting that the Institute is not an instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
They have relied on order dated 1721997 passed by Jammu & Kashmir High Court in WP (Service) No. 1415 of 1996 - Mrs. Asha Khosla v. Chairman, Army Public School and others, order dated 31.31997 passed by the Supreme Court in petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 6482 of 1997 - Asha Khosla v. Chairman, Army Public School and others, order dated 29.5.2001 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 14993 of 2000 - Gurwinder Kaur v. Union of India and others and order dated 4.7.2003 passed in C.W.P.
No. 8308 of 2001 - Hem Chand v. Union of India and others, 2003(3) S.C.T.
650 and averred that the Institute, which is being run by a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
On merits, respondents No. 2 and 5 have averred that admissions against the additional seats were made in accordance with the decision taken in the meeting of the Admission Committee held on 2282003 to first consider those who fulfilled the eligibility conditions at the time of entrance test.
According to them, even though respondents No. 7 to 9 were lower in merit than the petitioner, they were admitted against the additional seats of Punjab Category because they had passed 10+2 examination before the entrance test, whereas the petitioner passed the examination after completion of the first phase of admissions.
They have also defended the admission of respondent No. 6 by asserting that no other eligible candidate of Army Category was available who could be admitted against the additional seats.
8.
In his written statement, respondent No. 6 has questioned the locus standi of the petitioner to challenge his admission by contending that he was not even a competitor for admission against the seats earmarked for Army Category.
9.
In their separate written statements, respondent No. 8 and 9 have, by and large, adopted the stand taken by the Institute.
They have averred that the petitioner was not called for interview because he had compartment in 10+2 examination and was not eligible to be admitted to the Course.
According to them, the decision of the Admission Committee to first consider those who were eligible for admission at the time of entrance test does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
An additional plea taken by respondent No. 9 is that his admission may not be disturbed because in view of his admission in the Institute, he had given up admissions at Symbiosis International Educational Centre Law College, Pune and School of Legal Studies, Guru Nanak Dev University, Regional Campus, Jalandhar.
10.
Shri TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the provisions contained in paras 22, 23, 31 and 32 of the prospectus and argued that the decision taken by the Admission Committee to grant admission to the candidates who were eligible at the time of entrance test ignoring higher merit of the petitioner is not only ultra vires to the scheme of the prospectus but is also violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
He submitted that in view of the provisions contained in clause (i) of para 23 and para 32 of the prospectus, the petitioner was eligible to be considered for admission in the second phase and the Admission Committee committed a grave illegality by not considering his candidature and granting admissions to less meritorious candidates.
11.
Ms. Sweena Pannu, learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 5 argued that the writ petition should be dismissed as not maintainable because Army Welfare Education Society which had established the Institute does not fall within the ambit of the term State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
She then argued that the admissions made in consonance with the decision taken in the meeting of the Admission Committee held on 2282003 cannot be termed as arbitratory, irrational and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and those, like the petitioner who passed 10+2 examination after completion of first phase of admissions cannot take precedence over the candidates who were qualified at the time of entrance test.
12.
Shri KS Ahluwalia, learned counsel for respondent No. 8 and Shri TS Dhindsa, learned counsel for respondent No. 9 referred to para 31 of the prospectus and argued that non-consideration of the petitioner's candidature cannot be termed as illegal because on the last date fixed for submission of the admission form, i.e. 2062003, he was not eligible.
They also emphasised that in view of their admissions in the Institute, respondents No. 8 and 9 gave up admissions in School of Legal Studies, Guru Nanak Dev University, Regional Campus, Jalandhar and if their admissions in the Institute are quashed at this belated stage, then they would suffer irreparable injury.
13.
Shri Anupam Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No. 7 submitted that even if the Court comes to the conclusion that the petitioner is entitled to be admitted against one of the seats of Punjab Category, the admission of his client may not be disturbed because she is more meritorious than respondents No. 8 and 9.
14.
Shri Vivek Singla argued that the petitioner has no right to seek invalidation of the admission of respondent No. 6 because he was not a candidate for admission against the seats earmarked for Army Category.
15.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
The objection raised by respondents No. 2 and 5 to the maintainability of the writ petition deserves to be overruled in view of the judgments of this Court in Mohit Garg v Army Institute of Law, Sangrur Road, Patiala through its Director, 2000(3) RSJ 672 : 2000(4) SCT 380 (P&H); Dharam Veer Sayal v. Army Institute of Law, Patiala and others, 2001(1) RSJ 398 : 2001(1) SCT 1112 (P&H), and Samir Anand v. Army Institute of Law and others, 2001(1) RSJ 755 : 2001(3) SCT 231 (P&H) in which this Court, after considering a similar plea raised on behalf of the respondents, held that the Institute falls within the scope of the term State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India and is amenable to writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Some of the observations made in Mohit Garg's case (supra) are extracted below :  "Before concluding, we may deal with the preliminary objection raised by the respondent.
As already observed, it was contended that no writ petition was maintainable against the respondent as it is being run by a society which is not a State.
This question need not detain us for long as the same stands answered by a Full Bench of five Judges of this Court in Ravneet Kaur v. The Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, 1997(3) SCT 210 (P&H).
In this case also, the question arose whether a writ petition was maintainable against an unaided private medical college which was affiliated to a University.
A Full Bench of this Court considered this matter in Gurpreet Singh v. Panjab University, Chandigarh, 1983(85) P.L.R.
46 and the question was answered in the negative.
The correctness of this view was doubted and the matter was referred to a larger Bench.
The larger Bench decided the question in the affirmative and over-ruled the earlier view of the Full Bench in Gurpreet Singh's case (supra), it being held that writ or a direction could issue against a body performing a public duty as in the instant case.
AlL is performing a public duty in providing legal education.
In view of this binding precedent of our own court, it is not necessary to discuss the case cited by the counsel for the respondent."
16.
The orders passed by Jammu & Kasmir High Court and two Division Benches of this Court, on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for respondents No. 2 and 5 cannot be made basis for non-suiting the petitioner because--,  (i) in the afore-mentioned cases, Jammu & Kashmir High Court and Division Benches of this Court had decided disputes relating to conditions of service and not relating to admissions in educational institutions; and  (ii) the orders passed by the Division Benches of this Court in Gurwinder Kaur's case (supra) and Hem Chand's case (supra) are entirely based on the order passed by Jammu & Kashmir High Court in Mrs. Asha Khosla's case (supra).
In neither of those cases, attention of the Division Bench appears to have been drawn to the judgment of 5-Judge Bench in Ravneet Kaur v. The Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, 1973(3) SCT 210, the ratio of which is binding on us.
17.
Having rejected the preliminary objection, we shall now consider whether the petitioner has been illegally denied admission in Ist year of the Course.
For this purpose, it will be apposite to notice paras 22, 23, 31 and 32 of the prospectus which read as under :  "22 ELIGIBILITY FOR ADMISSION (i) A candidate who has passed 10+2 examination of the Punjab School Education Board or any other equivalent examination recognized as such by the Punjabi University, Patiala securing at least 50% marks (45% in case of SC/ST candidates).
(ii) He/She should not have completed the age of 21 years on Ist July, 2003.
23 APPLICANTS APPEARING IN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION IN MAR/APR-2003 - (i) The Applicants appearing for the qualifying examination in March/April, 2003 are also allowed to take the Entrance Test-2003, but their candidature for admission shall be considered subject to their fulfilment of eligibility conditions at the time of interview.
:- (Emphasis added).
(ii) In case an applicant has passed a qualifying examination from Board/University whose degree has not been notified as equivalent by the Punjabi University, Patiala, he/she will have to produce the eligibility certificate from the Punjabi University, Patiala at the time of interview, failing which his/her candidature shall not be considered.
31 SUBMISSION OF ADMISSION FORM After the declaration of result of Entrance Test - 2003, successful candidates in Army category upto merit No. 125, Punjab Residents Civil Category upto merit No. 20 and All India Civil Category upto merit No. 10 shall have to apply for the admission to the course at AIL by submitting an Admission Form, at Patiala Office, attached with the prospectus on or before 20 Jun 2003, duly completed in all respects along with the attested photocopies of certificates mentioned below : (i) Matric Certificate containing Date of Birth.
(ii) 10+2 Certificate with Detail Marks.
(iii) Character Certificate from the Principal of School/College last attended.
(iv) Migration Certificate.
(v) Requisite certificate of reserved category (Ref.
Paras Nos. 41 and 42).
In case of gap year/s the candidates are required to explain and submit the details of activity undertaken during the gap period and proof thereof.
Last date of submission of Admission Form with late fee of Rs. 100/- is 30th June, 2003.
32 INTERVIEW The candidates shall appear for interview at A.I.L.
Campus, Mohali on the following dates at 10 AM A) Army category up to merit No. 75 9 Jul 2003  (Wednesday) B) Army category from merit No. 76  11 Jul 2003 (Friday)  - Punjab Residents civil category Upto merit No. 20, -do- - All Indian civil category upto merit No. 10, -do- Note (i) The selected candidate will have to deposit the fees on the date of his/her interview, failing which, the candidature will be cancelled and the seat will be offered to the next candidate.
(ii) In case seat remains vacant within the last date of admission notified by the University after the interviews of candidates on the scheduled dates and list of interviewed and selected candidates is exhausted, the candidates next in merit shall be intimated to submit admission forms and appear for interviews."
A conjoint reading of the various paragraphs of the prospectus reproduced above shows that the basic condition of eligibility for appearing in the admission test was that the candidate should have passed 10+2 examination conducted by the Punjab School Education Board or any other equivalent examination recognised by the Punjabi University with atleast 50% marks (for general Category) and 45% marks (for the reserved category of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes).
Those who had appeared in 10+2 examination in March/April, 2003 were also treated eligible to take the entrance test with the rider that their candidature for admission would be considered subject to their fulfilling the eligibility condition at the time of interview.
The expression "at the time of interview" appearing in para 23(i) of the prospectus gave an indication about the point of time which reference to which eligibility of the candidates was to be determined.
If that expression is read in juxtaposition with the remaining part of para 23(i), it becomes clear that even if a candidate on account of non-declaration of the result of 10+2 examination or otherwise was not eligible on the dates of entrance test or declaration of result, he/she was entitled to be considered for admission if on the date of interview, he fulfilled the condition of eligibility.
In terms of para 31, successful candidates of Army Category up to merit No. 125, Punjab Category upto merit No. 20 and All India Civil Category up to merit No. 10 were required to submit admission forms on or before 2072003 along with Matric Certificate containing the date of birth, 10+2 examination Certificate with detail marks, Character Certificate and Migration Certificate.
The reserved category candidates were required to furnish the requisite Certificate in support of their claim of reservation.
In terms of Note (ii) appearing below para 32 of the prospectus, the vacant seats were to be filled from the candidates next in the merit.
18.
In view of the above analysis of the relevant provisions of the prospectus, we are inclined to agree with the learned counsel for the respondents that notwithstanding his merit placement at No. 8, the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for admission in the first phase because he had not passed 10+2 up to the date of interview, i.e., 25.7.2003 and the concerned authority of the Institute did not commit any illegality by not calling him for interviews in the first phase of admissions.
However, we are unable to agree with them that the decision taken by the Admission Committee in its meeting held on 2282003 was rational and just.
Rather, we are convinced that the decision of the Admission Committee that candidature of those who had passed 10+2 examination before holding of the entrance test shall be considered first irrespective of their merit placement was wholly arbitrary, irrational and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Undisputedly, the merit of the candidates determined on the basis of performance in the entrance test was the sole criteria for admission and eligibility was to be examined at the time of interview.
It is also an admitted position that interview for the second phase of the admissions were held on 22/2382003.
Thus, for the purpose of making admissions in the second phase, the eligibility was to be seen on 22/2382003.
As on 2282003, the petitioner had become eligible to be considered because he had cleared the compartment of 10+2 examination.
Notwithstanding this, his candidature was not considered.
This was per se contrary to the provisions of the prosecutus and resulted in violation of his right to equality guaranteed under the Constitution.
19.
The hollowness of the stand taken by respondents No. 2 and 5 on the issue of the petitioner's eligibility to be considered in the second phase of admissions is exposed by the fact that respondent No. 6, who had compartment in 10+2 examination, was considered for admission in the second phase by being treated eligible on the date of interview.
20.
The question which remains to be considered is whether the admissions of respondents No. 7 to 9 should be nullified and a direction be issued to the authorities of the Institute to admit the petitioner.
In view of our conclusion on the issue of the petitioner's entitlement to be admitted as per merit, we would have accepted his prayer and quashed the admissions of respondents No. 7 to 9 and directed respondents No. 2 and 5 to admit him in the Ist year of the course, but in the peculiar facts of this case, we refrain from doing so.
The reasons for this are :  (a) After their admissions in the Institute, respondents No. 8 and 9 gave up their admissions in the School of Legal Studies, Guru Nanak Dev University, Regional Campus, Jalandhar.
By this time, they have completed more than 5 months studies.
If their admissions are quashed at this belated stage, they would suffer irreparable injury because the Court cannot direct Guru Nanak Dev University to revive their admissions in the School of Legal Studies; (b) Respondent No. 7 is more meritorious than respondents No. 8 and 9 and till their admissions are nullified, her admission cannot be disturbed; and  (c) The petitioner is not the only candidate who was not given admission as per merit placement.
At least, one more candidate, namely, Ms. Jasleen Kaur is more meritorious than him and if a direction is given by the Court for making admission on the basis of merit, then she would be entitled to be admitted and not the petitioner.
Thus, he will not get any substantial relief.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.