NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner has sought quashing of annual confidential report for the year 1988-89 Annexure P-2, dismissal of non statutory complaint vide Annexure P-10 and of the statutory complaint Annexure P-12 by way of issuance of writ of certiorari or any other appropriate writ, order or direction.
In additions thereto, petitioner has sought direction to the respondents to review his case qua promotion to the rank of Colonel ignoring the annual confidential report and orders Annexure P-10 and P-12.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he had unblemished service record till the time one Brig.
RK Nanawatty took command of his unit for a brief period i.e. from October 18, 1988 to March 24, 1989 and recorded the impugned annual confidential report for the period 1988-89.
Earlier to this report and after the year 1988-89 the petitioner has been awarded good reports by various superior officers.
This report was written on August 30, 1989 ie long after the period prescribed in the instructions for recording of annual confidential reports.
As per instructions, the annual confidential report ought to have been recorded by March 25, 1989 which should have reached the Army headquarters by June 10, 1989.
This late recording of the annual confidential report itself erdes the credibility of the reporting officer.
Not only this, no supporting material has been referred to by the reporting officer.
Even the requirement of counselling as envisaged by the rules was not adhered to by the reporting officer.
Further challenging the annual confidential report, the petitioner highlighted that he had been given a box grading of 8 on his annual confidential reports for the year 1989-90, 1990-91 and 1991-92 and this being the position, it is unreasonable too to accept that such an officer could be rated so low as given in the annual confidential report, Annexure P-2.
Remarks in the annual confidential report that he is autocratic, his staff work just average, and his knowledge and application is satisfactory, appears to have been used without the application of mind.
In this view of the matter, this solitary adverse report Annexure P-2 loses its significance and ought to have been set aside as sought by the petitioner by filing non statutory complaint as well as statutory complaint.
Rejection of these complaints by the concerned authorities and that too by a non speaking order clearly brings out that the entire record of the petitioner was never brought to the notice of the Chief of the Army Staff.
This confidential report and rejection of the complaints by the authorities has jeopardised the promotion chances and the career of the petitioner and precisely for this reason his otherwise meritorious record has been brushed aside while examining his case for promotion as Colonel.
3.
The respondents, as per written statement, has controverted the various averments made by the petitioner.
By way of preliminary objection, it has been urged by the respondents that the writ petition is not maintainable for expunging remark from the annual confidential report.
Even otherwise, the non statutory as well as the statutory complaint of the petitioner have already been erected by the Chief of the Army Staff and the Central Government respectively.
On merits, it was urged that since Brig RK Nanawatty was Brigade Commander of the petitioner from October 1988 to March, 1990.
He was his reporting officer and so has recorded his annual confidential report.
Defending the annual confidential report, Annexure P-2, the respondents averred that the aim of the confidential report broadly is to have an objective assessment of Officer's professional and personal qualities, his competence and his potential as observed during the period covered by the report.
It is the duty of the reporting officer to record his assessment about the over all performance of the officer concerned clearly.
The respondents further controverted the averment made by the petitioner that his other annual confidential reports ranged from high average to above average.
Defending the confidential report, it was submitted that such a confidential report is reviewed by two or more superior reviewing officers in the chain of reporting.
The assessment given by all these reporting officers have to be studied together to form an overall picture of the performance of the officer reported upon for that particular period of reporting.
This way the impugned report, in fact, is based upon the objective assessment of the petitioner.
As regards the allegation that his claim for promotion has not been considered in view of this adverse report, the respondents denied this assertion of the petitioner.
According to the respondents, the name of the petitioner had been considered for promotion to the rank of Colonel thrice by the selection board.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the respondents and perused the relevant document referred to by the respective counsel in support of their contentions.
5.
Sh. HS Mattewal, learned senior counsel for the petitioner, assailed the annual confidential report as well as dismissal of non-statutory as well as statutory complaints filed by the petitioner.
Much emphasis was laid by the learned counsel to the effect that Brig RK Nanawatty was Command Officer of the petitioner for only five months.
In this short span he chose to record adversely ignoring the unblemished good record of the petitioner.
This report then examined in the light of reports previous to this report and the reports of the subsequent year clearly bring out that the reporting officer for some extraneous reasons was out to mar the career of the petitioner.
It could not be a co-incidence that the petitioner got good grading i.e. grade of 8 for the annual confidential report for the year 1989-90, 1990-91 and 1991-92.
6.
We find no merit in this submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
No material has been placed on record by which it could be inferred that Brig.
RK Nanawatty had any animus against the petitioner.
In fact, nothing has been even alleged by the petitioner in this petition.
Petitioner's non-statutory complaint filed against the annual confidential report for the year 1988-89 alongwith comments of the reporting officer and the record of the service of the officer was placed before the Chief of the Army Staff who after considering all aspects of the matter found no substance in the same and so erected vide order dated 1121992, Annexure P-10.
Similarly, statutory complaint too was dismissed by the Central Government on December 17, 1992 - Annexure P-12.
7.
The plea of the petitioner that his claim for consideration to be promoted as Colonel was ignored on account of this adverse report is too without any substance.
It has been specifically stated by the respondents that the petitioner's claim for promotion as Colonel has been examined by the Board thrice who, however, has not been found upto the mark.
This being the factual position, the grievance of the petitioner that he has been deprived of his right to be considered for promotion to the post of Colonel is factually incorrect.
In fact, while promoting an individual from the rank of acting Colonel to the rank of Colonel, the selection board takes into consideration the following factors :-  a) War reports;  b) Annual confidential reports earned in the rank of Major and Lt. Col. with special stress on command criteria;  c) Professional courses done along with gradings;  d) Honours and Awards;  e) Disciplinary punishments, if any, and  f) Special achievements and weaknesses.
Examined in the light of these factors, one annual confidential report, admittedly, is not the sole factor before the selection board.
This way the assertion of the petitioner that on account of one adverse report his chances of promotion have been marred is without any substance.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the decision of the apex court in case reported as Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi v. Union of India, 1983(1) SLR 365 : AIR 1982 (SC) 1473, which has, in fact, no bearing on the point in controversy.
The counsel referred to para 39 of this judgment which highlights the cardinal features of the Constitution that a person entering armed forces does not cease to be a citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his right under the Constitution.
Admittedly, there is no dispute to this proposition of law.
The case of the petitioner has been examined by the Chief of the Army Staff as well as by the Central Government who have found no infirmity in the annual confidential report.
Similarly, the decision in case reported as Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, 1987(2) SLR 54 : AIR 1987 (SC) 948. has no applicability on the facts of the present case.
As per ratio of this judgment, unless the adverse report is communicated and representation, if any, made by the employees is considered, it cannot be acted upon to deny promotion.
This dictum of the apex Court, when examined in the light of the present case has, in fact, no applicability.
As has been stated in para 9 of the written statement, annual confidential report is one of the eight factors which are taken into consideration by the selection board while promoting an acting Colonel to the rank of Colonel.
Besides, in the present case it has come on record that the annual confidential report was conveyed to the petitioner who feeling unhappy chose to file the representation against it by way of filing non- statutory/statutory complaints which were examined by the concerned authorities on merit but found no substance in the same.
For the aforesaid reasons, we find no merit in any of the contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioner and consequently dismiss the petition.
No order as to costs.