SP Kurdukar CJ (Oral) - This appeal is filed by the State of Punjab challenging the legality and correctness of the judgment and order dated October 24, 1991 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 13347 of 1989.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition filed by the first respondent and directed the appellant to appoint him as Assistant Advocate General, Punjab.
2.
The State of Punjab vide notification issued in August, 1987 (see Annexure P-4) invited applications for a post of Assistant Advocate General, Punjab in the scale of Rs. 2000-2300.
The applications were invited from amongst the practising Advocates of Punjab and Haryana High Court and Law Officers of Government of Punjab.
It is common premise that the first respondent (writ petitioner) had submitted his application within the prescribed time.
It is also common premise that the second respondent, who has been appointed, had neither applied for the post of Assistant Advocate General in pursuance of the said notification nor he appeared before the Selection Committee.
After processing the applications, a committee of three persons was constituted which consisted of Home Secretary to Government Punjab, Legal Rememberancer (now Secretary) to Government Punjab and the Advocate General, Punjab.
The Committee interviewed various eligible candidates and ultimately selected three candidates namely; ML Agnihotri, Baldev Singh and Raghbir Chand Sharma, the first respondent.
These three persons were accordingly kept on the select panel.
Mr. Agnihotri joined the service on 16101987 but, however, he resigned on 13111987.
The second candidate on the select panel namely Baldev Singh vide his letter dated 1311988 informed the State Government his inability to accept the offer.
It is also not in dispute that the first respondent was never offered the post of Assistant Advocate General although he was on the select panel.
3.
In the meantime, the State of Punjab took a decision to fill in the post of Assistant Advocate General from the service cadre.
Respondent No. 2 happened to be from the service cadre and accordingly he came to be appointed as Assistant Advocate General.
Aggrieved by this decision, the respondent No. 1 filed the abovesaid writ petition and prayed that the appellant be directed to give appointment to him against the vacancy since he happened to be on the select panel.
He also prayed for giving him seniority from the date of 16101987 with all other benefits.
The writ petition was contested on behalf of the appellant and the main plea that was taken by the appellant in their written statement was that the first respondent has no cause of action to challenge the appointment of the second respondent.
A contention was also taken that the moment Mr. Agnihotri the first candidate on the select panel joined and resigned the entire select panel stands scrapped and it is no more operative and, therefore, respondent has no right to claim any benefit on the basis of said select panel.
4.
The learned Single Judge after perusing the pleadings of the parties and circular No. 1673-3-II-56 dated 2231957 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab to all the Administrative Secretaries to Government of Punjab (Annexure P-5) held that the first respondent cannot be denied the appointment inasmuch as the circular dated 2231957 (Annexure P-5) supports him.
Accordingly, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and granted the relief to the first respondent.
It is this decision of the learned Single Judge dated 24101991.
Which is the subject matter of challenge in this Letters Patent Appeal.
5.
Mr. Aggarwal, learned counsel appearing for the appellant State of Punjab drew our attention to Annexure P-5, the circular dated 2231957 and urged that this circular has neither the force of law nor it is a directory one but it is only an enabling provision.
In support of this submission he drew our attention to the decision of this Court in L.P.A. No. 56 of 1993 decided on 391993 rendered by the learned Division Bench.
Assuming that what Mr. Aggarwal says is correct and the effect of the said circular dated 2231957 is only enabling one but this contention does not take the appellant's case any further.
Admittedly, respondent No. 1 was at Serial No. 3 in the select panel.
When respondent No. 2 declined to accept the offer, certainly we see no reason why the candidate at Serial No. 3 be denied an opportunity of being appointed as Assistant Advocate General.
The contention raised on behalf of the appellant that since, Mr. Agnihotri joined and resigned, the select list stands scrapped cannot be accepted.
The object of preparing a select list is to avoid the process of selection being repeated during short interval.
There is no apparent reason to justify why the first respondent be denied the opportunity of being appointed as Assistant Advocate General.
If the case of the first respondent is considered vis-a-vis the 2nd, respondent, who had been appointed, it is quite clear that the second respondent neither applied for the post of Assistant Advocate General in pursuance to the notification nor he was interviewed.
In these circumstances, we are of the opinion that there was no justification for the appellant to deny appointment to the first respondent to the post of Assistant Advocate General.
Mr. Aggarwal urged that the second respondent happened to be working in the office of Advocate General, Punjab and since he was quite familiar with the procedure and practice, he was selected.
This argument has no force and it is just a pretext to deprive the first respondent.
After considering the rival contentions, we are of the opinion that the learned Single Judge was right in granting relief to the first respondent.
There is no substance in the L.P.A. L.P.A. stands dismissed with costs.