Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can the posts of Assistant Professors at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the 'Institute') be reserved exclusively for members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ?
The two petitioners herein challenge the action of the Institute in reserving these posts as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners graduated in Medicine and Surgery in the years 1979 and 1981 respectively.
They passed the Master of Surgery Examination in the years 1984 and 1985.
Besides this, petitioner No. 1 completed his M.Ch.
in Pediatric Surgery July 1987 and petitioner No. 2 in Urology in June, 1989.
Petitioner No. 1 is working as Assistant Professor in the department of Pediatric Surgery on ad hoc basis since December 12, 1988 whereas petitioner No. 2 is working as Assistant Professor in Renal Transplantation on ad hoc basis since September, 1989.
There appointments have been extended from time to time.
3.
In the year 1990, the Institute issued an advertisement inviting applications for 12 posts of Assistant Professors in different specialities.
Eight posts were reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and four for those belonging to the category of Scheduled Tribes.
In this case, we are concerned with the posts in the specialities of Urology, General Surgery (Rental Transplantation) and Pediatric Surgery (Neonatology).
It is averred that according to the advertisement, the "age, postgraduate qualifications and experience" were "relaxable in exceptional cases on the recommendations of the Selection Committee".
It is further averred that the posts of Assistant Professors are specialised technical posts.
Even though all the posts are in identical scale of pay of Rs. 3500-4500, yet all of them belong to different specialities and each post "is an isolated post by itself".
It has been further pointed out that even in the department of Urology where there are three posts of Assistant Professors, a person belonging to the category of Scheduled Castes is already working.
The petitioners have further averred that this very vacancy of Assistant Professor in Urology had been advertised in December, 1989 and was not treated as a reserved post.
A reference has also been made to the recommendation made by Dr. SK Sharma, Professor and Head of the Department of Urology vide his letter dated October 17, 1990 that the post should not be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes/Tribes.
Challenge has also been made to the stipulation in the advertisement that the qualifications and experience can be relaxed.
The petitioners maintain that these posts have to be filled up by open competition and that the reservation thereof is a negation of the constitutional right conferred by Article 16.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, the factual position has not been disputed.
It is, however, claimed that the ad hoc arrangement has been made to last till the "regular selections are held."
It has been further averred that there are 93 posts of Assistant Professors in different specialities in the Institute.
12 posts were lying vacant and "were advertised as reserved for SC/ST candidates because the said vacancies either fall on points reserved for SC and ST candidates and all were carry forward served vacancies as backlog."
It has been further averred that all posts of Assistant Professor "are being treated as combined single cadre."
It is further claimed that there is a unit within the department of General Surgery which deals with Renal Transplantation and that the post of Assistant Professor cannot be treated as an isolated post.
It has been admitted that one post of Assistant Professor (Urology) was advertised but due to certain reasons and/also non-availability of experts, the selection could not be held.
It has also been admitted that "a proposal for exemption of various faculty posts from the purview of reservation being scientific and technical, was placed before the Academic Committee of the Institute in its meeting held on 10390, but the consideration of the said item was deferred."
The respondent points out that on receipt of Government of India's letter dated April 25, 1989 by which a ban had been placed on reservation of vacancies, all the 12 posts of Assistant Professors were treated as reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates.
It is on these premises that the respondent has defended the action in reserving all the 12 posts for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
5.
I have heard Mr. PS Patwalia for the petitioners and M/s DS Nehra and Jagan Nath Kaushal, learned counsel for the respondent.
6.
The Parliament promulgated the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & research, Chandigarh, Act, 1966 on December 19, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
In view of the objects of the Institute it was declared as "an institution of national importance."
It was incorporated with the objects of developing "patterns of teaching in undergraduate and post-graduate medical education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education," "to bring together, as far as may be, in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity" and "to attain self-sufficiency in postgraduate medical education to meet the country's needs for specialists and medical teachers".
To achieve these objects the Institute had been inter alia authorised to prescribe courses and curricula for studies, to establish one or more medical colleges with different departments, hospitals, a dental college, a nursing college, rural and urban health organisations and other institutions for training of different types of health workers etc.
It can train teachers for different medical colleges in the country.
It can hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles in under-graduate and postgraduate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations.
It can do "all other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects."
7.
If the Institute is one of national importance and it functions to attain the avowed objects as enumerated above, it must have an absolute right to select the best talent in every field.
This right should not be trammelled by considerations of caste and creed.
It should not be curtailed by "reservation of appointments of posts in favour of any backward class of citizen which in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the service under the State."
The objects as ordained by the Parliament command the Institute "to bring together.......educational facilities of the highest order......." (Emphasis supplied).
No executive authority, including Government of India, even while acting in the exercise of its right under Article 16(4) of the Constitution can dilute 'the highest' standard.
Any instructions for devaluing merit, which may be issued "for populist considerations" may be violative of the very provisions of the Act and the objects which it has to attain.
8.
Undeniably, the Central Government while issuing instructions regarding reservation of posts etc. for members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes had provided for the grant of exemption in respect of "scientific or technical" posts which existed for "conducting, organising, guiding and directing research."
The faculty position at the Institute eminently qualify to be classified as scientific or technical posts and exempted from the process of reservation.
Even though there was a proposal for the consideration of certain bodies of the Institute for the exemption of these posts from the purview of the orders regarding reservation, it is not clear as to why the decision on the matter was deferred and has not been finalised till now.
In matters of such vital importance utmost urgency should have been attached to the issue.
One can only lament the indifference and hope that the needful shall be done without delay.
The Institute has been established with the object of attaining self-sufficiency in postgraduate medical education to meet the country's needs for specialists and medical teachers.
Its effort can't be impeded by any consideration whatsoever.
9.
It is in this background that the validity of the action of the Institute in making reservation has to be examined.
The petitioners contend that each post is a separate and isolated posts.
The Institute maintains that all the 93 posts of Assistant Professors in different departments and specialities constitute one unified cadre.
It may be, that all posts of Assistant Professors carry the same status and scale of pay.
On a superficial and cursory examination, even the qualification of postgraduate degree in the speciality concerned may lead one to believe that there is no difference between one post and the other.
However, a closer scrutiny would reveal the finer and important difference.
An Assistant Professor in the department of Cardiology will not be qualified to conduct and guide research in the department of Renal Transplantation.
Similarly, an Assistant Professor in Endocrine Surgery shall not be able to train students in the department of Orthopaedics.
In this Institute, where teachers for Postgraduate studies in highly specialised fields have to be trained, each speciality whether super or sub is distinct and separate.
It is, therefore, unscientific, improper and arbitrary to treat all the 93 posts as constituting a single cadre.
Unless it is shown that there is more than one post of Assistant Professor in a particular speciality, each one of the 93 posts would be a separate isolated post.
In this situation, the reservation of such a single post would amount to cent per cent reservation.
It would be violative of the guarantee enshrined under Article 16 of the Constitution.
It would be unconstitutional.
It would be contrary to the rule of law as enunciated by the Apex Court in Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar, AIR 1989 SC 959.
If the three Deputy Directors belonging to the disciplines of Homoeopathy, Unani and Ayurvedic systems constituted separate cadres, as held in Paswan's case (supra), the posts of Assistant Professors in different specialities like Renal Transplantation, Paediatric Surgery (Neonatology) and Urology (Emergency) cannot constitute one cadre.
On this basis alone, the impugned action has to be quashed.
10.
One cannot also forget that even in matters of admissions to postgraduate courses in different specialities and more particularly in the field of medicine, the Apex Court has not permitted institutional preference or reservation in favour of members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes etc.
It has unequivocally held that "the primary consideration in selection of candidates for admission to the medical colleges must, therefore be merit.
The object of any rules which may be made for regulating admissions to the medical colleges must be to secure the best and most meritorious students."
If the most meritorious from amongst the students have to be admitted, the teachers cannot be less than the best.
No reservation can at all be permitted.
11.
Mr. Nehra, who mainly argued the matter, contended that Article 16(4) imposes a constitutional duty and entitles the Institute to make reservations.
It is undoubtedly correct that Clause (4) of Article 16 authorities the State to make reservations.
However, the Constitution also directs the State to grant equality of opportunity to all citizens.
Clause (4) embodies an enabling provision.
It authorities the State to make reservation if it forms an opinion that a backward class "is not adequately represented in the service."
Such a question cannot arise in case of single post.
12.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The impugned advertisement in so far as it relates to the posts of Assistant Professors in the Specialities of Urology (Emergency), General Surgery (Renal Transplantation) and Paediatric Surgery (Neonatology) is quashed.
The Institute shall of course be at liberty to advertise these posts without making any reservation.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.