Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner, who is a Colonel in the Indian Army has filed this writ petition for issuance of a direction to the respondent to promote him to the rank of Brigadier and for quashing the decision of Army Headquarters which his statutory complaint was rejected.
2.
The counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner has excellent service record, Even then he has been denied promotion and the officers junior to him have been promoted to the rank of Brigadier ignoring his superior claim.
According to the counsel, action of the respondents denying promotion to the petitioner is arbitrary and violate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution India.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner had made a request for summoning the petitioner's service record and that of Colonel GG Hundal (now Brigadier).
4.
On the direction, Major SK Aggarwal of Western Command had produced the record.
5.
I have screened the service record of the petitioner and that of Colonel GS Hundal (Now Brigadier) and some other officers besides perusing the DPC proceedings.
6.
A perusal of the paper-book and on the interpretation of the Regulations, it is seen that in Army all promotions to the rank of Lt.
Colonel and above are made by selection.
All officers of a particular batch are screened by a Selection Board on the basis of their overall career profile inter se individual as well as comparative merit.
The Selection Board is constituted under the orders of the Chief of the Army Staff in accordance with para 108 of the Regulation for the Army Act.
The Chief of the Army Staff is the competent authority to approve all promotions upto the rank of Lt.
Colonel, whereas the Central Government is the competent authority to approve all promotions to the rank of Colonel and above.
7.
It is worthwhile to mention that an officer is given three considerations for the purpose of promotion to any rank, which are as under  (a) Fresh consideration; (b) First Review, (c) Final Review.
The Selection Board is constituted of senior officers, the constitution of which is as under :  (a) Chairman Army - Commander of the rank of Lt. Col (1) (b) Members - Maj Gen (2) Lt. Gen. (2).
(c) Secretary - Addl.
MS (B) (d) The attendance of Respective Heads of Army/Services.
8.
For considering the case of an officer for promotion not only the ACRs for 10 years are taken into consideration, but the professional courses done alongwith gradings obtained, war reports, honours and awards, disciplinary punishment, if any, service in high altitude field areas etc., employer ability and potential including consistent recommendation for promotion to next higher rank, are also kept in view.
The crux is that for promotion, ACRs are not the sole criterion.
The other aspects, as mentioned above, are also taken into account.
9.
The Selection Board on the assessment of the career profiles simply makes recommendations and the competent authority is not bound to approve the same.
It is only the Central Government which is final competent authority to approve promotions to the rank of Colonel and above.
It has power to modify, review and approve the recommendation of the Selection Board.
Para 70 of the Regulation for Army Act (1987 Edition) envisages :  "70.
Claim for promotion - Officers will normally be considered for promotion in the order of seniority in their corps, but an officer whose early advancement is in the interest of service may be specially selected for promotion in the rank at the time.
The case of officers, who are superseded for promotion, will be kept under review "in accordance with the existing instructions"  As per existing instructions, an officer, as mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment is given three considerations.
In accordance with Regulations and Law, an officer has a right of consideration for promotion to a selection post.
When a vacancy is to be filled by selection, promotion cannot be claimed as a matter of right on the basis of seniority alone.
10.
In para 11 of the written statement, it has been stated that the petitioner was considered for promotion to the rank of Acting Brigadier by a Selection Board as follows :  (a) Fresh consideration in April 1986 with ACRs upto 1984-85 and graded `R' (unfit) (b) First Review in Nov 1987 with ACRs upto 1986-87 and graded `R' (unfit)  (c) Final Review in May, 1989 with ACRs upto 1987-88 and graded `R' (unfit).
The petitioner having been considered on three occasions in terms of Army Headquarters Letter dated March 9, 1965 copy Annexure R-1, and graded unfit on all the three occasions, was rightly superseded for promotion to the rank of Acting Brigadier.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot raise any legitimate grouse in the matter.
11.
I have perused the service record of the petitioner and some of the officers who have been promoted to the rank of Brigadier.
From the perusal of the same it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that the petitioner's record was better than that of Col GS Hundal (now Brigadier) or anybody else.
12.
The law is will settled that the Court is not to go over and above the proceedings of the Departmental Promotion Committee which had considered the case of eligible candidates for selection to the higher post.
The petitioner was not selected for the post of Brigadier as he failed to obtain the requisite grading/marks on his overall assessment.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
No order as to costs.