VK Bali, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 978, 977 and 940 of 1990.
In all the petitions the prayer is to direct the respondents to consider the petitioners for selection to the post of Primary School Teacher and appointment as such in the Government Primary Schools in the State of Punjab under the Punjab Education Department as they possess the qualifications prescribed in the Punjab Education Service Class III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955.
Brief facts are, however, being taken from C.W.P.
No. 978 of 1990.
2.
The petitioner of the said petition had passed one-year Bal Sevika Training Certificate Course in the year 1978-79 from the Indian Council for Child Welfare.
She had also passed Diploma in Education Part-II in the year 1982, which was from the State of Haryana.
The Punjab Education Department has prescribed qualifications for appointment of the Primary School Teachers as Matric/Higher Secondary with two years JBT certificate.
The petitioner had passed Matriculation with Diploma in Education Part-lI and as such was eligible for appointment as Primary School Teacher in Government as well as privately managed recognised aided schools in the State of Punjab.
The petitioner, on the strength of her qualifications had served in Chheharta Girls High School Chheharta (Amritsar), which was a recognised school.
The Government of Punjab had taken a policy decision on the subject of recognition of Diploma/Certificate awarded by the institutions situated outside the State of Punjab and laid down that any Certificate/Diploma, which is of two years duration and awarded by any institution recogonised by the State in which the institutions is situated, would be automatically deemed equivalent to the Junior Basic Training Certificate awarded by the Punjab Education Department.
It is also provided in the policy aforesaid that if any such Diploma/Certificate was awarded after a period of training which may be less than two years, but had been recognised by the State Government concerned, the holder thereof shall be eligible for appointment of teacher under the Punjab Government.
The petitioner got her name registered with various Employment Exchanges in the State of Punjab for appointment on the post of teacher.
The case of the petitioner is that vide various instructions issued thereafter like instructions dated 2951984, 2091985 and 1681990, the Punjab Government issued three notifications de-recognising the JBT Course (Home Crafts/Home Science) and Diploma in Arts and Crafts, which had been passed from the institutions of State of Haryana and JBT Course from Rajasthan respectively.
The primary contention of the petitioner is that this could not be done and the persons at least, who had done the courses from Haryana or Rajasthan could not be debarred from seeking appointment in the State of Punjab as they had done their courses prior to the aforesaid instructions.
No written statement has been filed in this case.
3.
I need not to go in details of the case and the contention raised by the learned counsel as the matter appears to be squarely covered in favour of the petitioner by a Full Bench decision of this Court in Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab, C.W.P.
No. 13174 of 1991, decided on 2491992 : 1993(1) SCT 770  .
The aforesaid judgment was followed by learned single Judge of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1148 of 1986, decided on 121993.
The Full Bench in the judgment aforesaid has held that on the basis of the Government letter dated 9.5.1960 once particular professional courses were recognised, the de-recognition would not affect those persons, who had obtained such qualification prior to the date of de-recognition.
That being so, this petition has to be allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to consider the petitioner eligible for the post of JBT teacher in the State of Punjab and as and when an occasion might arise, to entertain her application and to decide the case of the selection on merits.
Mr. Chatrath learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that there has been a fresh advertisement for filling up the posts of JBT teachers in the State of Punjab.
It goes without saying that the petitioner shall be considered eligible for applying for the aforesaid post.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.