NC Jain, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of R.S.A.
No. 513 of 1992 filed by the State of Punjab and R.S.A.
Nos. 1361 of 1992 and 1917 of 1991, filed by Lekh Ram Dixit.
Since the facts of all these cases and law points involved are similar, so the cases are being disposed by one judgment.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
These appeals have arisen out of the suit filed by the plaintiff for declaration to the effect that he was entitled to the scale of lecturer of college cadre from 1111973 in the scale of Rs. 700-1600 along with the difference of pay and for mandatory injunction directing the State of Punjab, DPI Colleges, Chandigarh, Pardhan, Acharya Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha and Incharge Government Institute of Modern Indian Languages, Patiala, defendants to complete the service book of the plaintiff since the year 1962 and for further direction to pay the difference of pay and allowances etc. after making necessary correction in the service book.
The case was filed on the basis of certain averments made in the plaint which need to be noticed in detail.
The plaintiff being Shastri (Sanskrit) and Prabhakar in Hindi and Matric English was employed as a language teacher by the Punjab Government in the year 1953.
Thereafter, he passed his FA and BA in English and MA.
both in Sanskrit and Hindi.
He had been a member of faculty of language of Punjabi University in the year 1972-73 and the member of Board of Studies in Sanskrit from the year 1973 to 1975.
He was appointed on these bodies because of his being approved teacher in the college, otherwise he would not have been appointed as has been averred by him in the plaint.
The plaintiff according to his case was approved for appointment as a teacher in Sanskrit and Hindi (Honours in Sanskrit and Hindi, i.e. Shastri and Prabhakar) by the Panjab University Chandigarh on 191965 and by the Punjabi University Patiala on the basis of his qualifications.
The plaintiff passed his MA.
in Sanskrit in the year 1971 from Punjabi University, Patiala and MA in Hindi in the year 1973 and he was placed in Second Division in both the examinations.
The plaintiff has further averred that he passed his Sahitiya Acharya (Sanskrit) from the Sanskrit University, Darbanga in high second division, apart from the various diplomas in Music, which, he has got to his credit, from different recognised institutes.
He was transferred to Government Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha in the year 1965, where he continued teaching the honours classes in Sanskrit and Hindi.
Under the Panjab and Punjabi University Regulations, only qualified and approved person can teach Hindi and Sanskrit honours classes, which he had been teaching.
Punjabi University, vide its letter No. 11475-11525 dated 2741965 approved the qualifications of teachers to teach the classes of honours in Sanskrit and Hindi, which reads as under :-  For Shastri : MA Sanskrit plus Shastri or Acharya plus Shastri 50% each.
For Prabhakar : MA.
Hindi or MA Sanskrit 55% plus Prabhakar 50% or Shastri plus Prabhakar or Shastri, Prabhakar plus BA  It is further the case of the plaintiff that previously Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha remained affiliated upto the year 1970 with the Panjab University, Chandigarh and later on its affiliation vested in the Punjabi University, Patiala.
The Panjab University approved the qualifications and similarly the same was approved even by the Punjabi University.
On the basis of qualifications, the plaintiff was approved as a lecturer by the Panjab University, Chandigarh for teaching honours classes in Sanskrit and Hindi, vide its letter No. Misc. 4150, dated 1731966 w.e.f.
191965.
It is further averred by the plaintiff that the Government of India, vide its letter No. F. 46-1/63-S.U.
dated 2311964 communicated to all State Governments and Registrars to all the Universities in India that they should employ traditional Sanskrit Pandits in their schools and colleges and they should be given due encourgement by treating them at par with other teachers possessing the similar qualifications in general education set-up.
The Punjab Government gave acceptance, vide its letter issued in May, 1968.
In the year 1972, the Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha was upgraded to that of a College and necessary orders were issued by DPI Punjab to the Circle Education Officer, Nabha and District Education Officer, Patiala.
Under the orders of the Government the aforesaid Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya Nabha, was upgraded to College level and the post of Head Teacher was converted into Pradhan Acharya, i.e. the post of Principal in the scale of Rs. 300-600 to that of College Lecturer.
These officers were specifically directed by the Government that they should not transfer or post any person in the college without the approval of DPI, Punjab.
The Government, vide its letter No. 8/33-74 -CI(1) dated 11.9.1974 issued by the DPI Punjab Chandigarh ordered that eight posts of lecturers to the scale of Rs. 300-600 from school cadre were shifted to Government Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha and these posts (classical and vernacular cadre) six in numbers at Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha were withdrawn from that college and the said posts were utilised in other schools in Patiala District.
It was further ordered that these teachers which included the plaintiff would continue to work against the posts of lecturers.
The plaintiff and other lecturers who were approved by the University to teach honours classes were treated as Acharyas, that is, lecturers in college.
The Government vide its order No. 4 ED.(1)-F. 75/5333 dated 431975, conveyed sanction in the encadrement of the post of Pradhan Acharya and Acharya in the Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya, Nabha.
Further the case of the plaintiff is that he had been working as Acharya ever since his status was raised to the college and the post was upgraded.
Further it is averred that in the year 1976-77 the DPI, Punjab transferred one vacant post of Acharya in the scale of Rs. 300-600 from the Government Sanskrit Maha Vidyalaya, Nabha to Government Institute of Oriental and Modern Indian Languages, Patiala.
The plaintiff was transferred to Patiala against the post of Acharya in year 1980.
Prior to the transfer, he was ordered to be transferred to a school cadre in the year 1976-77 and again in the year 1980, which was illegal as Ex. cadre transfers were not permissible.
Both the transfers were cancelled by the Education Minister.
Since the annual increment was not granted to the plaintiff in-spite of his repeated demands, the present suit was filed.
It was prayed that the plaintiff was entitled to the arrears and his pay fixation by adding all the increments from 1962 and completion of his service book and that he was entitled to be granted the pay scale of lecturer of college from 111973 which was Rs. 700-1600.
3.
While opposing the claim of the plaintiff it was averred by the defendants that the suit was not maintainable; it was time barred; the plaintiff has no cause of action and that he was not eligible to the scale of lecturer of college w.e.f.
111973 as he was not integrated in the college cadre.
Certain averments were not denied.
It was admitted that the plaintiff was employed as language teacher in the school cadre in the year 1953.
He was transferred from Government High School, Malewal to Sanskrit Maha Vidyalya Nabha.
The case of the defendant was that teaching virious classes in Sanskrit does not confer any right to the plaintiff to be treated as a college lecturer.
The approval of the plaintiff by the Panjab University does not confer any right upon the plaintiff to be treated as a lecturer, was the specific stand taken by the defendants.
It was specifically averred by the defendants that the selection of lecturers was made through Punjab Public Service Commission and that the status of the plaintiff was that of the teacher.
The relevant pleas of the parties gave rise to the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the mandatory injunction as prayed for ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is time-barred as alleged ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action, whatsoever as alleged ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the notice under Section 80 CPC, served upon the defendants is not legal ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
4.
The trial Court recorded all the findings in favour of the plaintiff.
It was found that the plaintiff was entitled to the grant of lecturer grade.
The plaintiff having not been granted the pay of lecturer even after the cancellation of his transfer orders, he is not entitled to lecturer grade from the year 1972-73, as his claim was barred by time.
The plaintiff cannot be granted the decree of recovery of arrears of salary of a lecturer beyond three years and two months.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeals filed by Lekh Ram Dixit and the State are found to be meritless and are ordered to be dismissed.
However, since the plaintiff has been dragged into filling the suit on account of wrongful act of the defendants, he in my opinion, is entitled to examplary costs of the litigation.
The suit would, therefore, stand decreed partly on payment of costs throughout.
The costs incurred by the plaintiff in all courts are quantified at Rs. 10,000/-.
Appeal dismissed.