PLN Sarma, J - These three writ petitions arise out of transfer orders issued by the respective competent authorities in the Food Corporation of India transferring the writ petitioners to Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
As common questions arise, all the petitions are being disposed of together by a common judgment.
2.
For convenience sake, we will deal with Writ Petition No. 7858 of 1992 as the other two writ petitions follow the same pattern and raise similar contentions.
3.
The sole petitioner in Writ Petition No. 7858 of 1992 joined as 'Senior Godown Keeper' in the Regional Directorate (Food), Southern Region.
Madras, Government of India, Department of (Food) on 27.7.1959.
Consequent on the establishment of Food Corporation of India under Food Corporation Act, 1964 (Act No. 17 of 1964), he was transferred to the First respondent along with other employees and he is presently working as Assistant Manager, (Depot) Grader-II, Food Corporation Godown at Samalkota, East Godavari District.
In Writ Petition No. 8690 of 1992, the two writ petitioners were working presently as Assistant Grade-I (Technical) having been transferred to Food Corporation of India on its formation.
Likewise, four petitioners in WP No. 8695 of 1992 were also working as Assistant Grade-I (Depot).
Insofar as petitioners 2, 3 and 4 are concerned, it is represented before us by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, that the transfer orders of 4th petitioner were cancelled even before the counter was filed in these proceedings and that they cancelled the orders in respect of petitioners 2 and 3 on 29.8.1992.
With the result, it is not necessary to decide the writ petition insofar as petitioners 2, 3 and 4 in Writ Petition No. 8695 of 1992 is concerned and on the writ petition no orders need be passed insofar as petitioners 2, 3 and 4 are concerned.
4.
All the petitioners in these writ petitions are challenging the orders of transfer issued by the competent authorities transferring them from the present post to Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
5.
To appreciate the contentions, it is necessary to refer to certain facts, which are either admitted or borne out of the record.
Food Corporation of India was established under Food Corporation Act, 1964 (Act 17 of 1964) for the purpose of work relating to storage, movement, distribution and sale of food-grains etc. For the above mentioned purposes, country is divided into four zones, each zone is under the charge of Zonal Manager.
The headquarters of South zone is located at Madras and it has jurisdiction over the States of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Pondicherry and Andhra Pradesh.
North Zone has its headquarters at New Delhi and covers Union Territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and States of Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands being under the administrative control of Union Territories, was under the control of Regional Director Food (Department of Food), Northern Region, New Delhi.
It is stated that the foodgrains are being moved to Andaman and Nicobar Islands from the Ports of Visakhapatnam, Madras and Hoogly.
Necessary foodgrains to Andaman and Nicobar Islands are being supplied mainly from Andhra Pradesh and the Southern Zone was entrusted with the construction of the godown at Port Blair.
After its construction, it was decided to appoint a senior and experienced Officer to man the newly constructed godown at Port Blair.
Since the food stocks are being supplied from Andhra Pradesh, second respondent transferred the work relating to supply of foodgrains to the godown at Port Blair to the control of Senior Regional Officer, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad.
In the light of the above facts, we have to consider the question arising in the writ petitions.
6.
The orders of transfer are challenged by the petitioners in these three writ petitions firstly on the ground that attachment of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, for the purpose of storage and distribution, to the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Hyderabad and also the decision of the Zonal Manager that the newly opened godown at Port Blair should be entrusted to a Senior Manager (Depot) is incorrect and unsustainable.
According to the writ petitioners, the foodgrains are being moved from the Ports of Visakhapatnam, Madras and Hoogly and the transport facilities are available to the Islands from the said Ports and not from the Port of Kakinada and that since the construction work of the godown was entrusted to the Regional Office at Madras, the maintenance of the said godown was also ought to have been entrusted to the Regional Office at Madras only and that the godown having capacity of above 2,000 Metric Tonnes and less than 5,000 Metric tonnes only to be placed incharge of Assistant Grade II (Depot).
But the godown at Port Blair has capacity of more than 5,000 Metric tonnes it should be placed incharge of Assistant Grade-I (Depot) and the transfer of the petitioners is in violation of the rule not to disturb the individual for a period of three years at a particular place of his posting and that the transfer orders were issued on the basis of 'pick-and-choose' policy.
7.
It is stated in the counter filed on behalf of the respondents that the foodgrains necessary for Andaman and Nicobar Islands are being supplied actually from Andhra Pradesh through Kakinada Port.
While so, Food Corporation of India decided to have a godown of its own at Port Blair and directed the Southern Zone to construct the same in view of the fact that the transport facilities are there from the Ports in Southern Zone via Madras etc.
The godown constructed by the Southern Zone at Port Blair came under the administrative control of Southern Zone.
Since the foodgrains are supplied to Andaman and Nicobar Islands from the surplus stocks in East Godavari District, the supply of foodgrains to Andaman and Nicobar Islands is placed under the control of Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Hyderabad.
In view of the fact that the required quantity of food grains are being supplied from Andhra Pradesh through Kakinada Port, first respondent decided that it would be convenient to the Southern Zone to supply the foodgrains to the Islands.
In order to facilitate the supply of foodgrains to the residents of the Islands under the public distribution system, the southern zone was instructed to construct the godown at Port Blair.
Having regard to the fact that for the first time godown of the capacity of 5,000 Metric tonnes was constructed at Andaman and Nicobar Islands, first respondent decided to post a senior and experienced Officer like the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 7858 of 1992, for manning the godown at Port Blair and others who are having technical qualification as the maintenance and storage of the newly constructed godown requires quality control.
8.
It is further stated in the counter that since the foodgrains are being supplied from the surplus stocks in East Godavari District, supply of foodgrains to Andaman and Nicobar Islands is placed under the control of Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Hyderabad.
These are all policy matters arrived at taking into consideration the interest of the administration and also the maintenance and storage of the newly constructed godown at Port Blair and the same cannot be the subject-matter of a writ petition and, therefore, the writ petitions are not maintainable.
9.
These writ petitions relate to transfer of the petitioners from one place to another for the purpose of maintaining the newly constructed godown and storage of foodgrains therein.
The attachment of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, for the purpose of construction of godown, to Southern Zone and attaching the same to the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Hyderabad for supply of foodgrains are all matters which cannot be gone into in a writ petition under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India, the remedy being an extraordinary one.
Even otherwise, no material is placed before us to establish that the policy decisions taken by the first respondent herein and implemented by the other respondents are not in the best interest of the administration.
Therefore, it is not possible for us to go into the decision taken by the first respondent herein attaching Andaman and Nicobar Islands, for the purpose of supply of foodgrains, and maintenance of godown to the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, Hyderabad, second respondent herein.
10.
The other ground raised by the petitioners in these writ petitions that they have not completed the normal period of three years in their respective posts and, therefore, they should not be disturbed also has no substance.
From what is stated above, it is clear that the godown was constructed for the first time at Port Blair and it also requires senior men for its maintenance and storage of foodgrains therein.
According to the counter, it requires technical personnel.
When the godown was constructed for the first time at Port Blair and senior and technical personnel are to be posted in the best interest of the maintenance and storage of food grains therein, the normal period of three years cannot come in the way.
It is for the administration to transfer personnel to the newly constructed godown in the best interest of administration.
It is stated in the counter that only available senior person like the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 7858 of 1992 was transferred to be kept incharge of the newly constructed godown at Port Blair.
It is also stated that except such of those persons who were transferred in recent months, there is no other senior in the category to which the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 7858 of 1992 belongs.
It is true that every individual will have his own difficulties, but the same cannot come in the way of transfer when the person accepted the job the incumbent of which is transferable.
11.
One of the objections raised on behalf of the writ petitioners was that pursuant to the circular issued by the first respondent with regard to the facilities and allowances to the corporation employees posted to Andaman and Nicobar Islands, they can only be posted after obtaining options and no such option was asked for from the petitioners in these writ petitions and therefore, the order of transfer is bad.
12.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the respondent, across the bar, that in fact options were called for from all the persons in the region, but none gave options and, therefore, the administration had to go into the question and transferred the petitioners in these writ petitions, taking into consideration the administrative convenience.
It is also clearly stated by the learned counsel for the respondents, on the basis of the letter received by him from the Regional Office, Hyderabad, that the order of transfer issued to the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 7858 of 1992 is only for a period not exceeding one year from the date of his reporting at Port Blair and that there are no seniors in the category to which the petitioner in WP No. 7858 of 1992 belongs and that the persons who are transferred will have all the facilities and financial benefits at Andaman and Nicobar Islands as laid down by the respondents.
So is the case in respect of other petitions.
13.
There is absolutely no allegation in the affidavits filed in support of the writ petitions attributing mala fides to the respondents for issuing transfer orders.
The only allegation made was that the transfers were made on the basis of 'pick and choose' policy, for which there was no foundation and in fact no details are given in the affidavits filed in support of the writ petitions.
The subject-matter of these writ petitions is only orders transferring the petitioners to Andaman and Nicobar Islands and it is necessary to bear in mind in this connection the limitations of High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India while dealing with orders of transfer.
In Union of India v. HN Kirtania, 1989(4) SLR 9 (SC), the learned Judges of the Supreme Court categorically held that, transfer of a public servant made on administrative grounds or in public interest should not be interfered with unless there are strong and pressing grounds rendering the transfer order illegal on the ground of violation of statutory rules or on ground of mala fides.
The learned Judges also stated that when a person accepts a job which is transferable and transfer is incidental to the service, the order of transfer should not be interfered with by the Courts ordinarily.
We do not find any such ground in the impugned orders.
14.
Having regard to the above, we are not inclined to interfere with the impugned orders.
Accordingly, these three writ petitions are dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.