SD Aggarwala, C.J.
(Oral) - These are two Letters Patent Appeals No. 1004 of 1990 and 740 of 1990, directed against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated February 13, 1990, passed in Writ Petition No. 6188 filed by Meenakshi Singla.
2.
Facts giving rise to these appeals are as follows :-  3.
Meenakshi Singla was appointed as Junior Lecturer (Chemistry) in Government polytechnic, Bhatinda, on adhoc basis for six months or until a candidate recommended by the Board joined whichever is earlier vide an appointment letter dated October 4, 1985 against general category post.
It is not disputed that the petitioner joined immediately on the post of Junior Lecturer in pursuance of the appointment letter and she continued to work on that post even after the expiry of six months.
On September 1, 1986, the Government of Punjab issued instruction which have been attached as Annexure P-2, to the writ petition.
These instructions directed that services of all adhoc employees to Class III posts who have completed one year service on April 1, 1985, be regularised.
In regard to those, who had not completed one year of service, instructions provided that the adhoc employees appointed after April 1, 1984 and had not completed one year of service shall be invited for interview and shall be considered along with other adhoc employees appointed after April 1, 1984 in regard to the vacant post.
In regard to the post of Junior Lecturer in Chemistry, Meenakshi Singla was not called for interview and Smt. Pritpal Kaur respondent No. 4 in the writ petition was appointed.
Meenakshi Singla consequently filed a writ petition for issue of a direction for quashing the appointment of Pritpal Kaur on the post of Junior Lecturer in Chemistry and also sought the relief that she should not be allowed to join the post and Meenakshi Singla be allowed to continue on the post.
This petition came up for hearing before the learned Single Judge.
The learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab, the petitioner was entitled to be called for interview but wrongly she was not called for interview.
It is also not disputed that initially, vacancy was reserved for Scheduled Caste candidate and respondent No. 4 did not belong to that class but she was one of the Displaced Persons by virtue of 1984 riots.
In these circumstances, the learned Single Judge directed that appointment of respondent No. 4 be not quashed as she had already been working on the post for the last three years and directed that Meenaskhi Singla be appointed now on the post of Junior Lecturer in Chemistry but she will not be entitled to the salary for the past period.
4.
Aggrieved by the decision of the learned Single judge, two appeals have been filed in this Court, Letter Patent Appeal No. 740 of 1990 has been filed by the State of Punjab and others assailing the order of the learned Single judge, on the ground that the learned Single judge erred in directing the appointment.
Meenakshi Singla has, however, filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 1004 of 1990 on the ground that she was entitled to past wages from the date when she was entitled to be appointed but was not appointed till the date of appointment.
5.
We have heard Addl.
Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the State of Punjab as well as the respondents counsel in these appeals.
6.
Learned counsel for the State of Punjab urged that the appointment of Meenakshi Singla was made vide order dated October 4, 1985 for six months or till a regularly selected candidate by the Board joined the post in question, thereafter, Meenakshi Singla has no right to continue on the post and as such, appointment letter could not be issued to her.
7.
In so far as this contention is concerned, we agree with the learned counsel for the State of Punjab that the appointment letter of the petitioner was no doubt for a period of six months or till a candidate duly elected by the Board joined the post in question but here the question for consideration is entirely different.
In accordance with the instructions date April 15, 1986, issued by the State of Punjab, Meenakshi Singla was entitled to be considered along with other adhoc employees to be appointed on vacant post.
This position cannot be disputed.
Meenaskhi Singla was not considered at all and respondent No. 4 Pritpal Kaur was appointed.
From the qualifications which has been mentioned in the petition, we find that Meenaskhi Singla is MSc, MPhil and PhD in Chemistry with high academic records whereas Pritpal Kaur possessed only degree of MSc.
In case, Meenaskhi Singla would have been called for interview, there were all chances that she would have been selected on the post in question.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the finding recorded by the learned Single judge is wrong that Meenaskhi Singla has a right to be considered on the post in question and she suffered because of her not being considered for the said post.
8.
In the instant case, it is also not disputed that respondent No. 4 has been continuing to work since November, 1986 and had been called for interview and was at that time selected on the said post.
In the interest of justice, we do not feel it necessary to set aside for order passed in favour or Pritpal Kaur as she has already been working on the post in question for the last more than six years.
9.
In normal circumstances since Meenaskhi Singla was only entitled to be considered for appointment, this Court would not have granted the prayer of Meenaskhi Singla, but since we are of the view that undoubtedly if she would have been considered by the Selection Committee, she would have been selected and as such in view of these special circumstances of the case, it would be in the interest of justice to direct that Meenaskhi Singla be appointed now on the post of Junior Lecturer Chemistry in order to give relief to the irreparable hardship caused to her.
We, therefore, think it proper to direct that Meenaskhi Singla be now appointed on the post of Junior Lecturer in Chemistry or in any equivalent post if there is a vacancy in any of these posts.
10.
Learned counsel appearing for the State of Punjab has urged that since the selection was made in respect of the post reserved for a Scheduled Caste candidate, Meenaskhi Singla had no right to the said post.
That may be so, but Pritpal Kaur whom the State Government appointed, does not belong to Scheduled Caste and, therefore, Meenaskhi Singla cannot be denied her right on the said post for being considered in accordance with her qualifications.
11.
In so far as the appeal of Meenaskhi Singla is concerned, learned counsel for the appellant has urged that she is entitled to the past salary.
In our opinion, this submission of the learned counsel is without any substance as the petitioner had only the right to be considered for appointment but when she is actually not appointed, the question of past salary does not arise.
We do not find any force in the appeal filed by Meenaskhi Singla.
In the result, Letters Patent Appeal No. 1004 of 1990 is dismissed.
Letters Patent Appeal No. 740 of 1990 is disposed of with a modification that Smt. Meenaskhi Singla shall be appointed on the post of Junior Lecturer (chemistry) now redesignated as Lecturer in Chemistry or in any other equivalent post.
In case, any vacancy arises in the department for the said post, the petitioner shall be appointed within a period of one month from the date of vacancy.
In case, vacancy is already existing, Smt. Meenaskhi Singla shall be appointed within a month from the date a certified copy of the order is produced before the authority.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.