Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This writ petition is filed by Constable Zile Singh of Haryana Police, seeking direction to the respondents to depute him to Lower School Course.
The petitioner has claimed his admission to the said course on the basis of his excellent performance in the written test and has challenged the admission of respondents 5 to 8 to the course which had commenced on July 1, 1991,  2.
The case of the petitioner is that he alongwith 55 other Constables had appeared in the written test but only 55 were declared successful.
Respondent No. 5 Bhup Singh had failed in the written test.
Despite that, he had been selected for admission to the Lower School Course.
The other plea is that Kanshi Ram respondent No. 6 had never appeared in the test.
But he too has been deputed for training to the said course.
The counsel contended that the candidates who were close to the High dignitaries have been deputed for training to the Lower School Course in violation of the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules.
The counsel further contended that the names of the selected candidates are entered in the list in order of merit determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee, on the basis of the tests and parade, written test, interview and examination of service record.
The candidate has to obtain at least 50% marks in each of the tests.
Kanshi Ram respondent No. 6 had obtained only 5 marks in the examination of service record and as such he should not have been deputed to the Lower School Course.
It has also been argued that the respondents had awarded more than the prescribed marks on the assessment of service record which is contrary to the Punjab Police Rules.
According to the learned counsel the petitioner was higher in merit in view of his performance in the tests.
Despite that, he has not been deputed to the said course in an arbitrary manner.
3.
In the reply filed by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, respondent No. 4, on behalf of respondents 1 to 4, it has been stated that 419 Constables including two lady Constables were eligible to appear in B-I test held on 1511991 at Sirsa.
339 Constables including two lady Constables appeared in B-I test on 1511991.
56 Constables including Bhup Singh respondent No. 5 had passed the written test and had secured 26 marks out of 50.
The respondents have denied that any list was displayed.
The result was announced verbally on 1611991 at Police Lines, Sirsa.
32 seats were allocated to Sirsa district.
56 Constables had qualified the written test out of whom 54 had qualified all the tests.
Therefore, merit list was prepared in accordance with the provisions of Rule 13.7 of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) as applicable in the State of Haryana and the selection was made accordingly.
The name of the petitioner figured at serial No. 50 of the list and had secured only 60 marks.
As per the seats allocated i.e. 32, the Constable at Serial No. 32 had secured 68-1/2 marks.
The respondents have denied that Kanshi Ram respondent No. 6 had not appeared in the test.
It has been stated that Kanshi Ram had appeared in the examination and selected for training on the basis of performance in the written test.
In Para 5 of the written statement it has been categorically denied that only 15 marks are allotted for Character Roll.
4.
The learned Deputy Advocate General had contended that there are no fixed marks for the assessment of service record which is done on the basis of education, courses passed and commendation certificate during service.
It was argued with vehemence by the Deputy Advocate General that candidates were selected on the basis of their performance in parade, written test, interview and examination of service record.
5.
On the direction of the Court, the respondents have also produced the case file pertaining to the selection of candidates to the Lower School Course.
6.
I have considered the respective submissions of the counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
7.
In order to appreciate the arguments of the learned counsel or the parties, it will be worthwhile to advert to the Provisions of Punjab Police Rules.
Relevant extract of Rule 13.7 of the Rules is as under :  "..... Names shall be entered in the order of merit, determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of tests in  (i) Parade, (ii) Written test in general law, (iii) Interview and (iv) Examination of Service record;" The interview and examination of service record do not constitute test in view of the abovesaid provision of the rules.
Sub-Rule (3) of the Rules reads as :  ".......
The candidates will have to obtain at least 50% of the marks in each test.
The maximum marks for each test shall be 100.
The syllabus for the parade and written test shall be prescribed by the Inspector-General through a Standing order, which may be reviewed after every three years."
(4) "The assessment of service record will be done on the basis of education, courses passed and commendation certificates earned during the service.
The marks assigned to these shall be as follows :  i) Education : BA and above ... 5 marks Matric and above ... 3 marks Middle and above ... 2 marks ii) Course passed : Courses upto 1 month duration ... 1 mark Courses upto 3 months duration ... 2 marks Courses upto 6 months duration ... 3 marks Courses upto 9 months duration ... 4 marks Courses exceeding 9 months duration ... 5 marks iii) Commendation certificates : Class I 3 marks Class II 2* subject Class III 1* to a maximum of 15 marks for both 8.
A perusal of the extract of sub-rule (1) of Rule 13.7 of the Rules reveals that only two tests have been prescribed, i.e. parade and written test.
The interview and examination of service record by no stretch of imagination can be held to be tests.
Marks in the interview are given on the performance in interview and the marks for the examination of service record are given on the basis of education, courses passed and commendation certificates earned during service.
The examination of record too is not a test.
The rule is that a candidate has to obtain 50 per cent of the marks in each test i.e. written and parade tests.
A candidate is to secure 50% marks in these two tests and is not required to obtain 50% marks in interview and examination of service record.
The contention of the petitioner's counsel that more than 15 marks cannot be assigned for examination of service record does not find favour with the Court.
The break-up of the marks assigned for assessment of service record has been given in sub-rule (4) of Rule 13.7 of the Rules.
A candidate under group (i) cannot be given more than 5 marks for education.
A candidate who has passed all the courses under group (ii) will be entitled to 15 marks.
Under group (iii) if a candidate is in possession of commendation certificate of Class I he shall be entitled to three marks, for Class II, 2 marks and for Class III, 1 mark subject to a maximum of 15 for both.
A Graduate candidate who had passed all the courses and is in possession of Class-I, Class-II and Class-III certificates, he will be entitled to 28 marks.
In view of this it cannot be said that marks are to be assigned from only 15 marks as no limit is prescribed under sub-rule (4).
9.
The relevant merit of the petitioner vis-a-vis other respondents 5 to 8 is as under :-  Candidate Law Paper Parade Interview Record Total Devi Singh 28-1/2 24 4 19 75-1/2 Ranbir Singh 25-1/2 24 4 18 71-1/2 Bhup Singh 26 22 4 18 70 Kanshi Ram 36-1/2 24 4 5 69-1/2 Zile Singh, (Petitioner) 25 16 3 16 60 10.
The petitioner had secured 50th position and no candidate, who was lower in merit to the petitioner, has been deputed for training to the Lower School Course.
The respondents had prepared a merit list of 54 candidates out of which only 30 candidates have been deputed, the last being Kanshi Ram, respondent No. 6.
I find no illegality in the impugned selection of Constables for admission to Lower School Course.
11.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.