Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was enrolled as a Nursing Assistant (a Sepoy) in the Army Medical Corps on October 14, 1965 rose to the rank of Havildar on January 5, 1986.
Having not been promoted to the rank of Naib Subedar, the petitioner was discharged from service on October 31, 1989 after he had completed 24 years of service.
His grievance is that the confidential report on his work and performance for the year 1988 was recorded and reviewed by an officer who had not actually watched his work.
As a result, he was graded as high average.
It was on account of this report that the petitioner was considered as ineligible for the post of Naib Subedar.
Later on, the report was initiated by the competent officer and the petitioner's performance was assessed as above-average.
That report was not taken into consideration.
If the later report had been taken into consideration, the petitioner was bound to be promoted as Naib Subedar.
Then he would have been entitled to continue to serve for a period of 26 years ie till October 31, 1991.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not promoting him to the rank of Naib Subedar, the petitioner filed a statutory complaint to the Chief of the Army Staff in June 1989.
The complaint having been rejected vide orders dated November 30, 1989, the petitioner represented to the Central Govt. Having failed to get a favourable order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner's annual confidential report for the year 1988 was initiated by Col. PRD Math and was reviewed by Maj. Gen. OP Bhardwaj, Ex. DDMS, 15 Corps.
It has been further averred that the petitioner had worked under the initiating officer from February 2, 1988 to December 1, 1988.
As such, Col.
Math was competent to initiate the report on the petitioner.
The written statement further points out that the petitioner was rightly graded as High -Average and as such he was ineligible for promotion "because he was not graded Above Average in the ACR for 1988".
With regard to the petitioner's averment that on noticing the mistake an effort was made to correct the error and as a result, on the direction of Brig.
Mukerjee, a proper report on him was initiated by Maj. (Mrs.) A Sen which had been accepted by Brig.
Mukerjee.
It has been averred that "the petitioner has not quoted reference of this office letter under which the fresh ACR for 1988 said to have been initiated by Maj. (Mrs.) A Sen was returned being unacceptable by this office.
In the absence of the reference, the letter in question cannot be traced."
Rest of the averments have also been controverted.
The petitioner had then filed an additional affidavit reiterating the stand taken by him in the petition.
It has been mentioned that it was somewhere around July, 1989 that the report recorded by Maj (Mrs.) A Sen and accepted by Brig Mukerjee was forwarded to the record office.
3.
I have heard Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. HS Giani, for the respondents.
In paragraph 7 of the writ petition, a categorical averment has been made that the M. I.
Room where the petitioner was posted was not under the control of the Assistant Director, Medical Services viz. Col. PRD Math.
It has been further averred that the work and performance of the petitioner was always assessed by the Officer Incharge, MI Room and DDMS was the reviewing officer in respect of the petitioner.
In reply to this averment, it has been stated in the written statement - "that on para No. 7 no comments."
It is thus apparent that the specific plea raised by the petitioner to the effect that Col.
Math was not the officer under whom he had worked, that the MI Room where he was posted was not under his control and the work and performance of the petitioner was to be assessed by the Officer Incharge of the MI Room, has not been denied.
It is in the background of this factual position that the petitioner's averment with regard to the fact that Brig.
Mukerjee had proceeded to rectify and as such Maj. (Mrs.) A Sen had initiated a report on the petitioner's performance for the year 1988, and assessed him as above-Average, has to be considered.
The reply even to this averment in paragraph 9 of the written statement is absolutely vague.
Further the petitioner's assertion in the additional affidavit that around July, 1989 the report was forwarded to the Record Office with the request that the earlier report initiated by Col.
Math be treated as withdrawn has not been rebutted by filing any affidavit.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration it appears to be clear to me that Col.
Math was actually not competent to record the report on the petitioner's performance.
Since, this specific averment that the MI Room was not under the control of Col.
Math has not been denied and it has merely been denied that the averment needs no comments, it is reasonable to presume that the averment has been admitted.
It follows logically that Col.
Math could not have recorded a report regarding the petitioner's performance.
4.
In this situation, it follows that only Maj. (Mrs.) A Sen who was the incharge of MI Room could have initiated the report on the petitioner's performance.
The reply filed on behalf of the respondents is vague.
Even if the stand taken by the respondents is assumed to be correct, then it is understandable that she was the only competent authority to initiate the report.
Consequently, in case there is no report recorded by Maj. (Mrs.) A Sen, it would be appropriate to direct the respondents to get a report from her for the year 1988 regarding the petitioner's performance.
If on examination of records, the respondents find that in fact she had sent a report and Brig.
Mukerjee had accepted that report and that it had been actually forwards to the Record Office, sometimes around July, 1989, then the petitioner's claim for promotion to the rank of Naib Subedar has to be considered and reviewed in accordance with the assessment recorded in that report.
As such, it appears appropriate to me to direct the respondents to reconsider the petitioner's claim after ascertaining the position with regard to his assessment for the year 1983.
5.
Before parting with the judgment it is appropriate to mention that reply on behalf of the respondents has been filed by an officer posted at Chandimandir.
The contents of the reply have been verified "true and correct to my knowledge ......" Firstly, it is extremely doubtful that an officer posted at Chandimandir would actually have any knowledge with regard to the facts of the case.
Secondly, there is no reference made to any record.
Even the reply is stated to be based on belief, but no basis for the belief entertained by him has been disclosed in the written statement.
The affidavit on behalf of the respondents does not meet with the requirements of Order 19 Rule 3, CPC.
Irrespective of that, the reply has been considered.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for appointment as Naib Subedar on ascertaining correct position or getting a fresh report on his performance from the concerned officer.
The needful shall be done within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The orders rejecting the petitioner's complaint passed by the Chief of the Army Staff are set aside.
In case the petitioner is found suitable for appointment as Naib Subedar, consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc. shall follow.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.