Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Draftsman in the year 1957.
He was promoted to the post of Shift Engineer in 1978.
On June 21, 1985, the Establishment Sub-Committee of Haryana Cooperative Sugar Mills, Rohtak (hereinafter referred to as 'the Society') decided to promote the petitioner to the post of Deputy Chief Engineer.
A copy of the order of promotion issued by the Managing Director on June 22, 1985 is at Annexure P 1 with the writ petition.
The proceedings of the Establishment Sub-Committee are at Annexure P.2 Under the orders of the Registrar Cooperative Societies, Haryana (hereinafter referred to as 'the Registrar'), the matter was placed before the Board of Directors in the meeting held on November 29, 1985.
At this meeting it is averred that the Board found that the promotion could be made with the approval of the Establishment Sub-Committee and that the matter was not required to be placed before the Board of Directors.
Mr. SN Goyal, who was present at the meeting as a nominee of the Registrar, disagreed with the view expressed by the Directors of the Sugar Mill and recorded his note of dissent.
Vide letter dated December 14,1985, the Managing Director referred the matter to the Government.
A copy of the letter is placed on record as Annexure P.7.
The factum of the dissent recorded by the nominee of the Registrar has been specifically noticed.
Note of dissent recorded by Mr. Goyal as reproduced in the letter at Annexure P.7 reads as under  "Shri SN Goyal, Member of the Board (Nominee of the R.C.S.
), however, disagreed with this and recorded his note of dissent as under : "Dissent note on the following additional agenda item :  "Promotion of Shri YS Gulia, Shift Engineer, to the vacant post of Deputy Chief Engineer."
The item has been put up for consideration and it cannot be dropped without considering the matter.
2.
I oppose this promotion of Sh. YS Gulia as Deputy Chief Engineer on the following grounds :-  a) That he does not possess the qualifications even for the post of a Shift Engineer.
So the question of his promotion to such senior post of Deputy Chief Engineer does not arise.
b) Simply because he has been given a higher grade than that of a Draftsman, he does not acquire academic qualifications.
This car at the most be considered as a personal grade to the draftsman.
c) This promotion has been made against the decision of the Board of Directors whereby the qualifications were laid down for this post.
d) Giving as such high a pay on promotion amounts to financial impropriety.
e) The post of Deputy Chief Engineer is not a promotion post and the Board had never decided it to be filled by promotion the Committee was not competent to fill up this post by promotion."
It was further observed in the letter as under :-  "The R.C.S.
or his nominee is one of the members of the Board of Directors appointed under Section 29 of the Act ibid.
Shri SN Goyal, IAS has been attending the meetings of the Board of Directors as a nominee of the R.C.S.
In the instant case, a difference of opinion in respect of the relevant matter of agenda item 15 i.e. whether the item in view of the fact and circumstances of the case can be dropped from the agenda, has arisen between a member nominated by the Government and other members of the Board of Directors.
The matter is accordingly referred to the State Government under Section 29(3) of the Act ibid which reads as follows : "Section 29(3) : Where a difference of opinion in respect of any matter arises between any member nominated by the Government or the Managing in Director appointed under Section 31 other members thereof, the matter shall be referred by the Society to the Government whose decision thereon shall be final and deemed to be a decision taken by the Committee."
We shall feel much grateful if you kindly have the matter examined in its depth taking into account the relevant facts and provisions of Act, Rules and Bye-laws and communicate the decision of the State Government in this behalf."
In pursuance to this reference, the Government vide its order dated July 3,1986 set aside the order of the Board of Directors and accepted the view recorded by Mr. SN Goyal.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P-10.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
The primary grievance made by the petitioner in this petition is two- fold.
Firstly it has been averred that the provisions of Section 29 were not attracted to the facts of the present case.
Secondly, the claim of the petitioner is that a large number of persons possessing the same qualifications as those possessed by the petitioner are working in various other Sugar Mills in the State and that the petitioner has alone been singled out for this promotion.
It has also been stated that no qualifications have been prescribed by the Registrar for the purpose of promotion from the post of Shift Engineer to that of Chief Engineer and in such a situation, the order of his reversion was wholly illegal.
Allegations of mala fide against respondent No. 4 have also been made.
It has been suggested that he was interested in the appointment of his son Mr. Sudhir Kumar Abrol, who was junior to the petitioner and as such all actions had been manoeuvred against the petitioner.
4.
The allegations of mala fide have been controverted by Mr. KP Abrol by filing a written statement.
On behalf of the other respondents initially a short written statement had been filed by Smt. Ved Kumari, Deputy Secretary to Government, which was followed by a written statement by the Additional Registrar.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Board was not considering the validity of the petitioner's promotion but only as to whether or not the matter should be discussed.
In such a situation there was no occasion for Mr. Goyal to record his views regarding the validity of the petitioner's promotion or for the Govt. to annul it.
He also contended that in fact it is only in a case which has financial implication that matter is required to be referred to the Government.
The appointment of the petitioner had no financial implication at all and as such no reference to the Government was required.
It has been further contended that the action of the Government is wholly arbitrary and discriminatory.
Mr. Rajan Gupta, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos.
I and 2 has controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
Section 29 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984 provides as under :-  "Section 29.
Nomination and co-option Committee -  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section 28 -  (a) Where the Government has -  (i) subscribed to the share capital of a cooperative society; or (ii) guaranteed the principal and interest in respect of debentures issued by the society; or (iii) guaranteed the principal and interest in respect of loans and advances to the society; or (iv) assisted the society with loans and grants by not less than one lakh rupees, the Government or any persons authorised by it shall have the right to nominate on the managing committee of such society not more than three members or one-third of the total number of elected members of such committee, whichever is less.
(b) Where the Industrial Finance Corporation, the State Finance Corporation, or any other financing institution or any employer notified in this behalf by the Government has provided finance to a Cooperative Society the Industrial Finance Corporation, the State Finance Corporation or the other financing institution or the employer, as the case may be, shall have the right to nominate one person on the committee.
(2) A person nominated under sub-section (1) shall hold office during the pleasure of the authority who nominated him.
(3) Where a difference of opinion in respect of any matter arises between any member nominated by the Government or the Managing Director appointed under Section 31 and members thereof, the matter shall be referred by the Society to the Government whose decision thereon shall be final and deemed to be a decision taken by the Committee.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws of a society, the Government may, by general or special order, direct that on the committee of such society or class of societies, as the Government may specify, there shall be cooptedy members of the society one-third members belonging to the weaker section out of whom at least one such members shall belong to the Scheduled Caste.
Provided that such co-option shall not be made if one-third members belonging to the weaker section including that of Scheduled Caste have been elected on such committee :  Provided further that in case no such co-operation is made, the Registrar may nominate such number of members.
7.
A perusal of the above mentioned provisions would show that where the government has assisted the Society with loans and grants by not less than one lakh rupees, it has a right to nominate on the Managing Committee of such society not more than three members or one-third of the total number of elected members of such committee, whichever is less.
It is also obvious that where a difference of opinion in respect of any matter arises between any member nominated by the Government or the Managing Director appointed under Section 31 and other members of the Society, the matter has to be referred to the Government.
Clause (3) renders the decision of the Government as final.
8.
The first question that arises for consideration is as to whether or not the appointment of the petitioner had financial implication.
Mr. Patwalia relying on the judgment in Lashkar Singh & others v. State of Punjab and others, 1985 PU 503, contends that it is only in case which has financial implication that matter is required to be referred to the Government.
He contends that the Sugar Mill had to appoint one or the other person as a Deputy Chief Engineer and the appointment of the petitioner did not have any financial implication.
This matter is concluded by a judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 5513 of 1985 which was decided on February 27, 1986.
Their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :  "We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and find no merits in petition.
It may be observed at the outset that the learned counsel did not challenge before us the appointment of the Assistant Registrar as Government nominee on the Board of Directors.
What was sought to be contended by the learned counsel was that it was not essential to refer the matter to the Government on the basis of note of dissent recorded by the Assistant Registrar.
As contended by the learned counsel, the note of dissent could be recorded only in those matters in which financial implication was involved and as the appointment of the petitioners did not involve any financial implication, the matter was not required to be referred to the Government on account of the note of dissent.
This contention of the learned counsel on the face of it, is fallacious.
The appointment of the petitioners did not involve financial implication and it was on that account that on the basis of the note of dissent.
The reference was made to the Government."
In view of the above pronouncement of the Division Bench, this contention cannot be sustained.
9.
Learned counsel further contends that Mr. SN Goyal was only a nominee of the Registrar.
He was not a nominee of the government.
Learned counsel submits that Section 29(3) is attracted only in a case where a difference of opinion arises between any member nominated by the Government and of her members and not in a case where a note of dissent is recorded by the nominee of the Registrar.
This specific plea has been raised in Para 16(b) as under :-  "That Shri SN Goyal was only a representative of the Registrar and no decision could be taken by the State on any difference of opinion raised by him.
The impugned action of the Government in directing the reversion of the petitioner is, therefore, wholly illegal and without jurisdiction."
10.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 2, 4 and 5, no reply to this para has been given.
In this situation, there is no specific reply to the contention, raised in the writ petition.
It is reasonable to infer that Mr. Goyal was not a representative of the Government, but had only been nominated by the Registrar.
This view is further clarified on a perusal of the impugned order (Annexure P10) in the first paragraph of the order it has categorically observed as under :  "However, Shri SN Goyal, Member of the Board (Nominee of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana) did not agree and opposed the promotion of Shri Y.S.
Goyal as Deputy Chief Engineer ..." 11.
In view of above, it is clear that Mr. SN Goyal was only a nominee of the Registrar.
It has neither been averred in the written statement, nor it has been shown to me by producing the record that the Registrar had been authorised by the Government to nominate any person on the Board of Directors of respondent No. 5.
In my view, in the circumstances of the present case, the provisions of Section 29(3) were not attracted.
In the situation, the order at Annexure P10 is beyond the provisions of clause (3) of Section 29.
12.
The petitioner had been appointed in June, 1985.
His appointment was annulled by the Government in July, 1986.
The reversion of the petitioner was stayed by the Motion Bench on July 17, 1986.
Consequently, the petitioner has continued to work as Deputy Chief Engineer for the last about six years.
A number of persons possessing qualifications similar to those possessed by the petitioner are continuing in various other Sugar Mills in the State.
In such a situation, I find that it will be harsh and unfair to the petitioner to order his reversion only on the ground of his qualifications.
This is essentially so because it has not been shown that the Registrar has prescribed qualifications, which the petitioner did not fulfil.
13.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The order at Annexure P10 is set aside.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.