Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner while posted as Headmaster, Government High School, Karsindhu (Jind) was issued an order dated 15.5.1986, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 2.226 of C.S.R.
Vol.
I, Part I (as applicable to the State of Haryana) read with Rule 532 A(C) and the note appended thereunder of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II, whereby it was decided to retire the petitioner from service on the expiry of three months from the receipt of the order, copy Annexure P-1.
2.
The background leading to the passing of the impugned order is that the work and conduct of the petitioner was average and the 70% of the annual confidential reports earned by him during the past 10 years were not good.
As such, he was not entitled to further extension of three years beyond the age of 55 years.
3.
The petitioner has impugned the order dated 15.5.1986, copy Annexure P-1, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has urged that his service record remained 'average' and 'good'.
It was contended that the average reports were never conveyed to him.
In the year 1979, for the first time, adverse remarks for the year 1977-78 in which his integrity was found doubtful, were communicated.
The petitioner submitted a detailed representation against the said remarks on 27101979, which has not been decided as yet and even the same was not placed before the competent authority, who had passed the impugned order of compulsory retirement.
It was next contended that the petitioner was retired on the basis of the Government instructions dated 1961986 which envisage that no such officials/officers are to be retained in service after the age of 55 years, who have earned 70% good or better than good reports during the last 10 years.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon this Court's decision rendered in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) SLR 1 and Brij Mohan Chopra v. State of Punjab, AIR 1987 SC 948.
4.
On a consideration of the matter, I have reached the conclusion that the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner deserves to be quashed.
5.
It is not in dispute that the executive instructions issued by the State of Haryana providing that only the officer/official who has earned more than 70% 'good' or 'above' reports, is entitled to continue in service after attaining the age of 55 years, were declared to be violative of Rule 326(a) and (d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I in KK Vaid's case (supra), wherein the impugned instructions were not only struck down, but it was also held that although note (1) to clause (B) of Rule 532 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II entitled the State Government to retire a govt. servant who has completed 25 years of qualifying service of pension without any giving any reason, but on account of inefficiency, dishonesty, corruption or infamous conduct, note (2) made it incumbent upon the Government to give a reasonable opportunity to show cause against proposed action and not to retire the employee without the approval of Council of Ministers.
6.
It is not in dispute that the representation of the petitioner against the adverse entry has not been decided so far.
In Brij Mohan Chopra's case (supra) it was held that during the pendency of the representation filed against the impugned adverse entries, the employee cannot be retired.
7.
Following the ratio of the decisions of this Court in KK Vaid's case and Brij Mohan's case (supra), the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 15.5.1986, Annexure P-1 compulsorily retiring the petitioner from service is quashes, The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.