RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 746 of 1987 and C.W.P.
No. 2157 of 1987 as common questions of law and fact are involved.
The petitioners in both the writ petition are Graduate/Post-graduate Engineers in Engineering or Arts.
They were appointed Vocational Masters in various trades like Engineering, Commercial Practices etc., by the respondent-State sometime in the year 1975 on ad hoc basis and later on were regularised through Punjab Public Service Commission.
It may be observed here that the petitioners were regularly appointed in response to an advertisement which was published in the Government Gazette dated 24th November, 1978 (copy Annexure P-5 in C.W.P.
No. 746 of 1987).
In this advertisement it was mentioned that 132 Vocational Masters in P.E.S.
Class-III (School Cadre) were to be appointed in various disciplines.
2.
The case of the petitioners is that they are eligible for consideration for promotion to Class-II posts in the Cadre of PES (School and Inspection) Class-II Service.
The Class-II Service is governed by the Rules known P.E.S.
(School and Inspection) (Class-II) Rules, 1976.
Rule 10 of these Rules provides the method of recruitment to the Class-II posts.
Rule 10(1) of the Class-II Rules is reproduced below for ready reference :-  10.
(1) In the case of Evaluation Officer, Senior Assistant Counselor, Deputy Circle Education Officers (Home Science) and (Teachers Training), Deputy District Education Officers, Principals, of Government High School, Model Schools, Circle Social Education Officers, District Science Supervisors, Assistant Survey Officers, District Education Survey Officers, Senior Lecturers and Coordinators in Government Service Training Centers in the time k;scale of Rs. 400-640/40/800 of the service.
i) 75% of the posts shall be filled by promotion from amongst the persons already serving in the Punjab Educational Service (Class-III) (School and Inspection State Cadre) and Punjab Educational Service (Provincialised Cadre) (Class-III) in such ratio as may be determined by Government from time to time; ii) 25% of the posts shall be filled by direct recruitment."
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioners are entitled to be considered for promotion to Class-II service under Rule 10(1) ibid as they were already serving in the Punjab Education Service (Class-III) (School and Inspection State Cadre).
4.
The case of the respondents on the other hand is that the petitioners are not borne in Punjab Education Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1978 inasmuch as the posts of Vocational Masters are not included in the Class-III Rules.
Since, according to the respondent, the petitioners are not members of Class-III service, they are not entitled to be considered for promotion under Rule 10 of the Class-II Rules.
5.
The learned counsel submitted that it is apparent from the perusal of the advertisement (Annexure P-5 dated 24th November, 1978) that petitioners were being recruited as Vocational Masters in P.E.S.
Class-III (School Cadre) and according to the learned counsel Class-II Rules do not envisage that a person has to be a member of the service under the Class-III Rules.
He further submitted that even if, strictly speaking, his clients do not fall for consideration under Class-II Rules, the interpretation that should be put by this Court on Rule 10 ibid should be such so as to include the Vocational Masters also as there is no further avenue for promotion provided to them and they are stagnating on the same post since 1975.
For this proposition, he has relied on the Supreme Court judgment titled Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and another v. Mr. KGS Bhatt, 1989(4) SLR 252.
He drew my attention to para 8 of the reported judgment, which is as under :-  "That then is the scope of bye-law 71(b)(ii).
But that does not mean that we should interfere with the relief granted to respondent-.
By pointing out the error that crept into the decision of the Tribunal, we need not to take to its logical end which will defeat justice.
Respondent-1 is not a layman.
He is a highly qualified Engineer.
Although joined service with a diploma in Engineering, he later passed Bachelor of Engineering (BE) and also acquired M.Tech degree and one more diploma (D.P.M.).
He was, however, left without opportunity for promotion for about twenty years.
This is indeed a sad commentary on the appellant's management.
It is often said and indeed, adroitly, an organisation public or private does not 'hire a hand' but engages or employs a whole man.
The person is recruited by an organisation not just for a job, but for a whole career.
One must, therefore, be given an opportunity to advance.
This is the oldest and most important feature of the free enterprise system.
The opportunity for advancement is a requirement for progress of any organisation.
It is an incentive for personnel development as well, (See Principles of Personnel Management by Plipo Edwin B, 4th Ed. P. 246) Every management must provide realistic opportunities for promising employees to move upward.
"The organisation that fail to develop a satisfactory procedure for promotion is bound to pay a severe penalty in terms of administrative costs, misallocation of personnel, low morale and ineffectual performance, among both non-managerial employees and their supervisors."
(See : Personnel Management by Dr. Udai Pareek, P. 277).
There cannot be any modern management much less any career planning, man-power development, management development etc. which is not related to a system of promotions.
(See : Management of Personnel in Indian Enterprises by Prof. NN Chatterjee, Chap., 12 p., 128).
The appellant appears to have overlooked this basic requirement of management so far as respondent-I was concerned till WR and AS was introduced."
6.
There is force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It seems that when the advertisement was issued the petitioners were sought to be appointed in P.E.S.
Class-III (School Cadre).
Once they are held to be in that Cadre, they are entitled to be considered for promotion under Rule 10 of the Class-II Rules.
However, it may be observed here that the State Government in its reply to the writ petition, which was filed in the years 1987, has averred that the petitioners as vocational Masters cannot form part of Punjab Education Service (School Cadre) Class-III and separate Rules regulating the conditions of service of this category of employees are in the making.
More than three years have passed since the filing of the written statement and the learned counsel appearing for the State is not in a position to apprise me as to whether the Rules have been finalised or not.
7.
In this situation, I deem it appropriate to direct the State Government to finalise the Rules within four months from the receipt of this order and then to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion under those Rules, if finalised.
The State Government would be at liberty to pass an appropriate order to treat the draft rules as Executive Instructions so that the petitioner's cases for promotion may be considered immediately under the Draft Rules, to be treated as Executive Instructions.
If for some reason, the Rules are not finalised, within a period of four months from the receipt of this order or the draft rules are not treated as Executive Instructions then the petitioners would be entitled to consideration for promotion to Class-II Rules under Rule 10 of the Class-II Rules w.e.f.
today.
In that eventuality, the State Government would fix the quota for promotion for Vocational Masters under Rule 10 of the Class-II Rules.
8.
With these observations, the writ petition is allowed.
there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.