Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioners while posted as Headmaster, Govt. High School, Pillu-Khera, Mandi, Distt.
Jind, was issued Notice dated 30-3-1988, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, under Rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, read with rule 532-A(c) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.II, as applicable to the State of Haryana vide which he was to retire from service on attaining the age of 55 years on the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of this notice by the petitioner.
The petitioner through this writ petition has prayed for quashing the impugned order, Annexure P-1.
2.
In the instant case, the petitioner was retired from service prematurely on the basis of an 'average' report and the Govt. instructions which envisage that the officers/officials having more than 70 per cent 'good' or above reports are entitled to continue in service after attaining the age of 55 years.
At the outset of hearing of the case, Counsel for the petitioner has contended that his matter is squarely covered by this Court's decision in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) S.L.R.
1.
The learned Counsel for the respondents could not repel the same.
On the consideration of the matter, I am of the view that his case is squarely covered by this Court's decision rendered in KK Vaid's case (supra) wherein the executive instructions issued by the State of Haryana that only the officers/officials having more than 70 per cent 'good' or above reports are entitled to continue in service after attaining the age of 55 years, were struck down being violative of rule 326(a) and (d) of the Punjab Civil Services Vol.
I It was further held therein that a Govt. employee has a right to continue in service till the age of superannuation and the average and uncommunicated reports cannot be acted upon.
In view of this, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 30-3-1988 Annexure P-1 is quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.