Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Head Master, Government High School, Dholera, was served with a Three-month Notice-cum- order of Retirement dated 951988, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, under Rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. 1, read with Rule 5.32-A(c) and note thereunder of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II, as applicable to the employees of the State of Haryana, vide which he was to retire from service after the expiry of notice period.
The petitioner, through this writ petition, has sought for quashing the impugned order of his premature retirement.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner, whose date of birth is 20101932, was initially appointed as a Masser on August 24, 1960 in year 1972 he was promoted as Head master.
In normal course he would have retired on 20121990.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that adverse remarks were recorded in his confidential reports for the year 1979-80 and 1981-82 which were not conveyed to him within the prescribed period of six months as per Government instructions, but the said adverse entries were communicated to him at very belated stage.
Although the petitioner had filed the representations against the said adverse reports, but the same were not considered at the time the decision to retire him prematurely was taken.
4.
Relying on the decision of this court in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) S.L.R.
1 the learned Counsel for the petitioner has contended that average and uncommunicated reports are not to be acted upon.
Though the petitioner during the period 1977-78 to 1985-86 earned 'good', 'very good' and 'outstanding' reports, but the respondent-department had not taken into consideration these reports while taking the decision in the petitioner's case.
According to the Counsel that since the petitioner was having 70% good reports during the aforesaid period, as per the Government instructions applicable on the subject of retirement, as such, he was entitled to be retained in service till the age of superannuation.
The Counsel had also argued that as per the latest law, only five years service record is required to be seen while considering the case of a Government employee for retaining in service or otherwise, after attaining the age of 55 years.
During the last five years no adverse report was conveyed.
In view of this, the impugned order has been passed illegally and in an arbitrary manner.
5.
On the other hand, the case, of the respondents is that the appointing authority has an absolute right to retire a Government servant on or after his attaining the age of 55 years.
It has been contended by the Counsel for the respondents that as per Government instructions, the case of all Government employees who attained the age of 55 years are to be considered by the appointing authority and only such employees, who have 70% good or better record can be allowed extension beyond the age of 55 years.
On scrutiny of the service record of the petitioner, he was not found fit to be retained in Government Service beyond the age of 55 years as his four Annual Confidential Reports out of nine confidential reports, available on the record, for the preceding 10 years, were found good or better category.
6.
On consideration of the matter, I am of the view that the case in hand is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in KK Vaid's case (supra) wherein the executive instructions issued by the State of Haryana which envisage that only the officers/officials having more than 70 per cent 'good' or above reports are entitled to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years, were struck down being violative of rule 326(a) and (d) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol.
I It was observed therein that a Government servant has a right to continue in service till the age of superannuation and the average and uncommunicated reports cannot be acted upon.
The state has admitted that the confidential reports of the petitioner for the years 1986-87 and 1987-88 are 'good' and 'very good'.
In view of this fact, it cannot be said that the petitioner's service record was not good.
7.
The other important aspect of the matter is that the petitioner had filed representations against the adverse entries, which were not decided by the respondent-department before passing the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
It is well settled principles of law that to retire a Government servant prematurely on the basis of adverse entries either not communicated or if communicated representations made against those entries are not considered and disposed of, is unjust and contrary to the principles of natural justice.
In Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, A.IR.
1987 SC 948, it was observed as follows :-  "Whenever an adverse entry is awarded to Government servant it must be communicated to him.
The object and purpose underlying the communication is to afford an opportunity to the employee to improve his work and conduct and to make representation to the authority concerned against those entries.
If such representation is made, it is imperative that the authority should consider the representation with a view to determine as to whether the contents of the adverse entries are justified or not.
Making of a representation is a valuable right to a Government employee and if the representation is not considered, it is bound to affect him in his service career, as in Government service, grant of increment, promotion and ultimately premature retirement all depend on the scrutiny of the service records.
Adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
The same consideration must apply to a case where the adverse entries are taken into account in retiring an employee prematurely from service.
It would be unjust and unfair and contrary to principles of natural justice to retire prematurely a Government employee on the basis of adverse entries which are either not communicated to him or if communicated representations made against those entries are not considered and disposed of.
8.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 951988, Annexure P-1 is quashed.
It is directed that the petitioner be deemed to have continued in service till the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years and shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.