Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The learned Counsel for the parties have consented that C.W.P.
No. 3663-1987 (Harcharan Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others) and C.W.P.
No. 6990-1987 (Ajaib Singh v. State of Punjab and others) involving identical question of law and facts be disposed of with a common order.
For the purpose of order facts have been taken from C. W.P. No. 3663-1987.
2.
The question for consideration in both these petitions is whether the petitioners, who are holding the posts of Sub-Divisional Engineers, Public Health, on ad hoc basis, have the right to hold the same when the direct recruits for whom the posts were meant, have become available.
In order to sort out the controversy, it will be appropriate to narrate the following facts :  3.
The respondents - State through an advertisement which appeared in a section of the press on 16.12.1979 invited applications for 85 posts of Sub Divisional Engineers in Punjab P.W.D., Building and Roads Branch.
Out of these posts, 75 posts were for Civil and 7 for Electrical.
Respondent No. 2, i.e. the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, (hereinafter referred to as the 'Commission') recommended 62 candidates for appointment as temporary Engineers in PWD, Building and Roads Branch.
About 35 were given appointments in P.W.D.
Building and Roads Branch while the remaining were absorbed in Public Health Branch, as they could not be accommodated in P.W.D.
(Building and Roads) Branch.
Some of the candidates who were selected by the Commission for appointment as Sub Divisional Engineers in P.W.D.
Building and Roads Branch but were actually appointed in Public Health had made representation requesting their transfer to ...... Building and Roads Branch.
It is not in dispute that after the transfer of 12 Sub Divisional Engineers to ....... Building and Roads Branch the rest of the Sub Divisional Engineers made representations to the Government for their transfer to P.W.D.
Building and Roads Branch.
The Punjab Government vide letter No. 249-BRI (2)-86/1119 dated 27th/28th February, 1986, addressed to respondent No. 4 asked all the Sub Divisional Engineers who were selected for Building and Roads Branch but were adjusted in Public Health Branch may be advised to furnish an undertaking that they will be transferred on Building and Roads Branch side if they accept bottom position in the list of seniority of PSE Class - II Building and Roads Branch, below the batch of 1980.
It was also made clear that their request for granting seniority in their batch in Building and Roads Branch will not be considered.
In response to the abovesaid letter, all the respondents 5 to 20 had given their consent for being placed at the bottom.
However, no final decision has been taken regarding their transfer to the Building and Roads Branch by the Government for administrative reasons.
The petitioners had joined in between 1976-79 as Junior Engineers possessed Diploma and passed AMIE grade examination while in service.
The petitioners possessed much experience as Junior Engineers varying from 8 to 11 years.
They were promoted on ad hoc basis against the quota posts of direct recruits.
Petitioner No. 3 was promoted on 1161985 and rest of the petitioners in the year 1984.
4.
The Government of Punjab for filling 35 vacancies falling to the share of direct recruits, selected 35 candidates through the Commission respondent No. 2 and also offered appointments to these candidates vide order dated 4111986.
All these candidates have been sent for six months training after which they were to join the department.
As a result, all the petitioners who were promoted in the year 1984-85 on ad hoc basis were to be reverted as Junior Engineers.
Now the petitioners have filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of writ in the nature of quo warranto commanding respondents 5 to 20 to vacate their offices as Sub Divisional Engineers in Punjab PWD Public Health Branch they were never selected for the said posts and have no authority in law to continue.
Further a writ of certiorari quashing the appointments of respondents 5 to 20 as Sub Divisional Engineers in Public Health Branch being illegal, or in the alternative to issue a writ of mandamus directing respondents 1 to 3 to absorb the respondents No. 5 to 20 in Punjab P.W.D., Building and Roads Branch and further to direct respondent No. 4 to relieve the said respondents of their duties in Public Health Branch.
5.
The challenge to the appointment of respondent Nos. 5 to 20 is primarily on the ground that the State of Punjab had advertised 85 posts of Sub Divisional Engineers in PWD (B&R) Branch but the candidates selected by the Commission-respondent No. 2 for PWD (B&R) Branch have been appointed in Public Health Branch against the posts which were not advertised.
6.
The State of Punjab have filed a detailed written statement and has taken a preliminary objection as well.
7.
It has been argued by Shri HS Riar, Additional A.G. Punjab, that the petitioners along with some other officials of Punjab PWD, Public Health Branch belonging to Junior Engineer category were promoted as Sub Divisional Engineers on temporary basis against the vacancies of direct recruitment quota for a specified time or till the candidates from Punjab Public Service Commission become available whichever was earlier.
Petitioners term of appointment/promotion on ad hoc basis was extended from time to time on account of non-availability of direct recruits.
Now the Commission has released and recommended the candidates for the posts of Sub-Divisional Engineers in Public Health Department in 1986.
Since the candidates recommended by the Commission are available, they are to be given posting and for that purpose the Government have taken a decision to revert Sub Divisional Engineers working on purely temporary basis against the quota meant for direct recruits.
It was urged by Mr. Riar that the petitioners had no locus standi to challenge the appointments of respondent Nos. 5 to 20 by filing writ of quo warranto.
8.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar and perused the paper-book.
9.
It appears that it must have been the cherished desire of the founding fathers of the Constitution of our country that no grievance of a citizen of the country remains unredressed.
For that purpose, some avenue was to be provided by which the people could seek the redressal of their grievances.
It was for this purpose most probably that Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution were inserted in the Constitution of India.
In fact, the said Articles are the panacea under which a variety of reliefs can be granted by the High Courts.
In order to get relief, the petitioner has to show the existence of his right and the duty cast upon the State Government.
In a writ in the nature of quo warranto, the Court has to see that ineligible persons are not holding the public offices and has also to see that no illegality or impropriety is committed by the State Government in making such appointments.
In the case in hand, respondent Nos. 5 to 20 were selected for appointment as Sub Divisional Engineers by respondent No. 2 i.e. the Commission which is an accepted source for making selection and recommendations of the candidates selected by it.
The qualification and syllabus for the examination for appointment as Sub Divisional Engineers in Buildings and Roads and Public Health are the same and the selection is made by the Commission Sub Divisional Engineer Public Health has to go for training for six months, which admittedly in the case in hand, was undergone by respondent Nos. 5 to 20.
It cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that respondent Nos. 5 to 20 were ineligible for appointment as Sub Divisional Engineers, Public Health, as they possessed the requisite qualification for such appointment.
As such I find no illegality/irregularity in the selection and subsequent appointment as Sub Divisional Engineers, Public Health.
Hence, I find no reason to quash the appointments of respondent Nos. 5 to 20 as Sub Divisional Engineers or to issue any direction to the respondent.
10.
The other aspect of the matter is that the petitioners were promoted as Sub Divisional Engineers Public Health, on temporary basis as a stop-gap arrangement against the posts meant for direct recruits for which the candidates now selected have already undergone requisite training for appointment.
Since the petitioners are occupying the posts meant for direct recruits, there is no escape for them from reversion and they have to make way for the direct recruits.
In case the posts falling to the share of the promotees are available, Government may consider to absorb them as per their seniority subject to availability of the posts.
In view of the foregoing reasons, the writ petitions are dismissed being devoid of an merit with no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.