Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for short `the Tribunal'), on 2122003 (Annexure P.13), whereby an original application filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
2.
The brief facts out of which the present writ petition arises are that the petitioner was initially appointed in Group-D and subsequently promoted to the posts of Junior Clerk; Senior Clerk; Superintendent and the Assistant Administrative Officer (AAO).
The petitioner was promoted from Clerk to Senior Clerk in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040/- on 1051973; to the post of Superintendent in the pay scale of 1640-2900/- with effect from 1561988.
Vide order dated 1761995, the respondents revised the pay scale of the Assistant from Rs. 1400-2600/- to Rs. 1640-2900/- with effect from 111986, but pay scale of the Superintendent was not revised.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the Superintendents working at the Institution level, are entitled to higher pay scale than that of the Assistants working at the Headquarters.
The petitioner submitted a representation on 24101995 claiming higher pay of the post of Superintendent than the pay of Assistant.
Since such representation was not favourably decided, the petitioner filed an Original Application bearing OA No. 567-HR-96 before the Tribunal.
The said application was decided on 2051997 when the following order was passed :  "In this application, the agitation is for revision of pay scale of the applicant who is Superintendent in the scale of Rs. 1640-2900/- to that of Rs. 2000-3500/- on the ground that the duties and responsibilities of Superintendent are much higher than the Assistants working at Headquarters office of the ICAR and he should be given the higher pay scale.
As per the recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of UOI and Anr. v. PV Hariharan and Anr., 1997(2) SCT 649 (SC), CA No. 7127 of 1993 arising out of OA 391/91, has precluded the Tribunals from adjudicating the matters of parity of pay or pay scales in the Government Department unless some discrimination is brought to the notice of the Court.
This is a matter regarding parity of pay scales between two sets of posts, therefore, it is squarely covered by the directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In view thereof, this matter cannot be adjudicated by this Tribunal.
2.
However, it was also brought to our notice that the matter is engaging the attention of the authority concerned and the representation filed by the applicant on 4101995 (A.3) is under active consideration.
3.
In view thereof, the OA is disposed of with a direction that respondents shall expedite the decision in the matter.
OA disposed of accordingly."
4.
It was found by the learned Tribunal that the Tribunal is precluded from examining the parity of pay scale between the two sets of posts, but the representation of the petitioner was ordered to be decided expeditiously.
Though subsequently an intimation was sent to the petitioner vide Annexure A17 on 17121998 after the Cadre Review Committee considered the question of upgradation of the posts of office Superintendent.
The petitioner again invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal as the petitioner was not granted the higher pay scale, but one J.I.P.
Madan, though junior to the petitioner, was granted higher pay scale under Assured Career Progression Scheme (for short `the ACP Scheme').
The said application has been dismissed vide the order impugned in the present writ petition.
5.
We have heard the petitioner and the counsel for the respondents at length.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the pay scale of the post of Assistant, working at the Headquarters and that of Superintendent is the same though the post of Superintendent is a promotional post.
It is contended that a promotional post should have a higher pay scale than that of the feeder cadre.
It is also contended that since Shri J.I.P.
Madan, a junior to the petitioner has been granted the benefit of ACP Scheme, resulting into higher pay scale, therefore, the petitioner is also entitled to the higher pay scale from the date his junior was granted such scale.
6.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the petitioner was promoted from the post of Senior Clerk to that of Superintendent, which carried higher pay scale than that of a Senior Clerk.
Since the petitioner was not an Assistant, therefore, his grievance in respect of higher pay scale for the post of Superintendent does not arise in the present case.
It has been further pointed out that Shri J.I.P.
Madan has worked on the post of Assistant in the Headquarters and the Superintendent in the same pay scale for more than 24 years, therefore, he was granted additional increment in terms of the ACP Scheme.
In terms of such Scheme (Annexure R6), the financial upgradation under the ACP Scheme is purely personal to the employee and shall have no relevance to his seniority position.
Reference was made to the condition No. 8 of the conditions for the grant of benefit under the ACP Scheme, which is part of Annexure R.6.
Thus, it is contended that the order passed by the Tribunal cannot be said to be suffering from any illegality, in any manner.
7.
In the earlier application filed by the petitioner, it was found that the Tribunal is precluded from adjudicating the matters of parity of pay or pay scale in the Government Department unless some discrimination is brought to the notice of the Court.
In the present case, the grievance of the petitioner is that the Assistant at the Headquarters and the Superintendent carried the same scale of pay and, therefore, the pay scale attached to the post of Superintendent is not proper.
We do not find any merit in the said argument for more than one reasons.
Firstly, the said claim of the petitioner has been negated way back in the year 1997 by the Tribunal.
The said order was not challenged by the petitioner.
Still further, the petitioner was promoted as superintendent in the year 1988, whereas the present application claiming the higher pay scale to the post of Superintendent has been filed after attaining Superannuation in the year 2003.
Still further, it is not open to the petitioner to dispute the pay scale to the post of Superintendent as he was not promoted as Superintendent from the post of Assistant (Headquarters), but he was promoted from the post of senior clerk.
He has got higher pay scale after his promotion to the post of Superintendent.
Therefore, the argument raised by the petitioner that pay scale attached to the post of Superintendent needs to be upgraded, is not tenable.
8.
The argument that the junior to the petitioner is getting higher pay scale, is again not tenable.
It has been pointed out that Shri Madan was appointed as Assistant by direct recruitment and promoted to the post of Superintendent, which has been considered as dying cadre and will not count for promotion.
Shri Madan earned only one promotion to the post of Assistant Administrative Officer.
He has been granted financial upgradation on completion of 24 years of regular service from the date of appointment as Assistant in the same pay scale.
Still further, in terms of the conditions in the Scheme, such financial upgradation will not affect the seniority as such benefit is only personal in nature.
9.
After the arguments were heard and judgment reserved on 2372008, the petitioner filed a Misc. application producing the seniority list of Assistant Administrative Officers circulated on 2311996 and on 2752004.
On the basis of the said seniority list, it is contended that Shri Madan, as a junior Assistant Administrative Officer, is getting more salary than the petitioner.
The said documents are of little assistance to the petitioner.
The name of the petitioner falls in seniority list (Annexure P16), circulated in the year 1996, whereas the name of Shri Madan appears in the subsequent seniority list, having been appointed as Assistant Administrative Officer on 1111996.
The said seniority list does not disclose the pay scale in which either the petitioner or Shri Madan has been placed, but assuming even if Shri Madan is getting higher pay scale, the same is inconsequential in terms of condition of grant of the benefit under ACP Scheme.
Thus, we are of the opinion that the petitioner cannot claim step up in the pay on the ground of payment of higher pay to Shri Madan.
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the petitioner cannot claim any higher pay scale or upgradation of his pay on the basis of upgradation of the pay of Shri Madan.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
The same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.