Nirmal Singh, J - By this appeal the appellant has impugned the judgment dated 17-3-2006 of the writ court, vide which the prayer of the petitioner seeking his appointment on a higher post on the basis of his qualification has been rejected.
2.
The case set up before the writ court was that the father of the appellant was working as a Extension Assistant in the Animal Husbandry Department who died in harness in 14-01-2004.
The appellant is 10+2 and has also acquired a Diploma in Computer Education.
He applied for appointment to a suitable post in terms of SRO 43 of 1994.
The request of the petitioner was accepted and he was appointed as attendant.
Thereafter, the appellant made a representation for his appointment on a higher post on the basis of the qualification, but the same was rejected.
3.
Mr. HA Siddiqui, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that under Rule-3 of the Jammu and Kashmir Compassionate Appointment Rules, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as Rules) there is a clear provision that a person is to be appointed against a post which is above class-IV Post, if he possesses qualification above matriculation or to a class-IV post if the said person has read up to matric.
He submitted that appellant possesses the qualification of 10+2 and, therefore, he is entitled to be appointed to a post which is above Class-IV.
In support of his submission, he has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Nirmala Devi v. State and others, 2003(3) SCT 14 : 2002(2) SLJ 364.
4.
Before considering the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant, it will be appropriate to notice Rule-3 of the above mentioned Rules :-  "Appointment under these Rules (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any rule or order for the time being in force regulating the procedure for recruitment in any service or posts under the Government, an eligible family member of a person specified in rule 2 may be appointed against a vacancy in the lowest rank of a non-gazetted service having qualification above Matriculation or to a Class-IV post if the candidate has read up to Matric".
5.
A perusal of the above said Rule makes it clear that an eligible family member of the deceased who is to be appointed on a compassionate grounds may be appointed against a vacancy in a lower rank of non-gazetted service having a qualification of matriculation or a class IV post, if a candidate has read up to Matric.
This rule does not specify that if a candidate has a qualification of above matriculation, he must be appointed above class IV post.
The purpose and object of appointment on compassionate grounds is that the kith and kin of the deceased are provided subsistence.
In Nirmala Devi's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant there was only a direction to consider the case of the appellant in accordance with rules.
The observations made in this regard in the aforesaid case are being reproduced below :-  "There appeals are accordingly allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider that claim of the appellants in accordance with Rule 3.
Let the consideration be done within three months from the date of copy of the order is made available by the appellants to the respondents".
This Court in the aforesaid case has also held as under :-  "....There can be no dispute with the broad proposition that a person seeking compassionate appointment has no absolute right to get a letter of appointment or to claim that he or she should be appointed against a particular post".
6.
In the instant case the appellant was appointed as attendant on compassionate grounds under the provisions of SRO-43 of 1994 when the appellant joined the said post he did not reserve any right that he can claim a higher post subsequently.
The appellant had worked on the said post for about one year and thereafter made a representation to the authorities concerned for appointing him on a post which is above class-IV, on the basis of his qualification.
Once the appointment is made in whatever class or category of a post on compassionate grounds, such appointment cannot be re- opened.
This proposition has been settled in 1994(3) SCT 590 : 1994(4) SLR 1, State of Haryana v. Naresh kumar Bali.
For the reasons mentioned above, there is not merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.