Sanjib Banerjee, J - The merits of the matter need not to be revisited after the several orders that have conclusively pronounced upon the matters originally in issue.
2.
There are orders of Hon'ble Single Judges of September 15, 2000 and October 15, 2001.
By the second of the orders, a detailed enquiry was carried out upon comparing the recruitment rules applicable to the petitioners with the recruitment rules relating to Corporations and employees under the Administration.
It was found that the petitioners were entitled to upgraded pay scales in accordance with the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission, in addition to the revised pay scales.
3.
Since the Court chose not to directly permit upgradation of pay scales, the Court left the matter to the respondents to permit the upgradation in the light of the observations contained in the orders passed.
Orders have been passed by the Division Bench on February 11, 2002, June 20, 2003 and November 24, 2005 by upholding the petitioners right to the upgraded pay scales.
By the last of the orders passed by the Division Bench, on November 24, 2005 the following direction was given :  "The Central Government as well as the Corporation is directed to extend the benefits of revised pay scale to the petitioners as applicable to the Central Government Officers discharging identical duties than that of the petitioners.
The Central Government or Corporation may, however, refuse such benefits if there is any such reason apart from the reasons already adjudicated earlier and discussed above.
Such benefits must be extended and/or reasons for refusal in terms of this order must be communicated to the petitioners within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order."
4.
The discussion that preceded the final direction contained in that order of November 24, 2005 spoke of the petitioners being entitled to the upgraded pay scales under the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission.
The direction has to be understood as a direction to extend the benefits of upgraded pay scales to the petitioners.
The power of refusal to extend the upgraded pay scales was restricted to grounds not urged before the Court or not noticed in the order of November 24, 2005.
5.
The order passed, and which has been challenged herein, in pretended compliance with the direction contained in the Division Bench's order of November 24, 2005 records the same reasons for refusal as had been found unworthy by the series of earlier judgments of this Court.
There is no new reason put forward in the order of January 3, 2006.
6.
The petitioners herein had instituted contempt proceedings before a Division Bench alleging that in making the order of January 3, 2006, the respondents had acted in derogation of the direction contained in the order of November 24, 2005.
Such contempt petition was rejected but the merits of the petitioners grievance against the order of January 3, 2006 were not adjudicated upon and left open for consideration in accordance with law.
The petitioners have applied by way of this fresh writ petition.
7.
The petition is allowed with a direction upon the respondent authorities to extend the benefits of the upgraded pay scales to the petitioners since it is apparent that the respondents have no new reason than those already put forward prior to November 24, 2005 in seeking to resist the petitioners claim for upgradation.
The entire exercise should be completed within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order.
8.
The writ petition is allowed as above without any order as to costs.
9.
Urgent Photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the parties upon compliance with all requisite formalities.
Petition allowed.