Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner has taken out the application (CAN 5347 of 2006) for an interim order directing the respondents to pay her salary according to the provisions of the Ropa Rules, 1998.
In view of the fact that the writ petition itself is ready for hearing, I invited advocate for the petitioner to place the writ petition itself.
According she has argued the case of the petitioner.
2.
The writ petition dated January 14th, 2003 was taken out seeking a mandamus directing the respondents to make provision for compassionate appointment of wards of teaching and non-teaching members of the staff working in recognised non-government secondary schools in the state.
The petitioner has also prayed for a mandamus directing the respondents to appoint her daughter as an assistant teacher in Kalyangram Madhyamik Vidyalaya, District North 24-Parganas.
3.
She was appointed in the school as an assistant teacher in 1972.
She worked there upto January 17th, 1994 and thereafter remained absent from duty from January 18th, 1994 on the ground that she was sick.
On May 2nd, 1999 she submitted a representation to the district inspector of schools concerned requesting that authority to appoint her eldest daughter (Smt. Anjana Biswas) as an assistant teacher in the school.
4.
The school authority took a resolution deciding to appoint Anjana as an assistant teacher on compassionate ground.
Since the District Inspector of Schools did not approve the decision of the managing committee of the school, the petitioner moved this Court by filing a writ petition No. 4771(W) of 2001; that was disposed of by order dated April 6th, 2001 directing the director of school education to give a decision in the matter.
Accordingly, the director gave his decision dated June 5th, 2002.
5.
That authority held that there was no scope to give compassionate appointment to the petitioner's daughter, since there was no provision of law for that purpose.
I find from the writ petition that order of the director was not challenged by the petitioner.
She rather contended that by not making provision for compassionate appointment in secondary schools, when such provision was made by the competent authority with respect to primary schools in the state, the state and other authorities acted in a discriminatory manner resulting in violation of the provisions of art. 14 of the Constitution.
6.
I am unable to see how the petitioner can seek a mandamus directing the state and its authorities to make provision for compassionate appointment of wards of teaching and non-teaching members of the staff working in recognised non-government secondary schools in the state.
Simply because provisions for compassionate appointment of wards of teachers working in primary schools in the state were made in the relevant statutory rules, in my opinion, the petitioner is not entitled to take the plea of discrimination and seek a mandamus from the writ Court.
7.
A plea of discrimination can be based only when a legal right exists.
In the absence of any provision for compassionate appointment of wards of teachers working in the recognised non-government secondary schools in the state, in my view the petitioner is not entitled to allege discrimination.
The plea cannot be based on a non-existent right.
The writ Court is not supposed to issue a mandamus directing the state and other competent authorities to make law for a particular purpose.
8.
It is for the state and the legislature to consider whether appropriate law should be made for compassionate appointment of wards of teachers working in the recognized non-government secondary schools in the state.
Hence, I am unable to accept the case of the petitioner that she is entitled to a mandamus directing the respondents to offer a compassionate appointment to her daughter (Anjana).
The director rightly rejected the request for compassionate appointment.
9.
It is submitted that the writ petition was amended in terms of order dated March 25th, 2004.
By that order only leave was granted to the petitioner to amend the writ petition.
No amendment application was, however, taken out.
The writ petition has not been amended in any manner whatsoever.
Counsel says that by filing a supplementary affidavit the petitioner was entitled to amend the writ petition.
I am unable to agree with her.
10.
Even otherwise, I do not find any merit in the contentions sought to be raised by filing the supplementary affidavit.
Counsel says that in view of provisions in Section 47 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, the petitioner was entitled to get salaries and allowances in terms of provisions in the Ropa Rules, 1998.
Her contention is that since the petitioner remained in service, the authorities were under the obligation to pay her.
To this, counsel for the state submits that she received all payments according to law; and hence there is no question of making any further payment to her.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that in view of provisions in the Ropa Rules, 1998 it was to be deemed that the petitioner duly exercised option accepting those rules.
11.
No case as argued by counsel has been made out in the writ petition.
By filing a supplementary affidavit the petitioner cannot make out a case not made out in the writ petition.
Besides, I am unable to see how in view of the provisions in Section 47 of the abovementioned Act, the Petitioner can claim salaries and allowances for the period during which she admittedly did not work.
Her absence from duty was to be treated according to the relevant rules and regulations.
12.
In my view, provisions in that S. 47 have no manner of application to the present case, and I do not find any reason to say that the petitioner was entitled to get salaries and allowances in terms of any provision in the Ropa Rules, 1998.
At this distance of time there is no scope to make an order directing the authorities to permit her to exercise option under those rules.
Option, if any, was to be exercised within the period mentioned in them.
13.
For these reasons, I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
The writ petition and the application both are accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
Petition dismissed.