Satish Kumar Mittal, J - The petitioner, who is the workman, has filed the instant writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing of the part of the award dated 19.2.1985 (Annexure P-1) passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Jalandhar, vide which he has been awarded only 50% back wages while reinstating him in service with continuity of service.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways, Hoshiarpur.
He was being governed by the provisions of Punjab Civil Service Rules.
On 1131980, he was charge-sheeted on the ground that he did not issue tickets to four passengers and embezzled the amount.
After issuance of the charge sheet, the enquiry was conducted.
Thereafter, on 31.12.1980, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner for terminating his services.
Consequently, on 3061981, services of the petitioner were terminated by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Hoshiarpur.
Against that order, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Director, State Transport, Punjab, Chandigarh, which was also rejected.
Thereafter, the petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred for adjudication by the appropriate Government to the Labour Court on 961982.
The Labour Court, after considering the evidence led by both the parties, set aside the order of termination of the service of the petitioner after holding that the enquiry against him was not properly conducted.
It was also held that the order of termination of the services of the petitioner was passed by an authority, who was subordinate of the appointing authority.
After holding the termination of the services of the petitioner as illegal, vide award dated 19.2.1985 (Annexure P-1), the petitioner was ordered to be reinstated as Conductor with continuity of service and with 50% back wages.
The petitioner has impugned the said part of the award to the extent that he has been wrongly awarded only 50% back wages.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while relying upon ate Full Bench decision of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 PLR 720 and the decision of the Apex Court in Mohan Lal v. The Management of M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 1253, has submitted that when the termination order of a workman is found to be illegal and he is ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service, then ordinarily he is entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
He submitted that this is the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the learned Labour Court has not given any justifiable reason for awarding only 50% back wages to the petitioner.
He submitted that the Management did not place on record any material, which could show that the petitioner was in gainful employment any where during the period of his termination.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the grant of restricted back wages by the Labour Court, while setting aside the order of termination of the service of the petitioner and ordering his reinstatement, is purely a discretionary exercise and the said exercise is not required to be interfered by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
In support of his contention, learned counsel relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in P.G.I.
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh v. Raj Kumar, 2001(1) SCT 326 (SC) : 2001(2) Supreme Court Cases 54.
5.
After hearing the arguments of learned counsel for both the parties and perusing the record of the case, I find no substance in the instant writ petition filed by the petitioner.
The Labour Court found that order of termination of the service of the petitioner to be illegal on technical grounds and awarded 50% back wages while ordering reinstating of the services of the petitioner with continuity of service.
The Labour Court awarded the restricted back wages to the petitioner.
However, he was reinstated with continuity of service.
While awarding the restricted back wages, the Labour Court has exercised its discretion keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case.
It is not open for this Court to go into the factual aspect of the matter and to interfere, in the discretion exercised by the Labour Court.
In P.G.I.
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh v. Raj Kumar (supra), while setting aside the order of this Court passed in a writ petition modifying the order of Labour Court and directing the payment of back wages in its entirety on the ground that there was no justification in not awarding the full back wages when the workman was ready to work, the Apex Court has observed as under :  "The High Court did not find any error or erroneous assumption of jurisdiction in the matter of declaration of payment of back wages.
While the normal rule is payment of back wages in its entirety, the High Court while recording the normal rule has failed to notice any error apparent with the reasoning of the Tribunal in the matter of grant of restricted back wages.
The finding of perversity or being erroneous or not in accordance with law shall have to be recorded with reasons in order to assail the findings of the Tribunal or the Labour Court.
It is not for the High Court to go into the factual aspects of the matter and there is an existing limitation on the High Court to that effect.
In the event, however the findings of fact is based on any misappreciation of evidence, that would be deemed to be an error of law which can be corrected by a writ of certiorari.
The finding of the Labour Court cannot be challenged in a proceeding in a writ of certiorari on the ground that the relevant and material evidence adduced before the Labour Court was insufficient or inadequate though, however, perversity of the order would warrant intervention of the High Court... Payment of back wages having a discretionary element involved in it has to be dealt with, in the facts and circumstances of each case and no straight-jacket formula can be evolved, though, however, there is statutory sanction to direct payment of back wages in its entirety.
The decision in the matter of back wages, in the instant case, was taken by the Labour Court having regard to the facts and circumstances of the matter in the issue, upon exercise of its discretion and obviously in a manner which cannot but be judicious in nature.
There exists an obligation on the part of the High Court to record in the judgment, the reasoning before denouncing a judgment of an inferior tribunal, in the absence of which, the judgment cannot stand the scrutiny of otherwise being reasonable."
6.
In view of the aforesaid factual and legal position, I do not find any merit in the instant writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.