Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the order of the Chairman, Ad hoc Committee, District Primary Council, Howrah dated December 7th, 1998 suspending him with effect from October 8th, 1998 when he was taken into custody in connection with Bantra PS Case No. 80/1998 dated October 8th, 1998 registered under s. 498A/326/302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
2.
At the relevant point of time he was working as head teacher in Dharmatala Prathamik Vidyalaya, Howrah.
Since he was arrested and taken into custody, in exercise of power available under r. 14 of the Recruitment Rules, 1940 the competent authority of the council decided to suspend him.
That rule conferred power on the appointing authority to place a teacher of a primary school under suspension during progress of investigation or pendency of trial of a case involving criminal offence.
There is no dispute that at the date the impugned order of suspension was made the case registered by the police station concerned was at the investigation stage.
3.
It is therefore clear that the authority issuing the order of suspension possessed the requisite power to issue it.
The ground on which it has been assailed is that the discretionary power conferred by the rule was not fairly and reasonably cxercised by the authority.
It has been argued that till May 31st, 2005, when the petitioner reached the age of superannuation, the authority did not initiate any disciplinary proceedings.
On the strength of two single bench decisions of this court in Basudev Mallick v. State of West Bengal & Ors., 2004 (1) CHN 33 and Sk.
Ayub Ali v. State of West Bengal & Ors., 2005 (1) CLJ 362, counsel argues that the suspension order, issued for involvement in a criminal case that had nothing to do with the discharge of duties by the petitioner as teacher, and kept in force for an indefinite period without initiating any disciplinary proceedings, is liable to be set aside.
4.
I am unable to see how the authorities given to me are of any assistance in the present case.
In those cases this court was considering the rules which provided for deemed suspension of the teacher for his detention in custody for a period exceeding forty-eight hours.
Here the provision in r. 14 of the Recruitment Rules, 1940 did not say that for detention in custody a teacher should be deemed to be suspended.
It rather conferred a discretionary power on the appointing authority.
Hence the question that actually arises for consideration in this case is whether the discretion was properly exercised by the authority issuing the order of suspension.
5.
In my view, the question that has arisen for consideration was of no significance at the date of moving the writ petition.
It was taken out on March 16th, 2005, when the suspension order had been issued on December 7th, 1998, and when the petitioner was to reach the age of superannuation on May 31st, 2005.
True it is that the authority did not take any steps for initiating disciplinary, proceedings, but that inaction cannot justify the delay on the part of the petitioner in approaching the writ court questioning the order of suspension.
6.
The period during which he remained silent changed the situation in that he, of course, reached the age of superannuation.
Only on the ground that the disciplinary proceedings had not been initiated, in my view, it cannot be said that the order of suspension was liable to be quashed.
That ground would have been relevant for considering the question of his reinstatement with liberty to the council to initiate disciplinary proceedings.
He having slept on his right to question the order, in my view, missed the opportunity of repairing the benefit of that ground.
7.
I am unable to hold that at the date the order was issued there was absolutely no justification for issuing it.
Whether the petitioner was liable to be proceeded against in connection with the criminal case, that was a question to be considered by the appropriate criminal court.
Having regard to the nature of the allegations made in the case concerned, it cannot be said that the appointing authority acted unfairly or unreasonably by issuing the order of suspension.
When the relevant rule did not make any distinction between criminal cases connected and uncounted with the discharge of duties as a teacher, I do not see any reason to permit the petitioner to assail the order by making such a distinction.
The rule was applicable to all kinds of cases involving criminal offence.
8.
For the reasons I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for to costs in it.
9.
Copy of this order duly countersigned by the AR (C) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
10.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.