SS Nijjar, J - The petitioner has challenged the order dated 6.11.2002 (Annexure P.14) passed by the Principal, Army School Unchibassi, Hoshiarpur, terminating her service on the post of Safaiwali.
She had been in the service of the School for more than 13 years as Class IV employee in different capacities.
Inspite of continuous service for 13 years, her services were not regularised.
The petitioner had made a number of representations claiming regularisation.
On the other hand, services of one Tara Devi who was junior to the petitioner have been regularised on 31102000.
The petitioner had, therefore, served legal notice on 372001 claiming regularisation.
The legal notice was not decided by the respondents.
Petitioner, therefore, filed C.W.P.
No. 17451 of 2002.
This writ petition was disposed of on 29102002 directing the respondents to pass an appropriate order on the legal notice within a period of two months from the date of certified copy of the order was brought to their notice.
Instead of regularising the service of the petitioner, the respondents have terminated her services by order dated 6.11.2002.
Hence, the present writ petition.
Respondent No. 1 has filed a short reply on 12122002.
Respondent No. 2 has filed a detailed reply.
In both the replies, the preliminary objection has been taken to the effect that respondent No. 2 does not fall within the term of `State' as defined in Article 12 of the Constitution of India Respondent No. 1 has relied upon a Division Bench judgment rendered by High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in WR (Service) No. 1415 of 1996, Mrs. Asha Khosa v. Chairman Army Public School and others).
The judgment delivered by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir is attached as Annexure R.1 to the reply.
In the aforesaid judgment, it has been held that the Army Welfare Education Society is not an instrumentality of the State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India Against the aforesaid judgment, the petitioner, therein, had filed Special Leave to appeal (Civil) No. 6482 of 1997 which was dismissed on 3131997 with the following order :-  "Upon hearing the counsel court made the following order : The Special Leave Petition is dismissed."
The question of law raised in the present writ proceeding was also considered by a Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 14933 of 2000 Gurwinder Kaur v. Union of India and others.
It has been held by the Division Bench that the petitioner therein would be entitled to file a suit for damages but the writ is not maintainable under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This finding has been given after considering the ratio of law laid down by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in the case of Asha Khosa (supra).
2.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, Advocate, has vehemently argued that the matter is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgment and cannot be reagitated.
Respondent No. 2 is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
He has further submitted that a show cause notice had been issued to her.
She did not give any reply.
In fact, she has filed the present writ when she came to know that her services were going to be terminated.
He further submits that the order passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 14993 of 2000 was never communicated to the respondents, prior to the passing of the order of termination.
3.
The submissions made by Mr. Gurpreet Singh are controverted by the counsel for the petitioner.
He has submitted that the impugned order has been passed by way of punishment.
It could not have been passed without complying with the rules of natural justice.
He has also submitted that the order is stigmatic in nature.
Therefore, it was necessary to hold an enquiry before passing the order.
Learned counsel further submitted that since the service of the person junior to the petitioner has been regularised, she was entitled to be regularised in the School.
It is further submitted by Mr. Rakra that the Division Bench of this Court in Gurwinder Kaur's case (supra) has not considered the decisions of the Supreme Court rendered in the following cases :-  (1) Sh. Anadi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vandassji Swami Suvarna Jayanti Mahotsav Samarak Trust and others v. VR Rudani and others, AIR 1989 (SC) 1607.
(2) Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College Shamali and others v. Luxmi Narayan and others, AIR 1976 (SC) 888.
(3) Ravneet Kaur v. C.M.C.
Ludhiana, 1997(3) SCT 210 (P&H) : 1997(4) SLR 221.
(4) Dr. TC Sharma v. Lt.
Governor, 2000(1) SCT 192 (Delhi).
(5) Kavita v. Daya Nand Medical College and Hospital Ludhiana, 1998(4) SCT 740.
(6) Smt. Kamlesh Kumari v. State of Haryana, 2001(3) SCT 224.
4.
Learned counsel submitted that in view of the aforesaid judgments, the writ petition would be clearly maintainable against respondent No. 2-School.
5.
We have annixously considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
We are unable to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in Asha Khosa's case (supra) considered the legal question which was formulated as follows :-  "Whether or not the Army Welfare Education Society is an instrumentality of the State in terms of Article 12 of the Constitution of India ?"
In that case, the petitioner had been appointed as Principal, Army Public School, Udhampur.
In her appointment order it was mentioned that her services would be governed by rules known as `Army Welfare Education Society Rules'.
Her services were terminated as the same were no longer required.
The petitioner had challenged the aforesaid order of termination.
The respondents had taken a preliminary objection to the effect that the School did not fall within the term `State' or `other authority' as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution of India After elaborate discussion, the Division Bench of Jammu and Kashmir High Court has come to the conclusion that the Army Welfare Education Society is not an instrumentality of the State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India Thereafter, the petitioner filed Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court, which, as noticed earlier, was dismissed on 3131997.
Relying on the aforesaid judgment of the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir, this Court has also come to the same conclusion in Gurwinder Kaur's case (supra).
In that case, the petitioner had been appointed as `Dorm Attendant' in an Army School.
Her services were terminated.
She had challenged the order of termination.
A Division Bench of this Court relying on the judgment of the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in the case of Asha Kosha (supra) came to conclusion that the writ petition would not be maintainable against the School.
6.
We find force in the submission made by Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
This Court is bound by the earlier decision rendered by the Division Bench in Gurwinder Kaur's case (supra)  7.
We have not been persuaded by the counsel for the petitioner to take a view different from the view taken by the two Division Benches in the cases of Asha Kosha and Gurwinder Kaur (supra).
We hold that the writ petition is not maintainable.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
The petitioner is, however, at liberty to pursue her remedy by way of civil suit to seek necessary relief.
Petition dismissed.