Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner Ruchi Rajpurohit has approached this Court challenging the action of the respondent Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot (hereinafter referred to as the respondent University) whereby she has been denied admission in the Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) course.
Additionally, the petitioner has challenged the vires of Regulation 2(1)(iii) of the Prospectus of the respondent University for the PMET 2006.
Directions have also been sought against the respondent University to give admission to the petitioner in the aforesaid BDS course.
2.
At the outset, it may be relevant to notice here that on September 15, 2006 when this case had come up for motion hearing, the learned counsel for the petitioner had given up the challenge made by the petitioner to the vires of Regulation 2(1)(iii).
The claim of the petitioner was based entirely upon the factual situation as well as on Regulation 2(1)(iv) of the Regulations.
3.
Certain essential facts may be noticed as follows :  The petitioner passed her secondary school examination from Central Board of Secondary Education in the year 2003.
Thereafter the petitioner appeared for her 10+2 examination conducted by CBSE in March/April 2006.
The petitioner, however, failed to clear the Chemistry subject bearing subject code No. 043 and was placed in compartment in the aforesaid +2 examination in the result declared on May 23, 2006.
Desirous of seeking admission to BDS course, the petitioner submitted an application form for PMET 2006 prior to the last date of submission of the applications.
The entrance test was conducted on July 2, 2006.
In the aforesaid entrance test, the petitioner secured an overall rank of 1474 and rank No. 1193 in general merit list for admission in MBBS/BDS/ BAMS/BHMS courses.
The petitioner in the meantime appeared in the compartment/supplementary examination conducted by CBSE and when the result of the aforesaid supplementary examination was declared on August 7, 2006, the petitioner was declared to have passed the Chemistry subject also.
However, the respondent University commenced with the process of admissions to the BDS course and for that purpose, held the first counselling on August 3, 2006.
The petitioner maintains that the counselling closed at rank No. 1190, whereas, the rank of the petitioner was 1193.
However, the second counselling was scheduled for September 7, 2006.
The petitioner also participated in the said counselling on the aforesaid date and claims to have duly furnished the certificate of 10+2 dated August 7, 2006, wherein the petitioner was declared to have passed all the subjects of 10+2 examination.
However, the petitioner was not granted admission on account of the fact that she had not passed her 10+2 in the annual examination 2006 and as such was not eligible.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner is before this Court.
4.
We have heard Shri Vivek Sethi, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Shri TS Dhindsa, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent University and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
5.
Shri Vivek Sethi, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has raised two fold arguments before us as follows :  (a) Since at the time of first counselling only students upto the rank No. 1190 had been counselled and the petitioner's rank was 1193, therefore, her turn for counselling did not come on August 3, 2006.
In the meantime, the petitioner had passed her 10+2 examination and even had cleared the subject of Chemistry, in which she was placed in Compartment.
Her result was declared on August 7, 2006.
On that basis, the learned counsel has argued that at the time of second counselling held on September 7, 2006, the petitioner was fully eligible for being counseled and the passing of the supplementary examination by the petitioner in the subject of Chemistry shall relate back to the annual examination of 2006.
In this regard, the learned counsel has relied upon a Division Bench Judgment of this Court in The Punjab School Education Board v. Harinder Kaur, 1990(2) Recent Services Judgments 217.
(b) The petitioner was under a disability at the time of first counselling held on August 3, 2006 but at the time of second counselling held on September 7, 2006, the said disability had been removed and the petitioner had passed her 10+2 examination in all subjects prior to the date of second counselling.
According to the learned counsel, in such circumstances, doctrine of Eclipse was attracted and, therefore, the petitioner was to be treated as fully eligible at the time of second counselling and, therefore, was entitled to be admitted to BDS course.
6.
On the other hand, Shri TS Dhindsa, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent University has refuted both the aforesaid arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Dhindsa has produced before us the Prospectus for PMET 2006 issued by the respondent University and has specifically referred to Part II of the said prospectus which contains eligibility conditions for the candidates seeking admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS/ BHMS courses.
Shri Dhindsa has also pointed out that the aforesaid eligibility conditions form part of the prospectus and have been included as per Punjab Government Notification No. 5/18/06-3HBIII/1940, dated April 24, 2006.
Our pointed attention has been drawn to the fact that as per the eligibility conditions, a candidate should have passed qualifying examination as a regular candidate from a recognised institution/University as per details given in Clause (i)(a) to (f) and the candidate should have passed 10+2 examination and should also be eligible as per Clauses (ii) and (iii) of the eligibility conditions.
According to Shri Dhindsa Clause (iv) of the para 2(I) is not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
7.
For the sake of convenience, we reproduce clauses (ii) to (iv) to para 2(I) as under :  "(i) The candidate should have passed 10+2 or equivalent examination as listed under 2(I)A(i)(a) to (f), during the Annual examination held in March/April 2006, or earlier.
(iii) Those candidates who had been placed in compartment in the earlier year should clear the same along with the students of annual examination of 2006.
Those who are placed in compartment in the annual examination 2006 or who are already in compartment and fail to clear the same in the annual examination 2006 shall not be eligible for admission to MBBS/BDS and BAMS/BHMS.
(iv) Result not declared - A candidate who may have appeared in the qualifying examination in the annual batch, but whose result has not been declared, may be provisionally permitted to appear in PMET 2006.
The candidate will be required to produce the evidence of the result having been declared and he/she having passed the annual examination 2006 fulfilling the eligibility by the time of first counselling."
8.
With regard to first counselling, Shri Dhindsa has argued that a candidate for being eligible to admission to anyone of the aforesaid courses including the BDS course was required to have passed 10+2 or equivalent examination as detailed in clause (ii) during the annual examination held in March/April 2006 or earlier.
Shri Dhindsa has also specifically relied upon clause (iii) of the Regulations wherein it has been specifically provided that those candidates who had been placed in compartment in the earlier years should clear the same alongwith the students of annual examination of 2006.
However, those who are placed in compartment in the annual examination 2006 shall not be eligible for admission to the aforesaid courses.
In these circumstances, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent University has maintained that the petitioner on her own showing had not cleared her 10+2 examination at the time of the annual examination since at that point of time she was placed in compartment in one of the subjects, namely, Chemistry and concededly the petitioner had cleared the aforesaid subject in a supplementary examination.
According to the learned counsel, clause (iii) of the Regulations specifically declared such students as ineligible.
The learned counsel has also argued that the reliance placed by the petitioner on Harinder Kaur's case (supra) was totally misplaced, inasmuch as, in the said case the controversy was entirely distinguishable.
9.
With regard to the second argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri Dhindsa has maintained that the doctrine of Eclipse had no application to the facts and circumstances of the case, inasmuch as the eligibility of a candidate was to be determined as per the State Government notification dated April 24, 2006, which was duly made a part of the eligibility conditions in the prospectus as well.
It has been argued by the learned counsel that once the petitioner was not eligible at all as per clauses (ii) and (iii), then in such a situation, the petitioner could not claim that the aforesaid disability stood removed later on.
10.
We have duly considered the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties with some anxiety.
11.
The eligibility conditions provided in clauses (ii) and (iii), as noticed above, clearly stipulate that a candidate to be eligible should have passed 10+2 or equivalent examination during the annual examination held in March/April 2006 or earlier.
Clause (iii) clearly stipulates that those candidates who had been placed in the compartment in the earlier years should clear the same along with the students of annual examination of 2006.
Clause (iii) specifically declares that those candidates who are already in compartment and fail to clear the same in the annual examination 2006 shall not be eligible for admission to MBBS/BDS and BAMS/BHMS courses.
In these circumstances, the petitioner was not eligible at all under the aforesaid clauses (ii) and (iii) of the Regulation.
12.
We have duly considered the law laid down by the Division Bench in Harinder Kaur's case (supra) upon which a strong reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the aforesaid case, a candidate who had taken her matriculation examination in March 1986 held by Punjab School Education Board had failed but in a supplementary examination held in September 1986 she was successful.
She submitted her admission form for plus one examination.
The examination was held in April 3, 1987.
However, the candidature of the aforesaid petitioner was cancelled by the Board on the ground that she had passed the matriculation examination in September 1986 amd appeared in plus one examination in April 1987.
Thus, the condition of one year's gap between the two examinations was not fulfilled and she was not entitled to appear in the examination.
On the aforesaid facts, the Division Bench interpreted the various regulations and held that Regulation 58 of the Regulations 1986 of the School Education Board had carved out an exception to Regulation 5A and, therefore, Regulation 5A could not be read as a condition of eligibility in case of regular candidates and since the aforesaid petitioner was a regular candidate, therefore, the condition of time gap of one academic year between last and taking of the next higher class was not applicable in her case.
Additionally, Division Bench also held that since the aforesaid petitioner was a regular student of a school and had taken the matriculation examination in March 1986, therefore, the supplementary examination taken by her would relate back to year March 1986 examination and, therefore, when she had appeared in her plus one examination on April 3, 1987, there would be deemed to be a gap of one year between the two examinations.
On the aforesaid facts, the Division Bench had held that passing of the supplementary examination would relate back to the date of passing of the annual examination.
However, the facts and circumstances of the present case are entirely distinguishable and the law laid down in Harinder Kaur's case (supra) is not applicable at all to the present controversy.
13.
We have already noticed above that clauses (ii) and (iii) of the Regulations are mandatory with regard to eligibility conditions and clause (iii), as a matter of fact, deals with circumstances which arise for consideration in the present case.
Consequently, the petitioner cannot be treated to be eligible for seeking admission to BDS course.
14.
We may also take note of clause (iv) of the Regulations to which reference was made by the learned counsel for the petitioner during the course of arguments.
The learned counsel has argued that clause (iv) deals with a situation when result of a candidate who had appeared in qualifying examination in the annual batch had not been declared but even such a candidate was permitted to appear provisionally in PMET 2006 subject to the condition that such a candidate was required to produce the evidence of the result having been declared and he/she having passed the examination 2006 fulfilling the eligibility by the time of first counselling.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has maintained that since the aforesaid clause (iv) shows that if a candidate was eligible on the date of counselling in a case when the result was not declared but was declared late, then in similar circumstances for a candidate, like the petitioner, who had subsequently cleared her qualifying examination in supplementary examination, but before the date of counselling, should also be treated as eligible.
15.
The argument of the learned counsel, although appears to be attractive but cannot be accepted.
Even clause (iv) of the Regulations specifically deals with a situation when a candidate for being treated as eligible must show on the date of counselling that his result of the annual examination 2006 had been declared and that he or she fulfilled the eligibility at the time of counselling.
The thrust of clause (iv) is again on the annual examination of 2006 and not on eligibility condition on the date of counselling.
It is only with a view to meet the situation that the result of a candidate might not have been declared by the University in time.
The said clause (iv) does not alter in any manner the eligibility conditions stipulated in clauses (ii) and (iii).
16.
With regard to the second argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner also, we are satisfied that doctrine of Eclipse has absolutely no application to the case in hand.
The doctrine of Eclipse would be attracted only when to start with if a person is eligible for consideration but only because of some disability, his claim cannot be considered at a particular point of time.
In such a situation, if on the happening of a subsequent event, the said disability is removed, then the original eligibility of such a person would revive and the eclipse of disability having been removed, the claim of such a person would be liable to be considered in accordance with law.
However, in the present case, the petitioner on her own showing was not eligible even to start with, inasmuch as, she had not qualified her 10+2 annual examination held in March/April 2006, having been placed in compartment in the subject of Chemistry.
Once the petitioner was not eligible even to start with, any subsequent happening cannot make her eligible.
The doctrine of Eclipse would absolutely be not attracted in such a situation.
17.
We may also take note of reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dularey Lodh, appellant v. The IIIrd Addl District Judge, Kanpur and others, 1984(2) RCR(Rent) 132 (SC) : AIR 1984 SC 1260 with regard to the fact that once the subsequent event/enactment removed the disability, then the original rights of the party would revive at once and become operative.
18.
As noticed above, since the petitioner had no original rights even to start with, being not eligible, the question of revival of any rights and removal of Eclipse would not even arise.
The aforesaid doctrine and the judgment relied upon by the petitioner would have absolutely no application to the facts of the case.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we do not find any merit in the present petition.
The same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.
`