AS Naidu, J - The nucleus of the dispute in each of these cases relates back to 15th of September, 1995 when an advertisement was issued in the daily "Samaj" inviting applications for filling up the posts of Junior Clerks in different offices in the district of Sonepur under the control of the Collector, Sonepur.
The advertisement indicated that the number of vacancies was `15' and might go up.
In response to the said advertisement a number of candidates including the present opposite parties applied for the posts and appeared at the selection tests.
After the process of selection was over, a select list of 66 successful candidates was published by the Collector on 6th November, 1995.
The list specifically indicated that out of the said 66 candidates, 38 candidates belonged to reserved categories; viz. 11 Scheduled Tribe, 13 Scheduled Caste, 8 SEBC, and 1 Physically Handicapped; and the rest belonged to general category.
Till 13-8-1996, 40 candidates out of the 66 selected candidates were given appointment.
14 candidates out of the said list who were not favoured with appointment orders moved the Orissa State Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench vide OA Nos. 1760 (C), 1761 (C), 1762 (C), 1763 (C), 1764 (C), 1765 (C), 1766 (C), 1767 (C), 2336 (C) and 2337 (C) of 1997; 142 (C) and 443 (C) of 1998; and 1903 (C) of 1999.
All the said OA's were heard together by the Tribunal.
2.
According to the applicants before the Tribunal, who are opposite parties before this Court, the Collector had conducted the recruitment test as per the requisitions submitted before him by different authorities of the district.
They alleged that many candidates who were placed much below them in the select list had been given appointment orders, while the cases of the applicants had been ignored for no fault of theirs.
3.
The Collector, Sonepur as well as the State of Orissa who were the respondents in the aforesaid OA's filed their objections before the Tribunal inter alia taking the stand that out of the select list, 31 had been given appointment on 8-11-1995 and 6 on 13-8-1996.
It was explained that a tentative select list of 66 candidates had been prepared although the same number of vacancies were not available at the disposal of the Collector.
The further stand of the respondents before the Tribunal was that appointment orders to rest of the candidates out of the select list were not issued on the assumption that the said select list which was prepared on 6-11-1995 was to remain in force only for a period of one year.
It was not disputed that the recruitment was conducted as per the Orissa Ministerial Service Rules, 1985, hereinafter referred to as `the OMS Rules, 1985'.
4.
In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, the Tribunal called for the relevant files and entire select list of the 66 candidates and after meticulously examining the same as also considering the number of vacancies meant for reserved categories as per the roster points, arrived at the conclusion that 26 out of the 66 candidates had illegally not been given appointment orders.
According to the Tribunal, even 5 male ST candidates had not been sponsored, and for such candidates the number of vacancies empanelled was less than the requirement.
The Tribunal further held that inconsonance with Rule 11 (1) of the OMS Rules, 1985 as prevalent at the time of recruitment in question the number of successful candidates in order of merit should have been equal the number of vacancies determined under Rule 6.
As such, drawing up a panel of candidates numbering more than the number of vacancies, according to the Tribunal, was in contravention of the aforesaid 1985 Rules, but for that the candidates who were selected after facing rigourous recruitment tests at more than one state were not to be penalized.
Accordingly the Tribunal allowed the OA's directing that the left over candidates out of the select list who had not been sponsored for appointment be sponsored to different offices in the Sonepur District against the vacancies earmarked for the respective categories to which they belonged, but then while sponsoring them, their placement in the panel should be strictly followed.
The said judgment of the Tribunal is assailed by the State of Orissa in these thirteen Writ applications.
5.
The main ground on which the judgment of the Tribunal is assailed is that the Tribunal acted illegally and with material irregularity in not keeping in mind that the select list which was prepared on 16-11-1995 had expired long since and, as such, no candidate out of the said list could be appointed.
According to the State, out of the said select list of 66 candidates, 40 have got appointment and the number of left over candidates is 26.
Out of the said 26 candidates, it is alleged that while only 13 candidates had filed the OA's before the Tribunal, the latter having directed to give appointment to all the left over 26 candidates exceeded its jurisdiction, and converted the OA's to Public Interest Litigations.
The impugned judgment is also criticized on the ground that the Tribunal had acted illegally in holding that in consonance With Rule 11 (1) of the OMS Rules, 1985, the number of selected candidates should be the same as the number of vacancies, although in fact the said rule stipulates that the list of successful candidates drawn in order of merit should not exceed doubled the number of vacancies as determined under Rule 6.
It is contended that the Collector did not act in contravention of the provisions of the aforesaid Rules and the judgment of the Tribunal being not sustainable in law may be quashed.
6.
After receiving Rule of this Court, a counter affidavit has been filed by the opposite parties who were the applicants before the Tribunal in the aforesaid OA's.
It is averred that in contravention of the rules, though posts reserved for male ST candidates were lying vacant, the same were not filled up by candidates of such category whose names found place in the select list.
While supporting the observations made and the conclusions arrived at by the Tribunal, the opposite parties have prayed that the Writ applications may be dismissed in limine as there was clear contravention of the statutory rules.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties patiently.
We have also examined the rules sacrosanetly, gone through the materials on record meticulously, and considered the submissions diligently.
The OMS Rules, 1985 clearly provides that the advertisement shall indicate the total number of vacancies and also the number of reserved vacancies for the purpose of conducting the competitive examination.
Rule 11 (1) thereof as prevalent on the date of the advertisement clearly stipulated that the Select list of the successful candidates in order of merit would be equal the number of vacancies determined under Rule 6.
Here the advertisement stipulated that there were `15' vacancies and the vacancy position might go up.
The select list prepared admittedly contained the names of 66 successful candidates.
A cumulative reading of Rules 6 and 11 (1) of the OMS Rules, 1985 vis-a-vis the select list which contained the names of 66 successful candidates leads to an irresistible conclusion that the number of vacancies at the time of publication of the select list was 66.
The stand of the State before this Court is that under the impression that the select list should contain double the number of vacancies, a list of 66 candidates was published.
But then, if the said statement is accepted, the vacancies that existed at the time of publication of the select list would have been 33.
But it appears that the total number of candidates already appointed is 40.
Thus the stand taken by the State is prevaricating, absurd and not acceptable.
On perusal of the impugned judgment we are satisfied that the Tribunal has rightly discarded the stand of the State.
The Tribunal has painstakingly examined the materials available on record and on being satisfied has arrived at its conclusions, and we find no infirmity or illegality therein.
8.
The submission of the State that as one year had expired from the date of publication of the select list, the same had spent its validity cannot also be accepted.
If vacancies were available, the candidates selected but illegally not sponsored for appointment should not suffer.
That apart, it is pertinent to mention here that before the Tribunal and also before this Court learned counsel for the State conceded that no further recruitment has been conducted in the meanwhile by the Collector, Sonepur.
The Tribunal has also rightly observed that in the meantime several other vacancies might have arisen due to retirement of employees, creation of new posts and the like.
Even according to us, in the interest of justice and equity, the poor applicants who have been all along diligently prosecuting the lis, and have been moving in the corridors for the last nine years should not suffer due to laches of the State.
Justice though delayed should not be denied to them.
9.
Accordingly while upholding the impugned judgment of the Tribunal; we direct that the appointment of the candidates should be confined only to the fourteen opposite parties who were the applicants in the OA's before the Tribunal.
Their service shall be reckoned from the date of their joining and their inter se seniority will be as per their respective positions in the select list.
The appointments letters be issued to them expeditiously, preferably within a period of two months hence, indicating the place of posting and the date of joining.
The Writ applications are accordingly allowed in part.
I.M.
Quddusi, J - I agree.
Applications partly allowed.