BP Katakey, J - The petitioners who are presently working as Readers in Govt. Aizawl College, have filed the present writ petition challenging the notifications dated 9-12-2002 and 23-1-2003 issued by the Additional Secretary to the Govt. of Mizoram appointing the respondent Nos. 3, 4, 5 and 6 and transferring and posting the respondent No. 7 as Principal in different Govt.
Colleges in the State of Mizoram and also for consideration of their cases for appointment to the post of Principal in different colleges as per the University Grant Commission Scheme, 1998, with retrospective effect from 9-12-02 i.e. the date when the private respondent Nos. 3 and 6 were appointed to the said post.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of the present writ petition is that, the petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 were initially recruited as Lecturer and thereafter promoted to the grade of reader, with effect from 25-8-89 and 5-9- 90 respectively.
Respondent No. 6 was initially appointed as Lecturer on 19-7-73 and then promoted to the selection grade lecturer with effect from 21-7-81.
The respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 7 were appointed as Lecturer on 1-12-76 and promoted to selection grade Lecturer with effect from 5-7-88, 1-1-90 and 1-1-86 respectively.
The respondent No. 7 thereafter deputed as Principal of J Buana deficit college for a period of two years from 1-3-93 and appointed as Principal vide notification dated 18-11-96 and thereafter transferred to Government Serchhip College as Principal with effect from 1-2-03 by the impugned notification dated 23-1-03.
The respondent No. 6 was deputed as Principal of J Buana College.
Lunglei for a period of two years vide notification dated 5-2-90, which was extended by another one year with effect from 7-2-92 vide notification dated 5-2-92.
He was thereafter transferred and posted as acting Principal Government Lunglei College with effect from 1-3-93 and thereafter as Principal Government Serchhip College vide notification dated 7- 11-96.
By another notification dated 3-2-97 he was transferred and posted as Joint Director (Kolasib) and thereafter again transferred as Principal Govt. Aizawl College vide notification dated 15-11-2001.
The respondent No. 5 was transferred and posted as Principal Government Aizawl College vide notification dated 17-8-99 and thereafter as Principal Government Zirtiri Residential Science College vide notification dated 15-11-2001.
The respondent No. 4 was transferred and posted as Principal, Govt. Champhai College vide notification dated 3-2-97.
The respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 was thereafter appointed as Principal and posted in Govt. Champhai College.
Govt. Zirtiri Residential Science College and Govt. Aizawl College respectively by the impugned notification dated 9-12-2002.
The respondent No. 3 was also appointed as Principal Lunglei Government College by the said notification dated 9-12-2002, but since he has retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation during pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner has not prayed for any relief against him.
3.
I have heard Mr. C Lalramzauva, learned counsel for the petitioners.
Mr. N Sailo, learned State counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, Mr. M Zothankhuma, learned counsel for the respondent Nos. 4 to 7 and Mr. KV Tlangmawia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 8 i.e. Mizoram Public Service Commission.
The respondent No. 3 has not contested the writ proceeding.
4.
Mr. C Lalramzauva, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the Government of Mizoram in terms of the guidelines issued by the Govt. of India framed a scheme for revision of pay-scales of Teachers, Tutors/Demonstrators, Librarians and Physical Education personnel in the Universities and Colleges.
The said scheme was implemented vide notification dated 3-4-91 giving effect from 1-1-86.
It was stipulated in the said scheme that the criteria for appointment to the post of Principal will be laid down by the State Government.
In the meantime the UGC has framed a regulation namely the University Grants Commission (qualification required of a person to be appointed to the teaching staff of the University and institutions affiliated to it) Regulation 1991 laying down the minimum qualification and the manner of appointment to the post of Professor, Reader and Lecturer in University or colleges.
The UGC thereafter framed a new scheme of revision of pay-scale minimum qualification for appointment, other service conditions of University and College Teachers.
Librarians, Director of Physical Education and Registrars of Universities in the year 1998, as a measure of maintenance of standard in higher education.
The said scheme was circulated by the Secretary of the UGC to the Vice-Chancellors of all the Universities as well as the Education Secretaries of all the States and Union territories vide communication dated 24-12-98.
The Government of Mizoram vide notification dated 12-10-99 has adopted and implemented the said UGC Scheme of 1998 in respect of the college teachers under the Government of Mizoram.
According to the learned counsel, the minimum qualification required for appointment as Principal in the Reader's grade has been stipulated in the said scheme, which is Master degree with at least 55% of the marks or its equivalent grade of `B' in the 7 points scale with latter grades `O', `A', `B', `C', `D', `E' and `F' and Ph.D or equivalent qualification and also having total experience of 10 years of teaching/research in universities/colleges and other institutions of higher education.
Mr. Lalramzauva, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that as the Government of Mizoram vide notification dated 12-10-99 adopted and implemented the said UGC scheme of 1998, the appointment to the post of Principal has to be made in terms of the provisions contained in the said scheme i.e. the persons who are qualified to be appointed as Principal can only be appointed to the said post after due selection.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioners having obtained 55% of marks in the Master Degree and also having obtained the Ph.D degree and 10 years of teaching experience are qualified for being considered for appointment to the post of Principal, but the respondent Nos. 4 to 7 though were not qualified to be appointed as Principal, in terms of the UGC scheme of 1998, having not obtained the Ph.D degree, or equivalent qualification, were appointed in the said post of Principal that too without initiating any process for selection as required under the 1998 UGC scheme.
Therefore, the appointment of the private respondents to the post of Principal is contrary to the UGC Scheme, which was adopted and implemented by the Government of Mizoram.
The alternative argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that even assuming the UGC scheme of 1998 is not applicable in case of the appointment of the private respondent to the post of Principal, the Government having framed the Rules being Mizoram Education & Human Resources Department (Group `A' posts) Recruitment Rules, 1987, (hereinafter referred to as the 1987 Rules), laying down the manner of appointment to the post of Principal of the college, the procedures laid down therein have to be followed in making selection and appointment to the post of Principal.
According to the learned counsel the respondent authorities before appointing the respondent Nos. 4 to 7 have not even followed the procedure laid down in the said 1987 Rules and therefore, the appointment of the respondents to the post of Principal is bad in law on that count also Mr. C Lalramzauva, learned counsel has therefore, submitted that the appointment of the respondent Nos. 4 to 7 is required to be interfered with and the respondents may be directed to undertake the process of selection to the post of Principal in terms of the UGC scheme of 1998.
The learned counsel in support of his contention has placed reliance on a decision of the Apex Court in University of Delhi v. Raj Singh, reported in 1994 Supp (3) SCC 516.
5.
Mr. N Sailo, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has submitted that private respondents were transferred and posted as Principal in different Government Colleges long before the issuance of the Government Notification dated 12-10-99 adopting and implementing the UGC scheme of 1998, as the pay scale of the Lecturer of senior grade and Reader and the Principal (Reader grade) are same.
According to the learned State counsel since at the time of their transfer and posting as Principal no minimum requisite qualification for the post of Principal was laid down by the UGC and the qualification prescribed in the UGC scheme of 1998 having been circulated vide communication dated 24-12-98 and the same having been adopted and implemented by the State Government vide notification dated 12-10-99 wherein the minimum qualification for being considered for appointment to the post of Principal (Reader's grade) was laid down for the first time by the UGC, the said requirement shall not be applicable in respect of the private respondents who were transferred and posted as Principal much before issuance of the UGC guidelines of the 1998 and adoption and implementation of the said scheme by the Government vide Notification dated 12-10-99.
The further submission of the learned State counsel is that the minimum qualification for recruitment to the post of Principal (Reader's grade) as laid down in the UGC scheme of 1998 is applicable in case of direct recruitment only and not in case of transfer and posting, as has been done in the instant case.
Regarding the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that no process of selection was undertaken by the respondents authority before appointing the private respondents as Principal, the learned State counsel has submitted that the suitability of the respondents were assessed by the MPSC while they were appointed as Lecturer (selection grade) and as pay scale of the Lecturer (selection grade) and the Principal is the same, the further assessment of the suitability is not required for posting such Lecturer in selection grade as Principal.
Mr. Sailo, learned State counsel has further submitted that the Government of Mizoram by the notification dated 12-10-99 adopted and implemented the UGC scheme of 1988 in respect of revision of pay only and not in respect of qualification prescribed for the purpose of recruitment to the post of Principal (Reader's grade) and therefore, the qualification prescribed for appointment for the said post under the said scheme is not applicable.
6.
Mr. Michael Zothankhuma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 4 to 7 has submitted that the respondents were initially transferred and posted as Principals in the respective colleges, prior to the issuance of UGC scheme of 1998 and adoption of the same by the Government of Mizoram vide notification dated 12-10-99 and therefore, minimum educational qualification prescribed for appointment to the post of Principal under the said scheme is not applicable in case of the appointment of the private respondents to the post of Principals.
According to the learned counsel since the post of Principal and the Lecturer (selection grade) carries the same scale of pay, and as the private respondents are admittedly senior to the petitioners, they were transferred and posted as Principal.
Mr. Michael, the learned counsel has further submitted that in any case as the posts against which the respondents were appointed as Principal fell vacant before issuance of the Notification dated 12-10-99 issued by the Government of Mizoram adopting, and implementing the UGC scheme 1998, the stipulation regarding the educational qualification in the said UGC scheme of 1998 for appointment to the post of Principal is not applicable.
According to the learned counsel though 1987 Rule was framed by the Government laying down the procedure for selection to the post of Principal, the said Rule was never applied for the purpose of selection to the post of Principal.
The learned counsel in support of his contention has placed reliance in YV Rangaiah v. J Sreenivasa Rao, reported in (1983) 3 SCC 284.
7.
I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and also perused the pleadings including the annexures appended there to.
8.
The respondents were promoted to the selection grade Lecturer on various dates.
The pay scale of the Sr. Grade Lecturer as well as Principal (Reader's grade) are similar and identical.
The respondent Nos. 4, 5, 6 and 7 were initially transferred and posted as Principal vide Notification dated 3-2-97, 17-8-99, 1-3-99 and 18-11-96 in Government Champhai College Govt. Aizawl College, Govt. Lunglei College and Govt. Serchhip College, respectively.
The respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were thereafter appointed as Principal in Govt. Champhai college, Zirtiri Residential Science College and Govt. Aizawl College respectively vide Notification dated 9-12-2002.
The respondent No. 7 was transferred to Govt. Serchhip College vide Notification dated 23-1-03.
The said Notification dated 9-12-02 and 23-103 are in challenge in the present writ petition on the ground that the respondents are not qualified to hold the post of Principal in terms of the provisions of UGC scheme 1998 and University Grant Commission (minimum qualification required for appointment and carrier advancement of teachers in universities and institutions affiliated to it) Regulation 2000, alternatively, on the ground that no selection was made before appointing the respondents to the said post of Principal as required under 1987 Rules.
The respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were transferred and posted as Principal in the Govt. College vide Notification dated 3-2-97 and 17-8-99.
The respondent No. 6 was initially deputed as Principal in J Buana College, Lunglei for a period of two years vide Notification dated 5-2-90, which was extended by another one year vide Notification dated 5-2-92 and was thereafter transferred and posted as acting Principal Govt. Lunglei College with effect from 1-3-93 and to Govt. Serchhip College as Principal vide Notification dated 17-11-96.
The respondent No. 6 was again transferred as Principal Govt. Aizawl College vide Notification dated 15-11-01.
Respondent No. 7 was initially deputed as Principal in J Buana College for a period of two years with effect from 1-3-93 vide Notification dated 25-3-93 and thereafter appointed as the Principal of said College vide Notification dated 18-11-96 on deputation.
He was transferred to Govt. Serchhip College as Principal with effect from 1-2-03 vide Notification dated 23-1-03.
9.
The respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were thereafter appointed as the Principal of Govt. Champhai College, Govt. Zirtiri Residential Science College and Govt. Aizawl College vide Notification dated 9-12-02.
The respondent No. 7 was transferred from J Buana College to Govt Serchhip College as Principal, with effect from 1-2-03. vide Notification dated 23-1-03.
(Sic) one Pu.
L.T.
Muana who retired from service on attaining age of superannuation.
It is evident from the Notification dated 3-2-97.
17-8-99, 5-2-90 and 25-2-93 that the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were transferred and posted as Principal and respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were deputed as Principal and posted in the respective Colleges of posting.
The respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were for the first time appointed as Principal vide Notification dated 9-10-2002 as they were earlier posted as Principal on transfer.
The respondent No. 7 though initially deputed as Principal and posted in J Buana College on deputation for the period of two years with effect from 1-3-93 vide Notification dated 25-3-93 he was appointed to the said post vide Notification dated 18-11-96 with the stipulation that he will continue to be on deputation.
All these appointments were made either by transfer or on deputation and thereafter by issuing fresh appointments orders after 1987 Rules was framed by the Govt. of Mizoram.
10.
Under 1987 Rules, which was framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and which came into force from the date of the publication in the Official Gazette, i.e. on 17-11-87, the post of Principal of Degree College is a selection post and to be filled up by promotion from the post of Vice Principal/Professor degree College or Vice Principal (M.I.E.)
with not less than 5 years regular service in the grade, failing which by transfer on deputation.
The selection to the post of Principal is required to be made by the MPSC/Selection Committee/DPC as may be constituted by the Govt. of Mizoram from time to time.
11.
The University Grants Commission in exercise of the power conferred by clause (e) of sub-section (1) of Section 26 read with Section 14 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and in supersession of the Regulations issued on 13-6-83 and the Notifications dated 19-2-85 and 26-11-85 framed the Regulations namely University Grants Commission (qualifications required of a person to be appointed to the teaching staff of the university and institutions affiliated to it) Regulation 1991.
Schedule 1 of the said Regulation prescribed the minimum qualification required for the post of professor, readers and lecturers in subjects other than fine arts, management, engineering and technology in Universities or Colleges for appointment of persons through open advertisement and for appointment of persons as Reader and placement in Selection Grade Lecturer and Senior Scale Lecturer.
The said Regulation does not specify the minimum qualification required for appointment to the post of Principal of the degree college i.e. the post of Principal (Reader's grade).
12.
The University Grant Commission, in the year 1998 framed a scheme of revision of pay scale, minimum qualification for appointment, other service condition of University and College teachers, Librarians.
Directors of Physical Education and Registrars of Universities as a measure for the maintenance for standard in higher education.
The said scheme was circulated vide communication dated 24-12-98 issued by the Secretary of the UGC to all the Vice Chancellors of the Universities and Education Secretaries of all States/Union Territories.
Under the said scheme minimum qualification for being appointed as Principal (Reader's grade) is stipulated, which is as follows:  "422 Principal (Reader's Grade)  1.
A Master's Degree with at least 55% of the marks or its equivalent grade of B in the 7 point scale with latter grades O, A, B, C, D, E & F.  2.
Ph.D or equivalent qualification.
3.
Total experience of 10 years of teaching/Research in Universities/Colleges and other institutions of higher education".
13.
The Govt. of Mizoram vide Notification dated 12-10-99 has adopted and implemented the said UGC scheme relating to the revision to the pay scale, minimum qualification for appointment of teachers in Universities and Colleges.
For better appreciation the said Notification is quoted below :  Notification  Dated Aizawl, The 12th Oct 99  In pursuance to the decisions taken in the meeting of the council of ministers held on 30-9-1999 and circulated vide memo No. J. 1, 10, 1 2/2/99EDS(Vol.IV) dt. 4-10-99, the Governor of Mizoram is pleased to order adoption and implementation of the UGC norms relating to revision of pay scales, minimum qualification for appointment of teachers in Universities and Colleges and other measures for the maintenance of standards 1988, in respect of the college teachers under the Govt. of Mizoram as adopted by the Govt. of India vide No. F-I-22/97-UI dt. 27-7-98, No. F-I-22/97-UI dt. 22-2-98, F-I-22/97-UI dt. 6-11-98 and UGC Notification issued vide letter No. F. 3-1/94 (PS) dt. 24-12-98 which are appended herewith.
Pay and allowances of college teachers covered by the scheme shall be fixed in the revised scale of pay with effect from 1-1-96.
This issues with the concurrence of finance department vide the UO No. FIN (PRU)/5 dt. 30-8-99.
Sd/-  (Denghnuna)  Secretary to the Govt. of Mizoram".
14.
The UGC scheme of 1998 which was circulated vide communication dated 24-12-98 was thereafter notified as Regulations by the UGC by framing University Grants Commission (minimum qualification required for the appointment and career advancement of teachers in universities and institutions affiliated to it) Regulation 2000 (herein after referred to as 2000 Regulation).
The said Regulation was framed by the UGC in exercise of its power under Section 26(1)(e) and (g) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and in suppression of the Regulations of 1991 and scheme of 1998.
The Regulation also provides the minimum qualification for being appointed as Principal (Reader's grade) which is as follows :-  "1.2.0 Principal (Reader's Grade)  1.
A Master's Degree with at least 55% of the marks or its equivalent grade of B in the 7 point scale with latter grades O, A, B, C, D, E & F.  2.
Ph.
D or equivalent published work.
3.
Total experience of 10 years of teaching/Research in Universities/Colleges and other institutions of higher education."
15.
The University Grants Commission Act, 1956 was enacted under the provision of Entry 66 of List 1 of the Constitution of India, to make provision for co-ordination and determination of standard in Universities and for that purpose to establish a University Grants Commission.
Section 12 of the Act provides that the general duty of the Commission is to take all Strick steps as it may think fit for promotion and coordination of University education and for determination and maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and research in Universities.
Section 2(f), defines a "University" which means a University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or "a State Act and includes any such institutions as may, in consultation with the Universities concerned is recognized by the Commission in accordance with the Regulations made in that behalf.
Section 26 of the Act empowers the UGC to frame Regulations in respect of the matter mentioned therein including defining the qualification required of any person to be appointed as teaching staff of the University and regulating the maintenance of standard and the co-ordination of work or facilities in Universities.
The UGC in exercise of its power conferred by Section 26(1) (e) (g) of the UGC Act, 1956 has framed the 2000 Regulation prescribing the minimum qualification required for the purpose of appointment as Principal (Reader's grade).
16.
The Government of Mizoram also vide notification dated 12-10-99 adopted and implemented the UGC scheme of 1998, which was subsequently converted to the 2000 Regulation.
The said scheme was adopted and implemented by the Government of Mizoram in toto.
Therefore, while making the appointment to the post of Principal (Readers grade) persons who have the minimum requisite qualifications as notified in the said 1998 scheme and 2000 Regulation can be selected for the post of Principal (Reader's grade).
Admittedly the private respondent Nos. 4 to 7 do not have the requisite qualifications as stipulated in 1998 scheme and the 2000 regulation.
It is also an admitted fact that before appointing the private respondents to the post of Principal no selection was held and they were in fact either transferred and posted or deputed to the post of Principal and thereafter appointed to the said post without any selection.
17.
In the instant case it is not in dispute that the colleges where the respondents were appointed as Principal, affiliated to the Mizoram University, which came into being by virtue of the Mizoram University Act, 2000 and the same is recognized by the UGC The colleges in question being affiliated to Mizoram University, they are bound by the provisions contained in University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and the Rules and Regulations framed thereunder.
Section 14 of the UGC Act, 1956 lays down the consequences of failure of University to comply with the recommendation of the Commission.
It has been stipulated in the said provision that if any University grants affiliation in respect of any course of study to any college referred to in sub-section 5 of Section 12A in contravention of the provision of that sub-section or fails within a reasonable time to comply with any recommendation made by the Commission under Section 12 or 13 or contravene the provision of any Rule made under Section 25 (2) (f) (g) or any Regulation made under Section 26 (e) or (f) or (g), may withhold from the Universities grants proposed to be made out of the fund of the Commission.
Therefore, the 2000 Regulation made under Section 26 (1) (e) and (g) of the UGC Act, 1956 if not implemented, the University shall not receive the grants from the Commission.
As the State Govt. has implemented the said 1998 UGC scheme in toto, which was translated into 2000 Regulation, the posts of Principal (Reader's grade) the post concerned in the present writ petition, are to be filled up by the person qualified in terms of the said scheme and Regulation.
The 1987 rules framed by the Govt. Mizoram under Article 309 of the Constitution of India shall cease to apply as soon as the 2000 Regulation was framed by the UGC in exercise of its power conferred by Section 26 of the UGC Act 1956.
18.
In view of the discussions made above, the contention of the learned State counsel and the learned counsel for the private respondents that the UGC scheme and the Regulation are not applicable in the instant case, cannot be accepted.
It is evident from the narrated above that though the private respondents were initially posted as Principal either by way of transfer or on deputation, the respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were subsequently appointed in the said posts vide notification dated 9-12-2002 and the respondent No. 7 was transferred and posted as Principal vide notification dated 23-1-2003.
The said respondent No. 7 has never been appointed substantively in the post of Principal.
Therefore, the contention of the learned State counsel that as the private respondents were appointed as Principal prior to framing of UGC Scheme of 1998 or 2000 Regulation, therefore, the minimum qualification prescribed therein for recruitment as Principal, is not applicable, cannot be accepted.
The Government while appointing any person to the post of Principal is bound to followed the UGC Scheme of 1998 and the 2000 Regulation framed by the UGC, which stipulate minimum qualification for appointment as Principal (Reader's grade), as the Government has adopted and implemented the said Scheme in toto vide notification dated 12-10-99.
The contention of the learned State counsel that the UGC Scheme has been adopted by the Government in respect of revision of pay only and not in respect of recruitment to the post of Principal, also cannot be accepted as the Govt. by the said notification dated 12-10-99 has adopted and implemented the scheme in its entirety.
Moreover, there cannot be any part implementation of the said Scheme framed by the UGC.
19.
In University of Delhi v. Raj Singh, (Supra) the Apex Court while dealing with the provisions contained in 1991 Regulation framed by the UGC, has held that Entry 66 of the List 1 of the Constitution of India empowers the Parliament to make a law relating to the co-ordination land determination of standard in institution of higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions and accordingly University Grants Commission Act, 1956 was framed.
The 1991 Regulations which was framed in exercise of the power conferred by Section 26 of the said Act, prescribing the qualification for appointment as lecturer in University or Colleges, are mandatory and have to be followed.
20.
The learned counsel for the private respondents has relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in YV Rangaiah (supra), wherein it has been held that in case of promotion to the higher post, the Rules applicable on the date when the post fell vacant shall apply.
There is no dispute in the said legal proposition.
In the instant case the post of Principal (Reader's grade) is required to be filled up by direct recruitment in terms of the provision contained in 2000 Regulation and therefore a candidate must possess the requisite qualification for being appointed in the said post as prescribed under the Regulation framed by the UGC and on the date when the employment notice is issued.
In the instant case it is an admitted position that the respondents were appointed as Principals without any selection and though they do not possess the educational qualification as required under 2000 Regulation framed by the UGC.
Hence the said decision of the Apex Court is not applicable in this case.
The colleges in question being affiliated to the Mizoram University and having adopted and implemented the UGC scheme and making payment of salary in terms of the said scheme, are bound by the provisions contained in 1998 scheme as well as 2000 Regulation in respect of appointment to the post of Principals (Reader's grade) also.
Therefore, the contention of the said respondents that the post of Principal (Reader's grade) being in the same scale of pay with that of the post of Lecturer selection grade and therefore, inter transferable, cannot be accepted.
21.
In view of the above, the appointment of the private respondent Nos. to 7 to the posts of Principal cannot be held to be legal and valid, being contrary to the 1998 scheme as well as 2000 Regulation and hence the same are set aside.
The appointment of respondent No. 3 has not been interfered with as the petitioners, though have challenged his appointment in the writ petition, they did not press for setting aside his appointment as he has retired from service, during pendency of the writ petition, on attaining the age of superannuation.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to fill up the said posts of Principals in accordance with the provisions contained in the 2000 Regulation at the earliest.
22.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No cost.
Petition allowed.