JS Narang, J - The petitioner has invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for seeking issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant the petitioner the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2100 (meant for a Mechanical Fitter) w.e.f.
361981 the day he was promoted.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Fitter Helper (Regular work charged) on 1851976 in a regular pay scale of Rs. 750-1200.
He has passed the matriculation examination and has also acquired the qualification of ITI Subsequently, he was promoted as Mechanical Fitter vide order dated 361981, copy Annexure P1.
However, a condition had been in the order of promotion, which reads as under :  "This employee will be paid salary in the present pay scale (Fitter Coolie) and by this order he will have no claim in the seniority, till this employee as per service rules does not complete eligibility service for promotion."
The petitioner performed the work as a Mechanical Fitter but was not entitled to receive the pay pursuant to the pay scale meant for Mechanical Fitter till he attained the required experience.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that for being promoted to the post of Mechanical Fitter no experience is required.
It is also the averment that despite a period of 12 years having passed and the petitioner working as Mechanical Fitter, has not been given the pay scale meant for Mechanical Fitter.
He approached the concerned quarters but at in vain.
It was on August 7, 1992, a representation in writing was submitted, copy of Annexure P3.
He had also served a justice demand notice dated 8.12.1992 with the additional prayer of fixing seniority amongst the Mechanical Fitters, as has been claimed in the present petition, copy Annexure P5.
On account of inaction on the part of the respondents, the present petition has been filed.
4.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner.
The plea taken is that the order of promotion of the petitioner was conditional and moreover Executive Engineer was not the competent authority to promote any Helper/Coolie, as Mechanical Fitter.
It has been further averred that the petitioner has not become eligible for promotion as his name stands at Serial No. 187 in the seniority list of Fitter Helper/Coolies.
It is also the case of the respondents that the claim of the petitioner for promotion was forwarded to the Chief Engineer, Punjab i.e. the competent authority.
But the same has been rejected with the remarks that the petitioner's name stands at Serial No. 187 of the sonority list of Fitter Coolies, therefore, cannot be considered for promotion for the time being.
It is, further, the plea that vide communication dated November 5, 1993 issued by the Executive Engineer, Public Health, it has been categorically averred that the petitioner is working as Fitter/Coolie and he is being paid the salary of Coolie/Helper, the post held by the petitioner.
However, it has been admitted that the petitioner had been regularised as Fitter Helper on April 1, 1982 vide order dated June 5, 1989 passed by the Chief Engineer, Punjab.
However, it has been admitted that the justice demand notice was received by the respondents but nowhere it has been averred that any reply has been sent.
The plea taken is that the petitioner was not eligible at the time of his promotion on 361981 and the plea pursuant thereto has been reiterated as submitted in the other part of the written statement.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book containing the respective pleas of the parties.
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner had been promoted as Mechanical Fitter vide order dated 361981 and till date this order has neither been cancelled nor withdrawn as no such plea has been taken by the respondents.
It is obvious that the petitioner was allowed to function as Fitter Mechanical all this while and even to date.
The candid plea taken is that the Executive Engineer Public Health Division, Rajpura, was not competent to promote any Fitter Helper/Coolie to the post of Mechanical Fitter but nowhere the plea has been taken that the order is non est and was not acted upon.
The other plea has been taken, at the same time, that the said order was conditional order that the petitioner would not claim seniority till, as per the service rules, he does not complete the eligibility conditions for promotion.
The perusal of the order, copy Annexure P1, shows that the petitioner had been promoted in the public interest to the post of Mechanical Fitter (General duty) though the condition had been imposed that he will be paid his salary in the pay scale of Fitter Coolie.
It is the settled law that if a person is asked to perform the duties in a post which may be higher or otherwise and that the pay scale is higher than the pay scale in which he was earlier working, the pay scale payable to such incumbent cannot be denied.
In this regard reference is made to the dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India rendered in re: Selvaraj v Lt.
Governor of Island, Port Blair and others, 1998(4) RSJ 22.
6.
The stand taken by the respondents, is neither fair nor honest from any angle.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been promoted to the post of Mechanical Fitter and the respondents have not been able to show what eligibility criteria had been spelt out for being promoted to the post of Mechanical Fitter.
By taking such pleas, would not render the claim of the petitioner untenable unless the instructions/rules are quoted and disclosed, none was pointed out nor any has been pleaded.
It is strange kind of plea that the petitioner had been promoted as Mechanical Fitter but he was doing the duty as a Fitter Coolie.
Again no explanatory reasons have been given in support of this plea.
No doubt the petitioner has also approached this Court after a long delay as is evident from the facts averred that the petitioner had been promoted to the post of Mechanical Fitter in the year 1981 and that the present petition has been filed in 1993.
However, justice demand notice was served in the year 1992.
Thus, the petitioner would be entitled to the pay scale at least three years and two months prior to the date of justice demand notice but not earlier thereto.
7.
In view of the fact that the respondents have not been able to substantiate their pleas that the petitioner was not entitled to promotion and that the order passed by the Executive Engineer is non est as the same has not been withdrawn till date and further the petitioner has worked and functioned as Mechanical Fitter all this while.
In view of the dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Selvaraj's case (supra), the petitioner is entitled to pay scale of Mechanical Fitter.
Resultantly, the petition is allowed with the clarification that the petitioner shall be entitled to be paid in the pay scale of Mechanical Fitter with effect from three years two month prior to the date of service of justice demand notice which was served in December, 1992.
No interest shall be paid.
Petition allowed.