Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is praying for an order directing the school authority to permit her to participate in the selection process that may be initiated by the school authority for appointing a non- teaching member of the staff in the school.
2.
Her case is this.
She belongs to the scheduled caste community.
Her grandmother was working in the school as a peon.
When her grandmother fell seriously ill, with the consent of the school authority she started working in the school as a peon from the year 2003.
In August 2003 she registered herself with the employment exchange as an unemployed person.
The school authority assured her that at the time of filling the vacancy for the post of peon she would be permitted to participate in the selection process.
In March 2006 the school authority requisitioned names from the employment exchange for the vacant post of peon in the school.
The school authority wrongly declined to give her permission to participate in the selection process.
3.
On the strength of the single bench decision of this court in Sanjay Kumar Roy v. State & Ors. 2005(1) CHN 355, counsel argues that since the petitioner has been working in the school, in view of the apex court decision in Abu Taher v. Abdul Waheb & Ors. (it was given in Civil Appeal No. 1203 of 2001), the petitioner is entitled to participate in the selection process, even if her name is not sponsored by the employment exchange.
4.
In my view, the single bench decision cited to me is of no assistance in the present case.
It was given at a point of time when the selection process initiated by a secondary school for appointing a non-teaching member of the staff was governed only by guidelines issued by the director of school education, and not by any statutory rules.
The apex court decision was also given in the context of those guide-lines.
At the present moment the selection process is governed by the statutory rules : the West Bengal Schools (Recruitment of Non-Teaching Staff) Rules, 2005.
In terms of provisions in Rule 8(5) of those rules candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges are only entitled to participate in the selection process.
5.
Hence the petitioner is not entitled to participate in the selection process, unless her name is sponsored by the employment exchange.
Admittedly her name has not been sponsored by any employment exchange.
She is not either entitled to participate in the selection process on the strength of her working as an unapproved non-teaching member of the staff of the school.
As is known, such appointment creates no right in favour of the appointee.
For participating in the selection process the length of service of the petitioner as an unapproved non-teaching member of the staff of the school is absolutely irrelevant.
For these reasons, I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
7.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by Assistant Registrar (Court) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on the usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.