SS Saron, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India had been filed for issuance of a writ for quashing the order of discharge from military service dated 3171997 (Annexure P-5) in respect of the petitioner, which is stated to be synonymous with his retirement.
2.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was enrolled in the Army Service Corps in the category of PA on 22.9.1971.
He was promoted as Havildar/PA in December 1979.
The next channel of promotion from the rank of Havildar is to that of Naib Subedar, to which he was promoted during 1989.
He was thereafter, promoted as Subedar/PA in the year 1991.
It is stated that the petitioner has a good and an unblemished service record.
3.
In July 1993, the petitioner was posted at HQ of an Infantry Brigade at Jalandhar.
During the year 1996 on account of certain extreme compassionate and personal reasons he decided to make a request for premature retirement.
The petitioner has his aged parents to look after.
His other two brothers were settled abroad and his parents remained unwell.
He also had the land property to look after.
Accordingly, the petitioner submitted an application making a request for the grant of premature retirement on 1521996 (Annexure P-1).
This application of the petitioner was recommended by his immediate Superiors i.e. OC Troops HQ 350 Inf Bde Camp.
It was also recommended by the Commander 350 Inf Bde namely Brig.
PS Sandhu.
The same was also recommended by the departmental channel at the Headquarter Corps.
Accordingly, the application was forwarded to the Army Headquarters through a letter dated 3051996.
The Army HQ declined the application for pre-mature retirement vide letter dated 1761996, which was communicated to the petitioner by the HQ Western Command, Chandimandir, in pursuance of their letter dated 2471996 (Annexure P-2).
The rejection was due to acute shortage of PA category and present deficiency in the cadre strength.
4.
The petitioner then received a posting order to HQ 15 Corps vide letter dated 2861996 and was to move by 3181996.
Before the petitioner could move to his new place of posting, he suffered acute backache which resulted in his hospitalisation at Military Hospital Jalandhar from where he was discharged on 17.8.1996 under a down-graded medical category CEE (Temporary) for 6 to 12 months with effect from 381996 to 321997.
He made a request for change of his station of posting on account of his temporary medical category.
The place of posting of the petitioner was at a high altitude area where 15 corps was stationed.
Due to medical advise he could not go to a high altitude area.
The request o the petitioner was initially declined by the ASC Records, Bangalore, vide letter dated 9.10.1996.
The Unit of the petitioner took up the case and vide letter dated 21111996 (Annexure P-3) it was recorded that the case of the petitioner for posting to a suitable station has already been taken up with ASC Records (Sup) and that pending posting to Ambala the petitioner could be attached on temporary duty with HQ 2 Corps.
A formal application was asked to be forwarded to cover the attachment.
The petitioner was attached on temporary duty to HQ 2 Corps at Ambala.
The petitioner then met with an accident, which resulted in multiple injuries for which he was hospitalised with effect from 1451997 to 10.6.1997.
The petitioner then sought some leave on compassionate grounds and finally he was directed to report back to his HQ i.e. HQ 3250 Inf Bde, Jalandhar, in June 1997.
The petitioner learnt that despite his case for discharge having been rejected yet it was again processed without there being any request from him.
The petitioner requested that he was no more interested in proceeding on discharge prematurely and wanted to complete his full tenure.
He also submitted that the application given by him for premature retirement/discharge had already been rejected and, therefore, the same could not be proceeded with further.
Nothing was heard by the petitioner and he was directed to report to the Record Office in the month of July 1997 immediately on his return from HQ 2 Corps to his parent Unit i.e. 350 Inf.Bde.
The petitioner on reaching the Record Office gave a representation dated 1881997 (Annexure P/4) to respondent No. 3 Army Service Corps Centre (South) Bangalore, through OIC Records, for cancellation of his discharge on the ground that his earlier application was rejected and he had not given any fresh application.
Despite the representation, the petitioner was discharged from service vide the impugned order dated 3171997 (Annexure P-5).
Hence the present petition assailing the said order of discharge.
5.
The respondents filed written statement and stated that the premature discharge on compassionate ground of the petitioner was sanctioned as a special case on the basis of his request to Army HQ (ST12) through proper channel vide Unit 350(I) Infantry Brigade, vide their signal No. A-5021 dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1).
It is stated that the petitioner applied for premature retirement on compassionate grounds through proper channel vide application dated 1521996 (Annexure P-1), which was not approved by the Army HQ due to shortage of manpower as intimated vide letter dated 1761996 communicated on 2471996 (Annexure P/2).
It is further stated that it is a fact well known to the petitioner that he had through his Unit vide signal dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) requested to reconsider his request for premature discharge on compassionate grounds through his Unit and that the second request of the petitioner was accepted by the Army HQ (ST12) and his premature discharge on compassionate ground was approved as a special case vide Army HQ letter dated 1311997 (Annexure R-3).
It is stated that in these circumstances, the contention of the petitioner that he never made a request for second time is incorrect and that the discharge approved by Army HQ was correct and as per the existing orders.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
7.
It is strenuously argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner did not make any second-representation for discharge.
He has referred to para-1 of the written statement filed by the respondents, wherein it is the case of the respondents that the premature discharge on compassionate ground of the petitioner was sanctioned as a special case vide 350(I) Inf.Bde signal No. 5021 dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1).
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that in fact this signal No. 5021 dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) had already been rejected vide letter dated 2791996 (Annexure P-6).
The relevant part of which reads as follows :-  "UUCLASS (.)
PREMATURE RETIREMENT PAs.
SEE YOUR A-5021 SEP. 19 PREMATURE RETIREMENT RESPECT JC-1822709F SUB/PA KARNAIL SINGH ALREADY EXAMINED AND NOT AGREED TO.
FWD MED DOCU TO ASC RECORDS S 9 (UP TO ENABLE THEM TO EXAMINE CASE FOR DIVERSION POSTING TO LOWER ALTITUDE.
ASC RECORDS SUP ONLY.
PL EXAMINE AND FWD WITH COMMENTS AND SERVICE PROFILE."
The above communication dated 2791996 (Annexure P-6) is not denied by the respondents and it makes a specific reference to Signal No. A-5021 of 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) which is the stand of the respondents in the written statement that the petitioner himself had requested to reconsider his request for pre mature discharge on compassionate grounds in terms of his Signal dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1).
On 1412000, the following order was passed by this Court :-  "Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, relies upon Annexure P/6 to contend that the reply is contrary to the documents of the respondents themselves.
Counsel for the respondents prays for time to verify this fact.
List on 2012000, as prayed."
In these circumstances, the respondents filed an affidavit dated 27112001 of Capt.
Pransanjit Sen, Adm Officer 359 Coy ASC (Sup.)
Chandimandir.
In the affidavit, it is stated on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner's Unit 350(I) Infantry Brigade, vide their signal No. 5021 dated 19 Sep 1996 (Annexure R-1), requested the authorities to re-consider the request of the petitioner for premature discharge on compassionate grounds and petitioner's Unit was apprised of the fact that vide Army HQ Signal No. 366117/QST12 dated 2791996 (Annexure P-6) that his request for pre-mature discharge from service had already been examined at Army HQ and the same was not accepted due to acute shortage of manpower in the petitioner's category.
It is further stated that taking into account the remarks of the medical authorities that the petitioner was in low medical category, it was decided to consider the petitioner's case for diversion of posting to low altitude area for which necessary instructions were issued to the Unit of the petitioner.
It is further stated that at the time of examining the case of the petitioner for diversion of posting to low altitude area, it was felt that to retain an unwilling person in service would not be in the interest of the organisation.
As such, approval to discharge the petitioner from service was accorded vide letter dated 1311997 giving him reasonable time of six months for completion of discharge/pension documents.
The formal discharge order was issued vide ASC Records (Sup) letter No. 1835/I/05/CA 3 dated 24 Jan 1997 and the petitioner was to be struck off strength (SOS) from the Army w.e.f.
181997.
8.
From the additional affidavit dated 27112001, it is evident that the petitioner did not make any second request for discharge as was sought to be made out from the written statement initially filed.
It is, in fact, during the consideration of his case for diversion of posting to low altitude area, that it was felt to retain an unwilling person in the service would not be in the interest of the organisation.
9.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the respondents emphasised on the fact that the discharge roll was signed by the petitioner on 2421997, in which it was clearly mentioned against para 20 of the discharge Roll Signed by the petitioner, that he is :  "Transferred to Pension Establishment at his own interest (sic.
- request) on compassionate grounds before completion of prescribed service age limit under item 1(i)(b) of the Table annexed to Army Rule 13(3) with liability to serve in the reserve for a period of 5 years or till attainment of 50 years of age whichever is earlier."
10.
The factual position, therefore, that is borne out from the record is that the petitioner made an application for pre mature retirement on compassionate and personal grounds on 1521996 (Annexure P-1).
This request was not acceded to by the respondents on 1761996 communicated to the petitioner on 2471996 (Annexure P-2).
Thereafter, the petitioner was issued posting order on 2861996 and was asked to move to HQ 15 Corps by 3181996.
At this point of time, he was hospitalised, due to acute backache at Military Hospital Jalandhar, from where he was discharged on 17.8.1996 under a down- graded medical category CEE (Temporary) for 6 to 12 months with effect from 381996 to 321997.
On this account, the petitioner requested for change of his posting.
The Hqr 11 Corps agreed to the attachment of the petitioner at Ambala, pending cancellation/diversion of his posting from HQ 15 Corps.
vide HQ 11 Corps letter dated 21111996 (Annexure P-3).
The petitioner was attached at Ambala which was mentioned in his movement order issued to him on 5.12.1996.
The petitioner performed his duty at the place of his attachment.
However, during his attachment at HQ 2 Corps he met with an accident and received multiple injuries, for which he was hospitalised from 1451997 to 10.6.1997.
The petitioner then sought some leave on compassionate grounds and was finally directed to report back to his HQ i.e. HQ 350 Inf.Bde.
Jalandhar in June 1997.
The case of the petitioner for premature discharge again appear to have been considered in pursuance of signal No. 5021 dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) and it was declined vide communication dated 2791996 (Annexure P/1).
However, while re-considering the case of the petitioner for diversion of posting, it was decided that to retain an unwilling person was not in the interest of the organisation and approval to discharge the petitioner from service was accorded on 1311997 (Annexure R-3) and formal discharge order was issued vide letter dated 2411997.
The petitioner signed the discharge roll on 2421997.
He then made a representation dated 1871997 (Annexure P/4) for cancellation of his discharge.
However, he was discharged from the Army vide impugned order dated 3171997 (Annexure P-5).
The petitioner did not make any second application for his discharge from service.
11.
The signal dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) in fact is a departmental communication from one headquarter of the army to another.
Reading of the same shows that in fact the petitioner was requesting for posting to Chandimandir and that he was posted at HQ 15 Corps.
Besides, vide ASC records letter No. 3501/68/PA dated 2861996, the petitioner was in medical category CEE temporary for six months w.e.f.
381996 with reason not to be posted to high altitude/cold climate area.
Thereafter it is recorded regarding request be accorded for sanction to proceed on pre mature retirement at the earliest and if no instructions to post him as requested vide letter dated 15.7.1996 be given as second choice, of posting him on compassionate grounds to Ambala.
This signal message dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) is not from the petitioner.
The same in fact is regarding choice of posting of the petitioner at Ambala.
Even otherwise insofar as request for discharge from the Army service is concerned, it stands declined by the competent authority vide their signal dated 2791996 (Annexure P-6).
Therefore, the decision to discharge the petitioner prematurely from the Army does not in my view satisfy the test of reasonableness inasmuch as it is based on irrelevant considerations which were not germane to the decision making process.
The impugned decision of the respondents was perverse being contradictory inasmuch as the respondents initially took the stand that the discharge of the petitioner was on account of his request vide signal message dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1).
This having shown to be incorrect, the respondents shifted their stand in their additional affidavit dated 27112001, which is that at the time of examining the case of the petitioner for diversion of posting to low altitude it was felt that to retain an unwilling person in the service would not be in the interest of the organisation.
12.
The approval to discharge the petitioner from service is stated to have been accorded as a special case vide Army Hq.
letter 1311997 (Annexure R-3) giving him reasonable time of six months for completion of discharge/pension documents.
Thereafter, the formal discharge order was issued vide ASC records letter dated 2411997 and the petitioner was to be struck off from the army w.e.f.
dated 181997.
It may be noticed that this decision was taken suo motu on a matter which had already been declined and against which there has been no representation.
The petitioner in pursuance of the impugned decision to prematurely discharge him from service was to suffer civil consequences.
Therefore, the decision when tested on the principles of reasonableness would entail the infraction of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner was afforded fair and reasonable opportunity to meet his case for consideration of his discharge after it had earlier been declined on two occasions i.e. on 1761996 which was communicated to the petitioner on 2471996 (Annexure P-2) and also the consideration of the Signal message dated 19.9.1996 (Annexure R-1) which was declined vide Signal message dated 2791996 (Annexure P-6).
Besides, in the affidavit dated 27112001 though it has been stated that the approval to discharge the petitioner from service was accorded as a special case on 1311997 and the formal discharge order was issued vide letter dated 2411997.
However, it may be noticed that before the discharge from the Army of the petitioner was to take effect from 181997 in pursuance of army HQ, letter dated 1311997 and the formal discharge letter issued on 2411997, the petitioner had moved an application dated 1871997 (Annexure P-4) requesting for cancellation of his discharge.
In his application, he gave his grounds as to why he sought discharge from service and that, he did not again apply for discharge.
He submitted that when he was in medical category AYE, the Army HQ did not approve his discharge and but when he was down graded in low medical category, it suddenly approved his discharge without obtaining fresh option.
The consequence of his being discharged under Army Rule 13(3) Item III(iv) i.e. at own request before completion of term of engagement in low medical category CEE(T) would make him ineligible for re-employment in civil as he would also be denied the benefits of disability pension and disability benefits under AGI Scheme.
Besides, due to his low medical category, he would not be able to look after his parents and his landed property and would rather be a burden on them.
In these circumstances, he requested for cancelling his discharge under Rule 11(2) and allow him to continue in service.
The petitioner thus sought the cancellation of his discharge in terms of Rule 11(2) of the Army Rules.
Rule 11 of the Army Rules reads as under :-  "11.
Discharge not to be delayed.
-- (1) Every person enrolled under the Act shall, as soon as he becomes entitled under the conditions of his enrolment to the discharged, be so discharged with all convenient speed : Provided that no person shall be entitled to such discharge, if the Central Government has by notification suspended the said entitlement to discharge for the whole or a part of the regular Army.
(2) The discharge of a person, validly sanctioned by a competent authority, may, with the consent of the discharged person, be cancelled by any authority superior to the authority who sanctioned the discharge either without any conditions or subject to such conditions as such discharged person accepts."
The perusal of above Rule 11(2) of the Army Rules 1954 shows that the discharge of a person validly sanctioned by competent authority may with the consent of the discharged person be cancelled by any authority superior to the authority who sanctioned the discharge either without any conditions or subject to such condition as such discharged person accepts.
13.
Rule 13 of the Army Rules describes the authorities empowered to authorise discharge.
The petitioner is a junior commissioned officer and the relevant part of R.13 which indicates the competent authority to discharge junior commissioned officers reads as under:-  13.
Authorities empowered to authorise discharge.
-- (1) Each of the authorities specified in column 3 of the Table below shall be the competent authority to discharge from service person subject to the Act specified in column 1 thereof on the ground specified Category Grounds of discharge Competent authority to authorise discharge Manner of discharge 1.
2.
3.
4.
Junior Commissioned 1.
(i)(a) On completion of the period of service or tenure specified in the Regulations for his rank or appointment are on reaching the age limit which-ever is earlier, unless retained on the active list for further specified period with the sanction of the Chief of the Army Staff or on becoming eligible for release under the Regulations.
Commanding Officer (b) At this own request on transfer to the parent establishment.
Commanding Officer (ii) Xxx xxx xxx (iii) Xxx xxx xxx xxx (II) xxx xxx xxx (III) xxx xxx xxx (IV) xxx xxx The above Rule 13 shows that Commanding Officer is the authority competent to discharge the petitioner.
It is not shown from the records as to whether the application dated 1871997 (Annexure P-4) regarding cancellation of his discharge was at all considered.
This application in fact by virtue of Rule 11(2) of the Army Rules was to be considered by an authority superior to the authority who sanctioned the discharge.
The said application is addressed to OIC Records, ASC Records (South), Bangalore, "Through Proper Channel."
The respondents have placed on record a letter dated 2571997 (Annexure R-4) which is with regard to the cancellation of premature discharge.
It is recorded therein that an application dated 1971997 from the petitioner requesting for cancellation of his discharge has been received directly in the office of Sena Seva Corps Abhlekh (Purti) ASC Records (Supply) Bangalore, and it has been requested to advise the petitioner not to correspond directly with the office.
The petitioner is under discharge drill and in case the application has been received in the office of Depot Coy. HQ Wing, ASC Centre (South), the same may please be processed through proper channel.
Besides, the additional affidavit dated 21112001 in para 6, it is stated that the petitioner submitted an application dated 1971997, 13 days prior to the date of discharge which could not be considered as representation against discharge and it was only an afterthought to embarrass the organisation as he had already signed the Discharge Roll in which it was clearly mentioned in para 20 of the Discharge Roll signed by the petitioner that he is transferred to pension Establishment at his own interest (sic.- request) on compassionate grounds before completion of prescribed service age.
Therefore, apparently the application for cancellation of discharge submitted by the petitioner has not been considered.
The question, however, that first requires to be examined is whether the petitioner could in any case withdraw his resignation before he was to be relieved on 3171997.
In order to appreciate this aspect, it is to be seen whether there was jural relationship of employee and employer before the effective date of 3171997 and in this regard the case of Balram Gupta v Union of India and another, AIR 1987 SC 2354, may be seen where the appellant therein after completing 20 years service wrote a letter dated 24121980, seeking voluntary retirement on 3131981.
By an order dated 20.1.1981 he was allowed to retire voluntarily from service prospectively with effect from afternoon of 3131981.
In the meantime on 31.1.1981 the appellant withdrew his notice on the ground that on account of persistent and personal requests from the staff members he had changed his mind.
The appellant was relieved by order dated 3131981 in which it was also mentioned that his withdrawal application was considered and was found not acceptable.
It was held that the dissolution in the contract would be brought about only on the date indicated, i.e., 3131981 and up to that the appellant was and is a Government employee.
There was no unilateral termination of the same prior thereto and he was at liberty to independently as a Government servant in accordance with the rules therein to withdraw his notice of voluntary retirement.
It was held that in the facts of the said case the resignation of the Government servant was to take effect at a subsequent date prospectively and the withdrawal was long before that date.
The appellant was allowed to withdraw his resignation and he was not put back to his job with all consequential benefits.
14.
In the case titled Power Finance Corporation Ltd v. Pramod Kumar Bhatia, 1997(3) SCT 321 (SC) : (1997) 4 SCC 280, it was held it is now settled legal position that unless the employee is relieved of the duty, after acceptance of the offer of voluntary retirement or resignation, jural relationship of the employee and the employer does not come to an end.
The order accepting the voluntary retirement was a conditional one, the conditions ought to have been complied with.
However, before the conditions could be complied with, the appellant withdrew the scheme.
Consequently, the order accepting voluntary retirement did not become effective.
It was held that it was not effective and no vested right had been created in favour of the respondent therein.
15.
In JN Srivastava v. Union of India, AIR 1999 SC 1571, the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Balram Gupta's case was followed and it was held that an employee serving notice of voluntary retirement which was accepted by the employer, the employee has the locus standi to withdraw the proposal before the date of retirement is reached.
It was also noted that once the request for cancellation of voluntary retirement proposal was rejected and the retirement had come into effect the employee has no choice but to give up the charge of the post to avoid unnecessary complications.
16.
In the case of Shambhu Murari Sinha v. Project and Development India, 2002(2) SCT 400 (SC) : AIR 2002 Supreme Court 1341, it was held that voluntary retirement is effective when it operates to terminate the tenure of resignor, it was held that in the absence of legal, contractual or constitutional bar a prospective resignation can be withdrawn at any time before it becomes effective and it becomes effective when it operates to terminate the employment of the office tenure of the resignor.
The employee therein had sought voluntary retirement under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme which was accepted by the Management with the condition that release memo along with detailed particulars would follow.
Before the appellant was actually released from service, he withdrew his option for voluntary retirement by sending two letters but there was no response.
He was released from service on the effective date.
It was held that the jural relationship of the employee and employer did not come to an end on the date of acceptance of voluntary retirement and the said relationship continued till he was relieved.
It was further held that in view of the settled position of the law and the terms of the letters of acceptance, the employee had locus poenitentiae to withdraw his proposal for voluntary retirement before the relationship of employee and employer came to an end and the management refused to accept the letter of withdrawal of employee as it was sent before the jural relationship of employer and employee came to an end.
17.
Learned counsel for the respondents however, relies upon decision in P Kasilingam v. P.S.G.
College of Technology, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 789, to contend that it is open to a servant to make his resignation operative from a future day and to withdraw such resignation before its acceptance.
However, the services of the Government servant would normally stand terminated from the date on which the letter of resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority, unless there is any law or statutory rule governing the conditions of service to the contrary can apply to the case of any other employee.
In P Kasilingam's case (supra) the appellant was a Lecturer and while on probation he was subject to departmental enquiry for dereliction of duty and irresponsible conduct.
Before the departmental enquiry was to commence the appellant therein handed over two letters addressed to the Principal, first was a letter of apology and the other letter of resignation.
The letter of apology was virtually an admission of his guilt.
The letter of resignation signified his intention to leave service with the request that his services may be retained for six months.
The resignation was accepted and it was directed that the appellant be relieved from duties after six months and the enquiry was dropped.
The Principal thereafter issued a relieving order dispending with his services forthwith on payment of his salary for a period of six months.
The appellant preferred an appeal under the Tamil Nadu Private Colleges (Regulation) Act 1976.
The Government directed the Additional Director of Technical Education, to hold an enquiry into the allegations made by the appellant which was to the effect that his letter of resignation was not voluntary but had been obtained by coercion.
The Enquiry Officer held that the allegations made by the appellant were baseless.
This report was not accepted by the Government and it was held that the letter of resignation was not voluntary.
The Government accordingly allowed the appeal and directed reinstatement of the appellant with immediate effect.
The Management challenged the order of the Government by a writ petition, which was quashed by the High Court.
It was held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that the High Court had viewed the matter from a wrong perspective and that in quashing the order of the Government the High Court observed that its finding is based on no evidence but proceeded on conjecture and surmises.
Therefore, the observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court were not directly in issue and the question at issue was whether the resignation was voluntary which was held a matter of inference to be drawn from other facts which was essentially one of the fact and it could not be questioned that the Government undoubtedly had the jurisdiction to draw its own conclusions upon the material before it.
In this view of the matter, the question involved was not really whether the services of a Government employee would stand terminated from the date on which the letter of resignation was accepted.
Besides the said observations that the services of a Government servant normally stand terminated from the date on which the letter of resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority unless there is any law or statutory Rule governing the conditions of service to the contrary are based on an earlier judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Raj Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1969 Supreme Court 180.
Raj Kumar's case (supra) was considered in Shambhu Murari Sinha's case (supra) and it was held that Raj Kumar's case (supra) may not have a direct bearing in the said case and the principle laid down there was noticed and the ratio of judgment in Power Finance Corporation Ltd v. Pramod Kumar Bhatia's case (supra) was reiterated.
Even otherwise in the case in hand, there are statutory provisions which provide for cancellation of the discharge.
In this view of the matter, the ratio of the judgment in P Kasilingam's case (supra) is in application to the facts of the present case.
18.
Keeping in view the above position that the petitioner court withdraw his request for discharge, it was incumbent upon the authorities to consider his request for discharge.
The petitioner had submitted a letter dated 18/1971997 (Annexure P-4) for cancellation of his discharge in terms of Rule 11(2) of the Army Rules.
This was submitted before his discharge was to be effective i.e. before 3171997.
The request for withdrawal of discharge has not been considered and the only reasoning in the additional affidavit dated 27112001 is that it could not be considered as a representation against the discharge order and it was only an afterthought to embarrass the organisation as he had already signed the Discharge Role.
The position, however, is that the said discharge was to take effect from 3171997 till which date there was jural relationship of employee and employer between the petitioner and the respondents and the petitioner had the locus poenitentiae to withdraw his resignation.
The non-consideration of the application by itself infringes the provisions of Rule 11(2) of the Army Rules.
The same was to be considered in accordance with law and the statutory provisions of Rule 11(2) of the Army Rules.
The effect of consequence of the discharge of the petitioner particularly making him ineligible for re-employment in Civil.
Besides, his being denied disability pension and benefits were circumstances which the competent authority ought to have considered.
The failure to consider the entire matter vitiates the impugned decision of discharge of the petitioner from Army.
Therefore, in view of the above facts and circumstances, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 3171997 (Annexure P-5) is quashed.
Consequently, it is directed that the respondents shall reinstate the petitioner in service till completion of his tenure and grant him all consequential benefits.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.