PS Patwalia, J - Petitioner is working as a Constable in the Punjab Police.
In this writ petition, he claims that the respondents should be directed to depute him to the Lower School Promotion Course (hereinafter referred to as Promotion Course), which had commenced from 20052004.
2.
The petitioner states that two seats were allocated to district Muktsar, where the petitioner is serving, for the Promotion Course.
A test was held for selecting constables for admission to the Course and in the said test, one Constable Sukhdev Singh was the first in order of merit and the petitioner obtained second rank.
Respondent no. 4, who belongs to the Scheduled Caste category, obtained a rank of 16 in the overall merit.
The respondents deputed Constable Sukhdev Singh, who was at Sr.No.
1 in the merit and respondent No. 4 to the Lower School Course.
Respondent no. 4 was deputed on the basis of reservation for Scheduled Castes in seats in the Promotion Course.
3.
The petitioner has filed this writ petition raising a two fold grievance.
His first grievance is that Constable Sukhdev Singh, who stood first in merit and who was deputed to the Course, did not actually join.
Since the candidate at Sr.No.
1 did not join, the petitioner who was at Sr.No.
2, was entitled to be deputed to the said Course.
Alternatively, the petitioner submits that even if the candidate at Sr.No.
1 joined, yet there could not be any reservation while sending the constables to undergo the Lower School Course.
Hence the action of the respondents in deputing respondent no. 4 on the basis of his belonging to the reserved category is against law and is liable to be set aside.
Consequently, the petitioner is entitled to be deputed to the Lower School Course against the second seat, against which respondent no. 4 has been sent.
4.
The respondents have filed a written statement contesting the petitioner's claim.
Along with the reply, the respondents have placed on record an instruction dated 16032004 providing that reservation for Scheduled Castes would be applicable even when deputing the constables to the Lower School Course after they pass the B-I test conducted under Rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
5.
We have heard Shri Guravtar Singh Mann, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Ashok Aggarwal, Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents and have perused the paper book.
6.
In so far as the first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned Shri Ashok Aggarwal, Addl.AG, Punjab produced the result of the Lower School Course for the term ending March 2005.
A perusal of the result would show that Constable Sukhdev Singh as a result of his selection had joined the Course and was declared to have passed the same in term ending March 2005.
Thus, this contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Constable Sukhdev Singh had not joined the Course is factually incorrect and since Sukhdev Singh who stood first, had joined the Course, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief on the first plea raised by him.
7.
Secondly, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that there could not be any reservation for Scheduled Castes while deputing the constables to the Lower School Course.
This contention can not be accepted for two reasons.
Firstly, there are specific instructions of the State Government dated 16032004 providing for reservation at the stage of deputing constables to the Lower School Course.
These instructions have been issued on the basis of a judicial determination of this issue by a Full Bench of this Court in its judgment reported as Constable Surjit Singh and others v. State of Punjab, reported as 1991(5) SLR 279.
In spite of the fact that the instructions were attached with the reply and relied upon, the petitioner has not raised any challenge to the same.
In the absence of any challenge to the instructions, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that there can be no reservation at the stage of deputing constables for the Lower School Course, can not be accepted.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, strenuously relied on a judgment of Full Bench of this Court in Sub Inspector Ram Phul and others v. State of Haryana, reported as 1992 (5) SLR 767.
This case related to a dispute arising out of sending Head Constables to the Intermediate School Course.
The view taken was that Head Constables should be deputed to the Intermediate School Course on the basis of their seniority.
The Full Bench, in reaching this conclusion, relied on an earlier Full Bench judgment of this Court in Sardul Singh v. Inspector General of Police, reported as 1970 SLR 505.
This Full Bench, however, does not deal with the question as to whether or not there can be reservation while deputing constables for the Lower School Course.
This question was directly considered by a Full Bench of this Court in Constable Surjit Singh's case (supra).
The judgment rendered by the earlier Full Bench in Sardul Singh's case (supra) was also taken into consideration by the latter Full Bench.
Ultimately the following conclusion was reached.
"It is, therefore, apparent that the prescription of test at the stage of the preparation of List `B' in terms of Rule 137 is essentially a step in the process of promotion of Constables to Head Constables.
That being the situation, it would be mandatory on the authorities to make the reservation as provided by Annexure R-1 at the stage of selecting candidates for being put on List `B'.
Even in Sardul Singh's case (supra) the final conclusion drawn by the Full Bench was specifically with regard to the interpretation of Rules 139 and 1310 of the Rules.
This would be apparent from a reading of paragraphs 1 and 2 of the report."
9.
It is therefore clear that the Full Bench has concluded that it would be mandatory on the part of the authorities to make reservation at the stage of selecting candidates for being put on List `B'.
No subsequent judgment to the contrary was produced before us by the counsel for the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, the argument of the learned counsel that there can be no reservation while deputing constables to the Lower School Course after holding the B-I test, can not be accepted.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this writ petition and the same is, consequently, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.