JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the Border Security Force on 19.12.1969.
His aforesaid appointment was in the pay scale of Rs. 75-95.
While in the employment of the Border Security Force, the petitioner was promoted as Lance Naik with effect from 6101985.
The post of Lance Naik, at the time of promotion of the petitioner, was in the pay scale of Rs. 210-270.
This pay scale came to be revised to Rs. 825-1200 with effect from 111986 and, therefore, the petitioner came to draw his salary in the pay scale of Rs. 825-1200 only with effect from 111986.
2.
During the course of his employment, by an order dated 531986 the petitioner was appointed as a Staff Car Driver with the Delhi Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal, on deputation terms for a period of one year, with effect from 121986.
Subsequently, by an order dated 2951989, the petitioner was appointed on transfer basis, against the post of Staff Car Driver with the Jodhpur Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal, with immediate effect.
This appointment of the petitioner vested in him the right to earn wages in the pay scale of Rs. 950- 1500 i.e. the scale of the post of Staff Car Driver in the Central Administrative Tribunal.
3.
Since the appointment of the petitioner to the Central Administrative Tribunal as Staff Car Driver, he has been claiming seniority with effect from the date he commenced to discharge duties of the post of driver i.e. even for the duration he discharged duties as driver while in the employment of the Border Security Force.
The Central Administrative Tribunal, therefore, sought a clarification from the Border Security Force, regarding the employment of the petitioner, as a driver .
The said clarification was furnished through a communication dated 3071998.
A perusal of the aforesaid communication reveals, that the petitioner commenced to start discharging the duties of the post of driver with the Border Security Force with effect from September 1972, i.e. after he had qualified departmental examination prescribed for the MT Driver cadre.
In other words, the petitioner claims seniority in the cadre of the post of Staff Car Driver in Central Administrative Tribunal with effect from September 1972.
Since the aforesaid claim was not accepted on the administrative side, the petitioner filed Original Application No. 461/CH/99 before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh.
The claim of the petitioner was partially accepted, in as much as, the petitioner was allowed to count his seniority in the cadre of Staff Car Driver in the Central Administrative Tribunal with effect from 6101985.
Unhappy with the determination of the authorities including the decision rendered in OA No. 461/CH/99 dated 9112001, the petitioner has approached this Court by filing the instant writ petition, claiming seniority in the cadre of Staff Car Driver of the Central Administrative Tribunal with effect from September 1972.
4.
While examining the instant claim raised by the petitioner, the Central Administrative Tribunal, while partly accepting the claim of the petitioner, recorded the following conclusions:-  " It established that the Applicant had been performing the duties of Driver from September, 1972 and was promoted as L/NK in B.S.F.
from 06101985.
Entries substantiating the above information are recorded in his service book available with CAT On the basis of the above documents, it is held that Applicant was holding post of L/NK Driver in B.S.F., i.e. parent Organisation of Applicant w.e.f.
06101985.
On behalf of the Official Respondents, it has been stated that since the Applicant did not have the same pay scale as a Staff Car Driver in CAT when he came on deputation to CAT, the post held by him in the parent Deptt.
cannot be held to be equivalent to the post of Staff Car Driver in CAT in this regard, it is relevant to mention the decision in the case of Sub Inspector Roop Lal & Ors. v. Lt..
Governor of Delhi & Ors,.
reported in 2000 SC (L&S) 213.
The Appellants, in that case were Sub Inspectors (SI) of B.S.F.
who were initially taken on deputation in Delhi Police as SI (Executive) and were later on absorbed in Delhi Police in the same capacity.
While fixing their seniority in Delhi Police, their past service in BSF as SI was ignored because pay-scale of SI in B.S.F.
was not equivalent to pay-scale in Delhi Police.
The Apex Court observed that "in law, it is necessary that if the previous service of a transferred official is to be counted for seniority in the transferred post then the two posts should be equivalent."
While determining the equation of two posts many factors other than pay will have to be taken into consideration, like nature of duties, responsibilities, minimum qualification etc.
In the case of AIR 1968 SC 850 (UOI Vs. PK Roy), the Hon'ble Supreme Court accepted the factors laid down by the Committee of Chief Secretaries, e.g. (i) the nature and duties of a post; (ii) the responsibilities and powers exercised by the officers holding the post; (iii) the minimum qualifications, if any, prescribed for recruitment to the post; and (iv) the salary of the post.
It is seen that the salary of a post for the purpose of finding out the equivalency of the post is the last of the criteria.
If the earlier three criteria mentioned above are fulfilled then the fact that the salaries of the two posts are different would not in any make the posts "not equivalent".
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that, "equal pay scale was not the sole determining factor while determining the equivalency of the two posts.
Although, Applicant's pay scale in the present Deptt.
Was also upgraded to Rs. 950-1400 w.e.f.
17011988, however, as per the above ratio the equivalency in pay scales being not the sole determining factor and considering the factors in the instant case, we have to hold that the post of L/NK Driver in BSF held by the Applicant was equivalent to the post of Staff Car Driver in CAT The post of L/NK Driver was held by the Applicant w.e.f.
06101985 in B.S.F.
although he had been performing the duties of Driver from September 1972."
5.
We have examined the issue in the totality of the circumstances noticed hereinabove.
Examined closely, it is apparent that the petitioner is claiming seniority in the cadre of Staff Car Driver of the Central Administrative Tribunal even for the period while he was discharging duties of the post of Constable with the Border Security Force.
As noticed hereinabove, the post of Constable occupied by the petitioner in the Border Security Force was in the pay scale of Rs. 75-95.
He was promoted from the post of Constable to the post of Lance Naik in the Border Security Force, with effect from 6101985, in the pay scale of Rs. 210-270 (revised to Rs. 825-1200 with effect from 111986).
Since the pay scale of the promotional post of Lance Naik was inferior/lesser than the pay scale of the post of Staff Car Driver (Rs. 950-1500), it is apparent that the post of Constable was in a scale which was lesser than the scale of the Lance Naik, and as such, also lesser than the scale of the post of Staff Car Driver in the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Since the post of Lance Naik was an avenue of promotion from the post of Constable, the post of Lance Naik was obviously higher in rank and status in comparison with the post of Constable, and as such, also lesser than the rank and status of the post of Staff Car Driver in the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Before the claim of the petitioner for seniority in the cadre of Staff Car Driver with effect from September 1972, can be accepted, he would have to substantiate that he had been discharging duties against a post of equivalent rank and status as that of Staff Car Driver in the establishment of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
On the basis of the deliberations recorded hereinabove, it is apparent that the post of Constable cannot be treated as equivalent either in rank or in status, or for that matter in terms of pay scale, to that of Staff Car Driver.
Since in the conclusions recorded by the Central Administrative Tribunal, it has been held that the post of Lance Naik Driver was equivalent to the post of Staff Car Driver in the Central Administrative Tribunal, we do not desire or wish to interfere with the same.
Accepting that position, as it is, we are satisfied that the Central Administrative Tribunal, while adjudicating the controversy in hand (by its order dated 9112001), was fully justified in granting seniority to the petitioner only with effect from 6101985.
There is no legal justification for accepting the claim of the petitioner for seniority with effect from September 1972, because as already concluded hereinabove, the petitioner was holding the post of Constable, which is lower in rank, status and pay scale than the post of Staff Car Driver for the period from September 1972 to 5101985.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this petition.
The same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.