Ranjit Singh, J - Petitioner, a retired employee of Mukerian Hydel Project, prays for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to consider his claim for regularization of his services and for grant of retiral benefits as would accrue to him on becoming regular employee.
The facts leading to filing of the petition may briefly be mentioned to get the hang of the issues agitated in the petition.
2.
The petitioner who claims to have studied upto 10th Class was appointed as a Fitter in Beas Dam Project, Talwara Township on 29.4.1963.
On 31.3.1968, he was promoted as Auto Mechanic.
However, his services were retrenched on 20.10.1977.
Thereafter, the petitioner was again appointed as Auto Mechanic in Mukerian Hydel Project w.e.f.
8.11.1978.
As per the appointment letter he was to be borne on work charge establishment and his services were to be governed by Regulations/Standing Orders of Mukerian Hydel Project applicable to the establishment from time to time.
The petitioner continued serving the establishment.
He has a grievance that his service book was misplaced by the Department which was not reconstructed despite various representations.
This, as per the petitioner, resulted in non-fixation of his pay and non- determination of his pensionary benefit.
The petitioner further pleads that on account of this only, his case for regularization could not be considered.
As per the petitioner, Punjab State Electricity Board has issued instructions through a Memo No. 510/1910/2140 dated 18.8.1994 laying down policy regarding regularization/adjustment of work charge/daily wage/casual employees.
Annexure P-5 is the policy containing said instructions.
It is also claimed that the Executive Engineer, Mukerian Hydel Construction Division No. 3l, Talwara had issued a seniority list of Auto Mechanics, as per which the name of the petitioner appeared at S No. 1 at that he, as such, was the seniormost Auto mechanic.
He was interviewed by the Selection Committee for being appointed as a Regular Auto Mechanic but his name did not appear in the select list though he was fully eligible.
The petitioner goes on to add that his name though was ignored but his junior namely Mr. Bhupinder Singh (S No. 2 at the seniority list) was selected and accordingly regularized on 6.7.1994.
This order has been placed on record as Annexure P-8.
The petitioner made representation but the same was not considered and thus he retired from the service on 3081998 after rendering 20 years of the service in the Mukerian Hydel Project without being regularized.
The petitioner was also not paid any pension, gratuity, provident fund and leave encashment which forced him to serve a legal notice on 292000, making claim for grant of all the reliefs besides his regularization and payment of retiral benefits.
When the respondents did not respond even to the legal notice, the petitioner filed CWP No. 1041 of 2001 which was disposed of on 2312001 with a direction to the Executive Engineer, Mukerian Hydel Project (respondent No. 3) to consider his case and take action in accordance with law within a period of 3 months by passing a reasoned order.
The petitioner had to file a contempt petition No. 860 of 2001 when the said directions were not complied within time and then order dated 2282001 rejecting the claim of the petitioner was passed.
It is in this background that the petitioner filed the present writ petition impugning the order rejecting his claim for regularization and for non-payment of his retiral benefits.
3.
While issuing notice of motion, this Court directed that the retiral benefits which are due to the petitioner be brought in form of a cheque on the date fixed.
The writ petition was admitted on 1652002, on which date it was also stated before the Court that all the amount due to the petitioner had already been paid.
A written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 has been filed through Senior Executive Engineer, Mukerian Hydel Channel.
It is disclosed in the reply that new service book of the petitioner has since been constructed and all arrears of pay revision has been paid to him as per his service record.
The claim of the petitioner for regularization, however, was rejected.
In support of its stand the Board has disclosed that the service of the petitioner was not regularized as he had not submitted documents before the Selection Committee at the time of his interview.
It is also brought out that the petitioner being work charge employee had retired on attaining the age of 60 years whereas if he had been regularized then he was entitled to serve only upto the age of 58 years.
Justifying its action in regularizing the services of a person junior to the petitioner, it is submitted that the services of Bhupinder Singh was regularized as he was having qualification of Matric with ITI and the service of the petitioner was not regularized as he was under Matric.
In the reply, however, it has not been disclosed if any minimum qualification was prescribed for regularization.
It is also not denied that regularization of the employees was regulated by the policy instructions, Annexure P-5, referred to and relied upon by the petitioner.
The petitioner has filed replication rebutting the averments made in the reply.
4.
I have heard Sh. GS Bal, for the petitioner and Sh. PS Thiara, on behalf of respondent-Electricity Board.
5.
Mr. Bal would contend that action of the respondent in not regularizing the services of the petitioner is in violation of the policy instructions besides being discriminatory.
As per Mr. Bal, persons junior to the petitioner were regularized but the claim of the petitioner was not properly considered and hence the action of the respondents is clearly discriminatory.
On the other hand, Mr. PS Thiara has contended that the Board was justified in ignoring the claim of the petitioner as he did not fulfil the qualification for regularization and hence the action of the Board in rejecting the claim of the petitioner is legal and calls for no interference.
The counsel has further submitted that the petitioner had served upto the age of 60 years being a work charge employee whereas he would have been entitled to serve upto 58 years of age as a regular employee.
He has accordingly pleaded for dismissal of the writ petition specially so when other retiral benefits have already been released to the petitioners.
6.
Having regard to the aforementioned stand of the parties, it is required to be seen if the action of respondents in denying regularization of services of the petitioner as per the policy instructions is justified or not.
A perusal of the policy instructions (Annexure P-5) shows that services of work charge workers having service of 10 years and above as on 3131994, and who are working in projects/posts where no normal channel of regularization of service is applicable, could be regularized on the terms and conditions as contained in the said policy.
As per the conditions contained in the policy this was to be done on "as is where is basis".
Besides, it was mentioned that while regularizing the service, the qualification of the selection criteria prescribed for the post of those possessed by the workers, was to be kept in view and his or her services were to be regularized commensurate with the qualification possessed by the worker.
It is further mentioned in the policy that in case of non-qualified work charge worker but having requisite experience his services were to be regularized as unskilled worker.
It may be seen that no essential qualification was prescribed in this policy instructions.
However, reference is found therein that qualification/selection criteria prescribed for the post was to be kept in view and the workers were to be regularized commensurate with the qualification possessed by the worker.
As per the stand of the respondents, the services of the petitioner were not regularized as he was under matric.
But it was nowhere disclosed in the reply if matric or any other qualification was essential for the post of Auto Mechanic.
Nothing in this regard has also been disclosed in the writ petition.
7.
A short affidavit of the petitioner dated 28.4.2006, was filed in the Court during the course of arguments on 28.4.2006.
Along with this affidavit an office order dated 7101993 of Punjab State Electricity Board was annexed as Annexure P-11.
This document was permitted to be placed on record.
As per the petitioner this office order regulated the procedure and the qualification regarding avenues of promotion to the regular establishment of Auto Repair Workshop and hence was applicable to determine the qualifications which could be considered essential for regularization of Auto Mechanics.
Since this document had been produced in the Court at the time of arguments, an opportunity was given to the Board to file response to the said affidavit and the Annexure.
The case was accordingly adjourned.
A short reply has been filed on behalf of Board in response to the affidavit referred to above.
8.
Annexure P-11 now placed on record reveals that for the post of Auto Mechanic which is a promotional post from Auto Helper, the essential qualification prescribed are Matric with ITI (Motor Mechanic) with 2 years minimum experience on the feeder post or non-matric capable to read and write with 6 years minimum experience on the feeder post.
In this affidavit filed by the petitioner it has also been mentioned that all the persons junior to the petitioner mentioned at S No. 2 to 8 of the seniority list of Auto Mechanics had been regularized and had further been promoted as Special Foreman.
It is further averred/disclosed in this affidavit that services of one Surinder Singh, appearing at S No. 3 in the seniority list, and Sh. Kewal Chand at S No. 7 of the seniority list and who were totally illiterate were regularized whereas the claim of the petitioner was declined on the ground that he was under Matric.
In response filed to this affidavit, the averments so mentioned in paras 2 and 3 of the affidavit have been admitted.
The Board has also conceded that services of persons mentioned at S Nos. 2 to 8 of the seniority list and junior to the petitioner had been regularized as Auto Mechanics and they have further been promoted as Special Foreman.
The claim of the petitioner in regard to the educational qualification of Surinder Singh and Kewal Chand has not been denied and rather it has been conceded that one was under Matric and that their services were regularized.
In this view of the factual position, the action of the Board/respondent in declining the prayer of the petitioner for regularization of services on the ground of being under matric cannot be sustained.
This justification advanced to deny the regularization of service to the petitioner gave an impression that this was the essential qualification for the post of Auto Mechanic.
The only difference is that an Auto Mechanic having Matriculation as qualification with ITI (Motor Mechanic) can be promoted with 2 years experience in the feeder post whereas non-Matric Auto Mechanics are to be so promoted with 6 years experience in the feeder post.
Accordingly, it cannot be urged that the Matriculation is the essential qualification for the post of Auto Mechanic.
The respondents have no answer to the allegation of discrimination.
If matric was essential qualification then action of the respondent in regularizing the services of under matric is clearly illegal.
Further denying the same consideration to the petitioner as shown to other clearly reveals discrimination.
The action of the Board in not regularizing the services of the petitioner on the ground that he was under Matric, as such, is illegal, discriminatory and hence unsustainable specially so when now it has been found that the matric is not the essential qualification to the post.
Accordingly, a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularization of services as Auto Mechanic from the date his juniors have been so regularized and grant him all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom w.e.f.
the date it is due to him.
9.
Before parting with the case it needs to be noticed that the contention of the counsel for the respondents that the petitioner could have only served upto 58 years of age, if his services had been regularized and further that he was paid the provident fund having retired as a work charge employee do merit some consideration.
It is true that by virtue of being work charge employee the petitioner has been able to serve upto the age of 60 years which is 2 years more than what he would have been entitled to serve as a regular employee.
The petitioner, however, had performed his duties for which he received pay and allowances.
At this stage, it would not be fair to direct him to make any refund of pay and allowances more so, when he had performed the duties for this period.
But the petitioner cannot be permitted to retain the employer's share of provident fund which was paid to him at the time of retirement once he is held entitled to pension.
He is required to refund the same.
Besides, in fairness the petitioner cannot be allowed pension for these 2 years for which he has received pay and allowances.
For the purpose of pension his service upto the age of retirement of a regular employee i.e. 58 years needs to be counted.
He, however, would be entitled to receive pension only after completion of 60 years of age.
Mr. Bal, appearing on behalf of the petitioner is justified in submitting that the petitioner at this stage would not be having ready amount to refund the employer's share of provident fund which he is required to return.
His prayer that the same should be deducted from the amount becoming due to him upon grant of pension and other benefits in this regard sounds reasonable.
As per the counsel, he hereby give an undertaking that the amount due may be adjusted from the pension and other pensionary benefits payable to the petitioner at the time of release of such payments due to him.
Thus while releasing the amount of pension due to the petitioner, the employer's share of provident fund paid to the petitioner be deducted and only the balance amount so found due be released to the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed in terms of the directions of aforementioned.
Parties are left to bear their respective costs.
Petition allowed.