MM Kumar, J (Oral) - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 7887 of 2005, 8146 of 2005 and 17064 of 2005 as common questions of facts and law are involved.
For the sake of convenience, facts are being referred from C.W.P.
No. 7887 of 2005 unless otherwise stated in the body of the petition.
2.
The prayer made in C.W.P.
No. 7887 of 2005, filed by the petitioner under Article 226 of the Constitution is that a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise his services on the post of Water Pump Operator (a Group `C' post) on which he claims to be working with effect from 161990.
The respondent department has regularised the services of the petitioner as mentioned in para 5, as per policy, on the post of Beldar in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940 with effect from 1.2.1996, which is a Group `D' post.
The basic reason for refusing to regularise the services of the petitioner as Water Pump Operator has been given in para 1 of the preliminary submissions.
The petitioner was initially engaged to discharge the duty of Water Pump Operator on daily wages but out of total 67 months he has worked only for ten months on a Group `C' post and for rest of 57 months he had worked on Group `D' post.
The aforementioned position is said to be illustrative by placing on record details of the employment in the office of Executive Engineer, D & P Public Health Division, Sonepat (R-I).
It has further been pointed out that for the appointment to the post of Water Pump Operator, the qualification prescribed is ITI Certificate in the Trade of Motor/Tractor/Diesel/Electric Mechanic but the petitioner is only matriculate and does not have the requisite qualification.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and in view judgment of a Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Secretary, State of Karnataka & others v. Umadevi & others, 2006(2) SCT 462 : (2006) 4 SCC 1, wherein it has been laid down that procedure for making appointment to a public office has to be followed, which is considered to be basic structure of the Constitution, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
4.
In other words, it is mandatory that the posts are advertised by the competent authority/the State or authorized selection body.
After considering all the competing claims in accordance with the criteria which answers the requirement of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution, the candidates are required to be selected and then appointed to the post.
Any entry into service by a method contrary to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution have been considered to be illegal as is evident from the perusal of para 15 and 53 of the judgment.
The Constitution Bench has made distinction between `illegality' and `irregularity'.
In order to cull out the aforementioned distinction, their Lordships' made a reference to the arguments raised in the case of RN Nanjundappa v. T Thimmiah, (1972) 1 SCC 409, wherein it was observed that if the appointment made itself is in infraction of the rules or if it is in violation of the provisions of the Constitution, such an illegality cannot be regularised.
It has been further observed that ratification and regularization is possible of an act which could be within the power and province of the authority but there has been some noncompliance of the procedure or manner which did not go to the root of the appointment and that regularization cannot be a mode of recruitment.
If such a proposition was to be accepted then a new head of appointment would be introduced in defiance of rules, which would have the effect of setting at naught the rules.
The Constitution Bench also made a reference to another judgment of the Supreme Court in BN Nagarajan v. State of Karnataka, (1979) 4 SCC 507.
Therefore, a clear distinction between those who have entered into service in violation of the rules and basic structure of the Constitution as envisaged by Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution are class apart from those whose appointments have been considered to be irregular.
It is in these circumstances their Lordships' of the Supreme Court in Umadevi's case (supra) has observed in para 53 as under :-  "53.
One aspect needs to be clarified.
There may be cases where irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as explained in SV Narayanappa, RN Nanjundappa and BN Nagarajan and referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made and the employees have continued to work for ten years or more but without the intervention of orders of the courts or of tribunals.
The question of regularisation of the services of such employees may have to be considered on merits in the light of the principles settled by this Court in the cases abovereferred to and in the light of this judgment.
In that context, the Union of India, the State Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such irregularly appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of the courts or of tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are being now employed.
The process must be set in motion within six months from this date.
We also clarify that regularisation, if any already made, but not sub-judice, need not be reopened based on this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the constitutional requirement and regularizing or making permanent, those not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme."
When the facts of the present case are viewed in the light of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Umadevi's case (supra) it becomes evident that the initial appointment of the petitioner on the post of Water Pump Operator, a Group-C post was not in accordance with the procedure envisaged by the Rules.
The minimum requirement of advertising the post in the Press, consideration of competing claims in accordance with a lawful criteria and then selection made on that basis have been completely given a go-bye.
Such an entry into service has been held to be against the basic structure of the Constitution as envisaged by Article 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
Therefore, it has to be viewed as an illegality which cannot be cured by the magic band of regularization.
Therefore, we do not find any ground to issue a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner on the post of Water Pump Operator.
However, at the same time, we wish to clarify that we are not re-opening the issue of regularization of the services of the petitioner on a Group-D post of Beldar because in Umadevi's case (supra) it has been laid down that the orders of regularization, if any, already made but not sub-judice, is not required to be re-opened on the basis of the judgment in Umadevi's case (supra).
The aforementioned position is evident from para 53, which has been extracted above.
In view of the above, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.