AP Sahi, J - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri SM Yadav for respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 3 and Sri KR Singh for the respondent No. 5  2.
Since the issue involved in the present writ petition is a pure question of law, as such this court does not find it necessary to invite any counter affidavit on behalf of the respondents.
The matter is, therefore, being disposed of finally at this stage.
3.
The petitioner has impugned the order dated 1-10-2005, whereby his claim for promotion against a substantive vacancy of class III post has been turned down on the ground that the said post has to be filled up by adjusting a compassionate appointee namely the respondent No. 5.
4.
Undisputedly, the facts are, that the Institution in question is governed by the provisions of UP Intermediate Act, 1921 and the Regulations framed thereunder which provides that 50% of the posts in class III shall be filled by promotion from amongst the eligible employees in class IV.
As it is evident from the fact narrated in the impugned order as well as in the writ petition, the number of posts which are to be filled up by promotion come to three.
There is a slight difference in the writ petition and disclosure of the number of the posts in the impugned order, but the same does not have material bearing inasmuch as even it is presumed that there are five posts in the institution, in class III, which figure cannot be disputed, then in that event also three posts have to be filled up by promotion.
At present, there is only one person, who has occupied the post by promotion as a class III employee and two more posts have to be filled up by promotion in the Institution.
5.
A vacancy arose in class III on 31-12-2004 on account of the superannuation of one Sri Brindavan, who was occupying the said posts.
The petitioner, who is a class IV employee, staked his claim for promotion on the post in question and since he did not get the benefit of promotion, he approached this court by filing writ petition No. 52634 of 2005 and the Distt.
Inspector of Schools was directed vide judgment dated 29-7-2005 to consider the claim of the petitioner and pass appropriate order in accordance with law.
6.
The Distt.
Inspector of Schools has passed the impugned order dated 1-10- 2005 and has rejected the claim of the petitioner firstly on the ground that since the promotion quota already stands exhausted, therefore, the petitioner cannot be promoted and secondly, the posts which have fallen vacant have to be first adjusted by appointing the compassionate appointees, before proceeding to make further appointments.
Sri KR Singh, learned standing counsel and learned counsel for the respondents No. 1, 2 and 3, have supported the aforesaid conclusion drawn by the Distt.
Inspector of School.
It has been further urged by Sri KR Singh, that apprehension expressed with regard to the status of the respondent No. 5 in the impugned order has also to be taken in account as the management and Education authorities continue to treat the status of the respondent No. 5 in the Institution as a temporary employee.
7.
Sri YK Saxena, learned counsel for the petitioner relying on the decision of this court reported in 1997(3) UPLBEC 1967, Anoop Singh v. Distt.
Inspector of Schools, has urged that the posts, which was meant to be filled up by promotion cannot be diverted to be filled up by the appointment of candidate on compassionate basis.
The said decision in turn relied on the decision of Hiraman v. State of UP reported in 1997(3) UPLBEC 1631.
8.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, the order impugned is unsustainable on both the grounds.
The Distt.
Inspector of Schools has proceeded on a total erroneous interpretation of Regulation 2 of Chapter III of the Regulations framed under the UP Intermediate Act, 1921.
The claim with regard to the number of posts as explained herein above, clearly establishes that three posts are available for promotion and, therefore, the conclusion drawn by the Dist.
Inspector of Schools that the promotion quota is full cannot be sustained.
The second ground taken by the Distt.
Inspector of Schools to the effect that the post which has fallen vacant has to be filled up by adjusting the compassionate appointee first is equally untenable in view of the decision referred to and relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The post has to be filled up by promotion and as such the claim of the petitioner cannot be rejected on this ground.
It is only after the promotion quota is filled up or in the event any such candidate is not available, such adjustment can be resorted to.
Even otherwise a compassionate appointee has been adjusted against a post meant for promotion and not against the posts, which are meant to be filled by direct recruitment.
9.
Sri KR Singh has again urged that an apprehension expressed in the impugned order clearly creates an impression as if the services of the respondent No. 5 are temporary.
The aforesaid apprehension is absolutely un- founded in view of the decision relied on by Sri KR Singh, in case of Budhi Sagar Jgubgy, v. Distt.
Inspector Schools, in Writ Petition No. 5653 of 1991, decided on 3-8-1992, wherein this court relying on earlier decisions has held that appointment under dying in harness on compassionate basis has to be treated a permanent appointee and such benefit cannot be extended as a temporary measure.
Even otherwise, under Regulations 101 to 107 of the Regulations contained in Chapter 33 of the Intermediate Education Act, 1921, it is an obligation of the State to adjust the compassionate appointee in the event of non-availability of the post by creating a supernumerary post, the respondent No. 5, therefore, is entitled to be treated as such having been appointed against the supernumerary post, which admittedly was created by the respondents under a statutory rule and the right which has accrued in favour of the respondent No. 5 for being appointed on compassionate basis cannot be taken away on the basis of the apprehension expressed in the impugned order.
There is absolutely no reason for not treating the respondent No. 5's status as a permanent employee in the institution.
10.
In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, since the posts in question fall within promotional quota, the case of the petitioner has to be considered for promotion and accordingly the impugned order dated 1-10-2005 is quashed with a direction to the Distt.
Inspector of Schools, for re- consideration of the claim of the petitioner in the light of the observations made herein above and pass appropriate orders as expeditiously as possible preferably within one month from the date of production of a certified copy of this order before the said respondent.
11.
In view of the finding and conclusion drawn herein above, the order dated 6-7-2005 passed by the respondent No. 3 also stands quashed, however, without prejudice to the right of the respondent No. 5, which stands protected in the light of the observations made herein above.
12.
The writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.