Vinay Mittal, J (Oral) - The petitioner - Ms Neelam had appeared in BA Part II examination conducted by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, being a regular student of BBK DAV College, Amritsar.
The aforesaid examination was to be conducted in the month of April 2005.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was required to appear in two compulsory subjects and three optional subjects.
The petitioner, consequently, was allotted a roll number entitling her to appear in the said examinations.
The petitioner appeared in both the compulsory papers i.e. English and Punjabi.
She was, thereafter, to appear in three optional subjects also.
A subject of Hindi, which was one of the optional subjects, opted by the petitioner, was further sub-divided into two parts i.e. Part-A and Part-B.
Final examination of Hindi Part-A was to be conducted on April 23, 2005 whereas the examination of Part-B was to he held on April 26, 2005.
2.
On April 21, 2005, petitioner met with an accident, as she was hit by a car while coming back after appearing in the examination of the compulsory subject.
She suffered serious injuries including injury on the left knee.
She was given medical treatment and even the knee injury had to be stitched after giving some anaesthesia.
The petitioner was advised bed rest by the doctor treating her.
3.
In view of the above said circumstances, a representation was made by the petitioner through her father, on April 22, 2005, addressed to the Vice Chancellor of the University, informing the involvement of the petitioner in the aforesaid accident and requesting the Vice Chancellor for granting her permission to allow her to appear in Hindi Elective subject (Part-A and Part- B), on medical grounds, by giving her a special chance.
Along with the aforesaid representation, a medical certificate duly issued by the attending doctor, was also attached.
The petitioner claims that she was assured that she would be granted the aforesaid special chance and in the hope thereof, she took the admission in the next year of BA Part III at SN College, Amritsar.
However, vide an order dated July 21, 2005, the petitioner was informed that her representation could not be accepted and she could not be granted a special chance to appear in the Hindi Elective subject.
A copy of the order dated July 21, 2005, communicated to the petitioner, has been appended as Annexure P-3 with the present petition.
4.
The petitioner claims that she moved repeated representations, thereafter, to the Vice Chancellor for considering her case sympathetically but no fruitful results came.
Consequently, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition for quashing the order dated July 21, 2005 (Annexure P-3) and for issuance of directions to the respondents to allow the petitioner to sit in special examination to be conducted in September, 2005.
5.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
A written statement has been filed by them.
They have claimed that the petitioner was not entitled to any special chance in the two papers as per the rules approved by the Syndicate of the University on February 09, 2004.
6.
Vide an order dated September 27, 2005, the petitioner was granted permission to provisionally appear in Hindi paper (Part-A and Part-B), in supplementary examination, which was to be held on September 28/30, 2005.
It is the conceded position between the learned counsel for the parties that the petitioner had so appeared in the aforesaid examination.
However, her result has not been declared.
7.
I have heard Shri M.K.
Dogra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and Shri DS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the respondents and with their assistance, have also gone through the record of the case.
8.
Normally speaking, an interpretation of the rule, approved by the Syndicate in its meeting dated February 09, 2004, would be required by this Court in the present petition, as on merits, the stand of the parties has to be examined on the interpretation of the said rule.
However, I find that in peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, since the petitioner has already been granted a permission to appear in Part-A and Part-B of Hindi paper, in an examination which was held on September 28/30, 2005 and because of the fact that she had already joined the next higher class, it would be in the fitness of things to treat the aforesaid appearance of the petitioner in the said supplementary examination has a regular appearance.
While doing so, this court is also conscience of the hardship, the petitioner has suffered on account of serious accident, met by her.
The petitioner cannot be faulted for being absent from the examination on April 23/26, 2005.
9.
Keeping in view all the aforesaid facts, it is directed that the appearance of the petitioner in Hindi paper supplementary examination, held on September 28/30, 2005, shall be treated as a regular appearance and therefore, the University shall declare the result of the aforesaid Hindi paper (Part-A and Part-B), within a period of two weeks from the date, a certified copy of this order is received.
10.
The petitioner shall be permitted to appear in BA Part III examination, as per her entitlement.
11.
Shri DS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the respondent- University has very fairly offered that the orders passed by this Court in the present petition shall be communicated by him to the concerned authorities, so that the petitioner can pursue her academic career, as stated above.
12.
The present writ petition is disposed of with the aforesaid observations.
A copy of the order be given dasti on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.