MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for issuance of a direction to the respondents to issue posting orders to the petitioner by granting him permission to join as Sub-Inspector, Cooperative Societies claiming that the petitioner has been duly selected and has qualified the training course from the Cooperative Institute, Nabha.
The petitioner belongs to Rajasthan and his caste `Nayak Harijan' is recognised as a Scheduled Caste there.
2.
Brief facts of the case necessary for the disposal of the controversy raised in the instant petition are that on the basis of the requisition sent by respondent No. 1 to the Subordinate Services Selection Board, respondent No. 3, issued an advertisement in the English daily `The Tribune' on 151982 inviting applications, inter alia, for appointment to the post of Sub- Inspector (Males), Cooperative Societies.
The total number of 300 posts were advertised and 100 posts were reserved for Scheduled Caste/Tribe, 15 posts were reserved for Backward Class and 45 were reserved for Ex-servicemen.
The advertisement as appeared in `The Tribune' dated 151982 reads as under :-  "300 Sub-Inspectors, Cooperative Societies (Male) 100, 15 and 45 posts are reserved for Scheduled Castes/Tribes, Backward Class and Ex- servicemen respectively.
Age : 20-27 years, Relaxation in age limit for Government servants as per Government rules and instructions.
Scale Rs. 450- 800.
EQ : Graduate of a recognised University or its equivalent.
Preference will be given to those having passed the Junior Diploma in Cooperation.
The selected candidates who do not hold diploma in Cooperation shall have to undergo six months training prescribed for the post before appointment.
During training they will get stipend.
The selected candidates before getting training shall have to execute agreement bond as required.
Those who had applied in response to Board's advertisement No. 7/78 category No. 5, dated 1561978 and subsequent corrigendum dated 1521979, 331979, 1511980 and 2011980 and fulfil the prescribed qualifications and age limit mentioned above, need not apply again.
Those who had applied in response to Cooperative Department advertisement dated 1841980, also need apply again.
Difference of fee will be taken from the old applicants at the time of interview in the shape of bank drafts".
3.
The petitioner claiming to be fully eligible applied for the post under Scheduled Caste category.
He attached a certificate issued by the District Magistrate, Ganganager dated 11.7.1977 (P-1), which is to the effect that the petitioner belongs to `Nayak Harijan caste', which is a Scheduled Caste under the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
The certificate showing him as a permanent resident of Ganganagar was also attached with the application.
He was informed by respondent No. 1 that he was duly selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board - respondent No. 3 to the post of Sub- Inspector, Cooperative Societies.
It was further intimated that he was to be called for training in due course of time.
Out of 287 persons selected for the post of Sub Inspectors, the petitioner was placed at Serial No. 247 in the merit list and in the list of Scheduled Caste he was at Serial No. 88 out of 100 seats reserved for that category.
He was eventually sent for training to Cooperative Training Institute, Nabha.
He completed six months junior basic course from that institute (2691984 to 1231985).
The name of the petitioner was recommended by respondent No. 1 to respondent No. 2 along with 67 other selected candidates on 631985.
The name of the petitioner appeared at Serial No. 63 out of the list of 68 candidates.
The Deputy Registrar was directed by respondent No. 1 to issue posting orders.
However, he did not issue posting order in respect of the petitioner.
The reasons for non-issuance of posting order has been disclosed by respondent No. 2 in a communication dated 2591985, addressed to respondent No. 1.
The aforementioned communication discloses that there was no post of Sub-Inspector vacant in the Jalandhar Circle and some telephonic message was flashed instructing the Deputy Registrar, respondent No. 2, not to issue the posting orders of the petitioner.
The petitioner made a representation to respondent No. 1 on 1961985 (P-5).
4.
The stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in the written statement is that the `Nayak caste' according to the clarification issued by the Director, Scheduled Caste and Backward Class Welfare Department, Punjab, Chandigarh, is a `Backward Class', in the State of Punjab.
On a complaint received against the petitioner alleging that he did not belong to Scheduled Caste category, enquiries were made and the aforementioned fact was revealed by the Director, Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes Welfare Department.
The communication sent by the Director, dated 141985, has been placed on record as Annexure R-1.
It has further been the stand of the respondents that only Scheduled Castes of Punjab are to be recruited against reserved vacancies as per instructions of the Punjab Government, issued on 1851985 (R-2).
5.
Mr. AS Brar, learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to the opening para of the advertisement claiming that the applications were invited for Scheduled Caste/Tribes of All India.
He further submitted that in respect of Backward Class, the applications were confined only to Punjab State.
The clause on which reliance has been placed reads as under :-  "Invite applications to reach its office not later than 3151982 on a plain paper in the form prescribed below for the following categories of posts, accompanied by two pass portsize photographs of the candidates and copies of the certificates/testimonials duly attested by the Gazetted officer and fee of Rs. 25/- for category No. VIII and Rs. 15/- for all the remaining categories.
For Scheduled Castes/Tribes (of all India)/Backward Classes (of Punjab State only) the fee will be Rs. 6/- and Rs. 4/- respectively.
All the Ex-servicemen are exempted from payment of fee.
Candidates should specify the category and post applied for on application form clearly".
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has then argued that his candidature was duly accepted and he was selected.
After selection, the petitioner was put on training for six months at the Cooperative Training Institute, Nabha.
It is only at the time posting that a complaint was received at the back of the petitioner which has resulted into cancellation of his appointment without affording any opportunity of hearing to him.
7.
Mr. Satish Bhanot, learned State counsel produced the original record of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 before me and has argued that perusal of Clause 13 of the advertisement reveals that 300 posts of Sub-Inspectors, Cooperative Societies (Males) were advertised and only 100 posts were reserved for the members of the Scheduled Caste/Tribe.
He has mentioned that a member of Scheduled Caste is to be recognised as such by the State of Punjab.
In that regard, learned counsel has placed reliance on para 2 of the instructions, dated 2251985 (R-2).
8.
Having heard the learned counsel at a considerable length and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that the instant petition is liable to be dismissed because in order to claim the benefit of reserve category, the caste of the petitioner is required to be recognised as Scheduled Caste in the respondent State of Punjab.
It is well settled that a person from other State cannot claim the benefit of reservation on the ground that in the State of his origin he is considered as a member of the Scheduled Caste despite the fact that in the State of employment his caste is not considered as Scheduled Caste or Backward Class.
This position emerges form a perusal of Article 16(4), 341 and 342 of the Constitution.
The aforementioned provisions have been considered by Constitution Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Action Committee v. Union of India, 1994(4) SCT 435 : (1994)5 SCC 244.
Their Lordships while interpreting the expression `for the purposes of the Constitution ............ in relation to a State' have held that a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe in relation to his original State of which he is permanent or ordinary resident cannot be deemed to so in relation to any other State when he migrates to that State for the purposes of employment and education etc.
It is because of the aforementioned reason that the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 has made provision for specifying the caste or tribes in relation to a given State or Union Territory.
Referring to the plain language of Articles 341 and 342, in para 3, their Lordships have observed as under :-  "3.
On a plain reading of clause (1) of Articles 341 and 342 it is manifest that the power of the President is limited to specifying the castes or tribes which shall, for the purposes of the Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in relation to a State or a Union Territory, as the case may be.
Once a notification is issued under clause (1) of Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution, Parliament can by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, specified in the notification, any caste or tribe but save for that limited purpose the notification issued under clause (1), shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
What is important to notice is that the castes or tribes have to be specified in relation to a given State or Union Territory.
That means a given caste or tribe can be a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in relation to the State or Union Territory for which it is specified.
These are the relevant provisions with which we shall be concerned while dealing with grievance made in this petition".
The reason for the aforementioned position is not far to seek.
The consideration for specifying a particular caste or tribe for its inclusion in the list of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe in a given State would depend on the nature and extent of disadvantages and social hardships suffered by that caste, tribe or class in that State, which may be totally non-existent in another State.
The aforementioned view has been echoed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 16 of the judgment wherein Constitution Assembly Debates have also been cited and the same reads as under :-  "16.
We may add that considerations for specifying a particular caste or tribe or class for inclusion in the list of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes or backward classes in a given State would depend on the nature and extent of disadvantages and social hardships suffered by that caste, tribe or class in that State which may be totally non est in another State to which person belonging thereto may migrate.
Coincidentally it may be that a caste or tribe bearing the same nomenclature is specified in two States but the considerations on the basis of which they have been specified may be totally different.
So also the degree of disadvantages of various elements which constitute the input for specification may also be totally different.
Therefore, merely because a given caste is specified in State A as a Scheduled Caste does not necessarily mean that if there be another bearing the same nomenclature in another State the person belonging to the former would be entitled to the rights, privileges and benefits admissible to a member of the Scheduled Caste of the latter State "for the purposes of this Constitution".
This is an aspect which has to be kept in mind and which was very much in the minds of the Constitution-makers as is evident from the choice of language of Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution ............" 9.
The aforementioned view of the Constitution has been accepted, followed and applied by a three Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of S Pushpa and others v. Sivachanmu Gavelu and others, 2005(1) SCT 842 : (2005)3 SCC 1.
10.
When the facts of the present case are examined in the light of the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court while interpreting Articles 341 and 342 as well as Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, no doubt is left that the petitioner, who belongs to Scheduled Caste category in the State of Rajasthan, cannot ipso facto on that basis claim reservation until and unless his caste is also included in the list of Scheduled Castes in the State of Punjab.
On plain reading of the Constitution, precedents and principles, I am of the view that there is no merit in this petition and the prayer made is liable to be rejected on this ground alone.
11.
The respondent State has placed reliance on instruction dated 2251985 (R-2) which may not be strictly applicable to the facts of this case having been issued after the selection made in 1982.
However, the instructions recognise the position under the Constitution which would be equally applicable as it cannot be argued that the constitutional position has been brought out by the instructions.
Therefore, it would be apposite to refer to those instructions, which reads as under :-  "It is also clarified that a Scheduled Caste/Tribe person who has migrated from the State of origin to some other State for the purposes of seeking education, employment etc. will be deemed to be a Scheduled Caste/Tribe of the State of his origin and will be entitled to derive benefits from the State of origin and not from the State from the State to which he has migrated".
It is evident from the aforementioned para that a person who has migrated from the State of his origin to another State for the purposes of seeking education may continue to be a member of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe of the State of his origin and such a person cannot become entitled to derive benefits from the State to which he is migrated.
In other words, the petitioner cannot claim that he must be treated as a member of the Scheduled Caste merely because he belongs to `Nayak caste', which is regarded as Scheduled Caste in the State of Rajasthan.
12.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that in the opening para of the advertisement the expression "All India" has been used against Scheduled Caste/Tribe categories does not advance the case of the petitioner because the expression "All India" and "State of Punjab" has not been used for the purposes of reservation.
The aforementioned clause deals only with the payment of fee which is to be paid by the candidate belonging to the aforementioned categories.
The reservation for various castes including Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Class has been provided by clause 13 of the advertisement, which clearly shows that 100 posts are reserved for members of the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.
The petitioner is trying to make a mountain out of a molehill.
The argument is absolutely misconceived and I have no hesitation to reject the same.
For the reasons aforementioned, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.