HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The appellant was appointed as an Assistant Professor in the department of Internal Medicine in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, against a leave vacancy on 3131994.
She continued to work in that capacity till July 1995 after securing several extensions.
While she was in service, the PGI issued an advertisement, Annexure P-3, dated 291994, calling for applications for regular appointment to the post of Assistant Professor in Internal Medicine.
The appellant applied for the said post and after selection was put at Sr. No. 1 in the waiting list.
One Dr. Amita Aggarwal, who was selected for appointment, was called upon to join her duties by 2551995.
This date was extended time and again on the request of Dr. Amita Aggarwal by the Director of the PGI with the final extension being given upto 1571995.
Dr. Amita Aggarwal, however, did not join her duties, on which a letter of appointment, Annexure P-6, was issued to the appellant on 2171995 and she joined her post the very next day.
It appears that a new Assessment Promotion Scheme was approved by the governing body of the PGI vide Annexure P-8 on 25.4.1992 and rectified by the Institute Body on 14.8.1992.
As per Clause 3 of this Scheme, an Assistant Professor/Associate Professor, who had put in four years experience in the regular service of the PGI, was eligible for promotion under the said scheme.
The cut off date for purpose of eligibility was also fixed in the scheme as being 30th June of that particular year.
Pursuant to the aforesaid scheme, the PGI issued a circular dated 2892000 calling options for consideration for promotion.
The appellant's case was, however, not considered on the plea that she did not have four years regular service as on 30.6.1999 as she had been appointed on 2271995, leading to a shortfall of about 22 days.
The appellant thereafter moved a representation dated 2741999, Annexure P-9, to the Director of the PGI, which was rejected vide order, Annexure P-10, dated 671999 on the ground that she did not fulfill the eligibility condition of four years of regular service.
The order, Annexure P-10, had been impugned in the writ petition.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition vide judgment dated 3012002, upholding the stand of the PGI.
2.
The facts above mentioned are not in dispute.
Based on these facts, Mr. Sehgal, the learned counsel for the appellant, has argued that the cut off date of 30th June was arbitrary and that the extensions in the joining time given to Dr. Amita Aggarwal by the Director were wholly without jurisdiction as Entry No. 40 of Schedule 1 of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research Chandigarh Rules, 1967, envisaged only an extension of 30 days on the hands of the Director.
It has accordingly been urged that the extension granted to Dr. Amita Aggarwal from 2521995 to 1571995 by the Director was completely unauthorised and had unnecessarily delayed the appointment of the appellant by several months.
Mr. Sehgal has also raised a plea with regard to the counting of ad hoc service for the purpose of determining the eligibility of four years experience and in this connection, has also placed reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rudra Kumar Sain and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 2000 Supreme Court 2808.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
4.
We find that the argument with regard to the counting of ad hoc service and the cut off date as advanced by Mr. Sehgal has no merit.
The judgment cited above does not lay down a universal rule that ad hoc service which is followed by regular service has to be counted for determining seniority etc. as the judgment pertains to a specific set of rules.
Despite being questioned, Mr. Sehgal said that there were no rules which governed this issues with regard to this service under the PGI.
We, therefore, find that this argument has no merit and must be rejected.
5.
We are further of the opinion that in all selections a cut off date has to be fixed, failing which the entire process will become difficult to implement.
The fixation of a cut off date is, therefore implicit in any selection process and forms an instrisic part thereof.
We are, however, of the opinion that the PGI or its governing body should have a fresh look at the appellant's case keeping in view the facts of the case that Dr. Amita Aggarwal has been granted unauthorised extension beyond 30 days.
Admittedly, she had been given time upto 2551995 to join her post and as per Item No. 40, mentioned above, this period could not have been extended by the Director beyond 30 days.
However, he extended the period upto 1571995.
To our mind, any extension beyond 30 days was not justified under the Rules.
We also find that had Dr. Amita Aggarwal not been given an extension beyond 30 days, the possibility that the appellant would have got appointment much earlier cannot be excluded and that this would have brought her within the scope for eligibility i.e. completion of four years of regular service.
As already mentioned above, the shortfall in the case of the appellant is only 22 days.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the authorities should re-examine the appellants' case in the background of the above facts.
We accordingly quash the order, Annexure P-10, and remit the case to the authorities for re-consideration in accordance with the observations mentioned above.
The final decision be taken within six months from the date a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
Appeal allowed.