These appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated 6102004 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petitions of the appellants and also against the order dated 352005 whereby the application was filed by the appellants seeking for restoration of the writ petitions was dismissed.
2.
Both the aforesaid orders are under challenge in these appeals on which we have heard the learned counsel for the appellants.
The decision dated 6102004 was rendered by the learned Single Judge on merit of the writ petitions and, therefore, the subsequent application filed and disposed of on 352005 was not maintainable as the said application was filed merely seeking restoration of the writ petitions.
A writ petition can be restored to its original number when it is dismissed in default.
In the present case the writ petitions were dismissed on merit and, therefore, no applications for restoration were maintainable.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge was right in rejecting the said applications.
3.
So far the challenge of the appellants as against the order dated 6102004 is concerned, we have perused the said judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge.
In the writ petitions the petitioners had prayed for regularization of service from the date of their initial appointment and not from the date when they became eligible under the regularization scheme of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
It was held by the learned Single Judge the aforesaid issue that was sought to be raised was no longer res integra in view of the decision of the court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gauri Shankar & Ors., 1999(4) S.C.T.
585 : 1999 Orders V AD (Delhi) 905.
We have perused the said decision also wherein it has been held that regularization of casual employees can take place in accordance with and as per the scheme on the basis of their seniority as and when posts become available.
It has also been held in the said decision that regularization cannot be given from a back date as there is possibility that in such cases juniors may become seniors.
4.
Since the respondents have their own scheme of regularization and workers are being regularized in accordance with their seniority position, therefore, the findings and conclusion arrived at by the learned Single Judge do not call for any interference.
The records placed before us also disclose that regularization is being done in terms of seniority position which is crystal dear from the paragraphs 2 and 3 of the memorandum of appeal.
5.
The counsel for the appellants also submits before us that since the appellants have completed 240 days, therefore, they should hale been regularized from the back date.
We are unable to accept the aforesaid contention in view of the fact that the said plea was not raised before the learned Single Judge and was not considered by the learned Single Judge.
6.
We may appropriately refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Executive Engineer, ZP Engg.
Divn.
and another v. Digambara Rao and others, 2005(1) SCT 636 (SC) : 2005(1) AD (SC) 115 : (2004)8 SCC 262, wherein the Supreme Court has held that completion of 240 days of continuous service in a year may not itself be a ground for directing an order of regularization The said decision is also squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
7.
We find no merit in these appeals and the same are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.