Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - The writ petitioner now holding the post of Assistant Director in the establishment of the respondent No.1, has prayed for relief in negative way that not to regularize the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 as well others similarly circumstanced employees for the post of Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors.
Short fact as narrated in the writ petition which is more or less admitted by the respondents, is as follows :-  2.
The respondents No. 3 to 16 were promoted to the post of Deputy Directors (Civil as well as Electrical) from their feeder post of Assistant Director on ad hoc basis and for a period of two years with effect from the respective date of appointment or until further orders which-ever is earlier.
The said ad hoc promotion was granted on the conditions that they and each of them will have to pass the departmental and professional examinations as per existing rules within a period of two years from the date of such provisional appointment and upon his failure in passing the said examination within that period he shall be reverted to the post of Assistant Director.
It was further conditioned that the appointment would neither confer any right on the incumbent for regular appointment nor is to be construed as determinative of his seniority.
The aforesaid persons continued with the aforesaid posts without taking any examination until 1995.
Their appointments continued on ad hoc basis even after expiry of two years without reverting them in breach of the conditions.
No examination was held nor any rules for conducting examination was framed.
Ultimately, on 24th July 1995 comprehensive rule relating to recruitment to the various posts right from the last step of the ladder namely Sub-assistant Engineer and up to the level of Director was made and published.
In terms of the aforesaid rules the provision for filling in the post of Deputy Director (Civil and Electrical both) was made by way of promotion.
The mode of promotion was provided by way of selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Merit is to be determined from the annual confidential report.
It is provided that Assistant Director shall not be eligible for promotion to the post of Deputy Director unless he has completed six years of satisfactory service as Assistant Director (Civil and Electrical) and passed the prescribed examination similar to the departmental and professional examination prevalent in PWD, Government of West Bengal.
The above respondents and each of them though were officiating on promotion for a long time not only for the post of Deputy Director but next higher post, were asked to pass the examination in terms of the said recruitment rules.
All of them sat for the examination except two candidates, all failed to qualify themselves.
After having taken examination as above the said respondents challenged such promotional policy on the basis of the suitability and asked for regularization of their services and/or promotion to the higher post granted on the basis of ad hoc promotion by filing a writ petition previously.
The said writ petition was, however, ultimately withdrawn.
3.
Thereafter the respondent No.1 appointed one-man committee to review the situation and/or controversy relating to regularization of the aforesaid respondents.
The said Committee commonly known as Gopal Mukherjee Committee recommended for regularization of the ad-hoc promotion to all the respondent employees and also prescribed different mode of filling up of the post of Assistant Director and Deputy Director and so on.
The writ petitioner, though much junior to the respondents No. 3 to 16, has challenged the said recommendation which has since been accepted by the board and further decided to regularize adhoc promotion of the aforesaid respondents.
4.
Mr. Mazumdar learned Advocate appearing in support of the petitioner contends that the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are obliged to follow the rules for recruitment circulated by the notification dated 24th July 1995 while taking decision of granting promotion to the respondents No. 3 to 16.
They and each of them were illegally regularized in their post without subjecting them to go for test and examination.
They were thus in circuitous way regularized by accepting so-called recommendation and the report of the one-man committee.
5.
He contends that recruitment rules 1995 was published and circulated in the exercise of the statutory power and the same cannot be by-passed by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
They and each of them were promoted on ad hoc basis for a period of two years only and within this period they were supposed to be reverted back to their parent posts.
There is no provision for relaxation of these rules in fact the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 who as a matter of fact vandalized in holding examination and refused to obey the direction of the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
They were fully aware that by the aforesaid ad hoc promotion no right had been created or accrued in their favour.
In support of his contention he has relied on the decision of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1999 SC 897 (AK Sharma v. Union of India and Anr.) The said rule is still in force and the same has not been repealed.
The report of the Gopal Mukherjee Committee and the recommendation made by him cannot be a legal document and the same cannot override the provision of the rule framed lawfully by the respondent No. 1.
The report cannot supplant the said rules.
6.
He further contends that the formation of committee has got no statutory sanction, as the same was not appointed under the provision of Rule 8 of the West Bengal Housing Board Rule, 1973.
The aforesaid provision provides amongst other the Committee of this type should have more than one member and must have approval of the State Government.
In this case only one member consists the Committee and there was no approval at any point of time of the State Government.
Though the Hon'ble Minister in charge and the Secretary of the Housing Department being Chairman and member respectively of the Board has accepted such report and recommendation, still the same is not valid act.
The Hon'ble Minister at the time of accepting the same did not act as a Government, rather granted approval qua the Chairman of the Board, the said Committee was formed and report was procured only for the sole purpose to by-pass the legal provision to regularize illegal ad hoc promotion of the respondent Nos. 3 to 16.
In this connection he has relied on decision of the Supreme Court in AIR 1994 SC 1808.
7.
The learned Counsel Mr. Debabrata Banerjee appearing for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submits that the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 have been regularized in accordance with the provision of the rules.
When it was detected that serious problem had arisen with regard to the implementation of the promotional policy particularly in case of the candidates who were granted promotion on ad hoc basis in the year 1986 and when they were allowed to continue in the promotional post without any break, it was decided that a committee should be and indeed was formed under the Chairmanship of Mr. Gopal Mukherjee, an advisor of the Board.
This one-man committee after having examined all aspects of the matter recommended amongst others regularization of the promotion granted to the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 in the year 1999.
Therefore, following this report the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 in course of time were granted further promotion to the post of joint director, as the board in its meeting found that the recommendation of the said Committee to be acceptable and it was accepted.
According to the learned Counsel for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 under the provision of the West Bengal Housing Board Act, 1972 the Board has ample power to make regulation in consonance with the Act and Rules, the rules of recruitment and promotion of the engineers, officers was promulgated on 24th July 1995.
He further submits that the decision of the Board on 5th May 1999 is nothing but the extension of rules of recruitment of 1995.
Hence there is no question of supersession of the recruitment promulgated on 24th July 1995.
He submits further that the Board has inherent power to amend any rule for its bona fide purpose.
8.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 submits that the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 were appointed as graduate civil engineer in the department and at present holding the post of Directors, Joint Director, Deputy Director after having been promoted from the post of their initial appointments as Assistant Directors between 1977 to 1983.
When these respondents were granted ad hoc promotion the writ petitioner was not in the picture.
Therefore, he is not affected at all.
It was no fault of these respondents but respondent Nos. 1 and 2 who could not arrange for holding departmental examination within two years as mentioned in their respective order of promotion.
No rule was framed and respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were waiting for the report and recommendation of the Pay Commission.
In course of time his clients were not only allowed to continue with their first promotional post but they were given further promotion to the next higher posts.
The respondent Board has jurisdiction and authority to adopt any policy of regularization of services considering the plight of the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 who have been officiating in the promotional post for a long time uninterruptedly.
He has relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in this connection reported in (2000) 1 SCLJ 428, (1998) 2 SCC 439, AIR 1985 SC 306 and (2004) 2 SCC 423.
9.
From the respective contentions of the learned Counsel it appears to me the primary objection has been taken by the respondents that the petitioner has no affectation of right as he is much junior to the respondent Nos. 3 to 16.
In order to maintain a writ, it is true one has to establish his legal right and its affectation.
But this rule has exception in case of writ of quo warranto.
In substance the petitioner has prayed for this relief.
He has stated in the petition the aforesaid respondents cannot be regularized in the aforesaid post, as the same is de hors recruitment rules.
So their holding of office in their respective promotional posts is unauthorized, illegal and contrary to the published rules.
10.
So I hold that the writ is maintainable and the petitioner's right to be considered for the promotion on the basis of seniority cum merit has been denied by flouting and/or superseding effectually the relevant recruitment rules.
11.
The question raised on merit in this matter now, is whether the decision of the Board to regularize the respondents employee and each of them is justified under the provision of the Act and rules thereunder or not.
Mr. Mazumdar has rightly stated that respondent Nos. 3 to 16 did not acquire any vested right while continuing in the promotional post on ad hoc basis.
They were made known since beginning that this promotion was for two years only and within this time they were to qualify themselves in the selection tests, or until further order whichever is earlier.
The selection test was not held within two years but they were allowed to continue, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 should not have allowed them and should have reverted to their parent posts at that point of time or even subsequent thereto as there was no provision for continuation or regularization of the respondent Nos. 3 to 16.
In my view one cannot take any advantage of the continuing wrong.
Thereafter.
the respondents No. 3 to 16 have challenged promotional policy on the basis of selection and in fact they and each of them took test for promotion but they failed.
They challenged the aforesaid policy in this Court and they were unsuccessful.
12.
As rightly argued by Mr. Mazumdar what promoted the respondent Nos. and 2 to take different stand after withdrawal and/or dismissal of the writ petition filed by the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 is not explained.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are the creatures of the statute and they cannot take any action or decision contrary to the provision of the Act and rules.
It is settled position of the law that authority and power of the statutory bodies are circumscribed and/or restricted by the statute and the rules framed thereunder.
Unlike private individuals they don't have any absolute liberty to do or take any action, whatever they like.
13.
1 am unable to accept the submission of Mr. Bhattacharya the learned Counsel of the respondent Nos.
I and 2 that the Board can change and take policy decision as it thinks fit.
They have relied much on the report and recommendation of one-man-committee followed by acceptance of the Board.
I have examined the provision for constitution of such committee under Rule 8 of the aforesaid Housing Board Rules and the same is reproduced hereunder : -  "8.
Appointment of Committees and delegation of functions under Section 26(3) : The Board may appoint a Committee or Committees to advise or to assist it in matters relating to any of the functions of the Board under the Act or any matter entrusted to the Board by the State Government subject to the following conditions, namely, that- (1) the total number of members in a Committee shall not exceed five;  (2) the Chairman of the Committee shall be appointed with the approval of the State Government;  (3) when a Committee is constituted at the district level, the District Officer and a local Executive Engineer of the Board of the State Government shall be ex-officio members of the Committee;  (4) the duties and functions of the Committee shall be specified with the approval of the State Government in each case;  (5) the remuneration and allowance to be allowed to the Chairman and to other non-official members of the Committee shall be fixed with the approval of the State Government".
There cannot be any doubt that the Committee has to be formed as aforesaid by more than one Member and must have the Chairman with approval of the Government.
Here the Committee is formed with a lone member of Mr. Mukherjee.
No prior or pass facto approval has been obtained from the Government and the Board for this appointment of Chairman.
The respondents have tried to equate the function of the Board with that of the Government taking advantage of presence of the Hon'ble Minister of the concerned department being Chairman of the Board and the Secretary of the concerned department being ex officio member.
Mr. Mazumdar has rightly stated that the Hon'ble Minister and his Secretary while accepting the report and recommendation of the Gopal Mukherjee Committee has acted qua Board official not acting as a Government.
14.
Therefore, I hold that formation of Committee followed by acceptance of its report is wholly unauthorized and illegal.
I do not find any power in the Rules or Act to legalize this kind of irregular appointment when it was made specifically clear that they were obliged to go through the selection process.
The report of the Committee in effect supersedes amongst other provision of the rules for promotion so far the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 are concerned.
This favourable decision extended by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to those chosen officers is wholly discriminatory and in breach of the expressed provision of the rules.
The rule of law does not permit it.
The decision cited by Mr. Bhattacharjee learned Counsel for the respondents in this case is hopelessly inappropriate and irrelevant.
Those decisions were rendered in cases where irregular act and action were regularized under expressed provision of the rules made by the Government.
Here I do not find any such provision.
Accordingly I hold that the regularization by accepting the report of the said Committee, of the respondent Nos. 3 to 16 in their respective promotional post is wholly illegal.
Since they have been continuing in this post illegally and they have drawn their salary, I do not want to upset by asking them to return their salary, this would be most inequitable.
However, they will not be allowed to continue further until they are subjected to successful undergoing of test and/or examination as per rule, which they have failed already.
Without such test they cannot claim any benefit whatsoever.
Such test shall be undertaken as early as possible.
15.
1 therefore, direct the Board to follow the rules.
Until it is repealed, modified, altered in accordance with law, there shall not be any departure whatsoever from the rules in the matter of promotion.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.