Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - Three parallel courses for medical studies have been introduced by the State Government in the State of West Bengal.
These three courses of studies are Allopthy, Homoeopathy and Ayurvedic.
The selection for admission of the candidates to all these three courses or studies is made through a common entrance examination conducted by the West Bengal Board of Examination for admission to Engineering Medical and Technological Degree Colleges.
2.
The petitioners were all selected for admission in different Government Homoeopathic Medical Colleges and Hospitals within the State through the said common entrance examination held in the year 1997.
The petitioners have all passed 4 1/2 years Course of Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (B.H.M.S.)
Course.
Thereafter, the petitioners attended their respective traineeship in different State Government run Homoeopathic Medical Colleges and Hospitals.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners in this writ petition is against the State respondents as the said respondents have not introduced any housestaffship for the students who successfully completed internship after acquiring degree of Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery, though such housestaffship was introduced both for the allopathic students and/or Ayurvedic student's.
Thus, though the State Government has made a compulsory provision for undergoing practical training course for the allopathic and Ayurvedic students in course of their housestaffship but no such provision has been made for the homoeopathic students.
As a result, the homoeopathic students are deprived of availing of proper training course after their successful completion of internship.
4.
To sort out the differences and discriminations amongst the students of three parallel courses of students, the petitioners submitted a representation to the Hon'ble Minister-In-Charge, Dept.
of Health & Family Welfare, Writers' Buildings, Kolkata being annexure `P-1' to this writ petition.
Copy of the said representation was given to different other State functionaries, inviting their attention about the need for introduction of housestaffship for the homoeopathic students in the State.
5.
Since the said representation was not considered by the concerned respondents, the petitioners earlier moved a writ petition being WP No. 3897(W) of 2004 before this Court.
The said writ petition was disposed of on 2232004 by Justice Subhro Kamal Mukherjee, whereby the writ petitioners were directed to make a detailed representation, disclosing the nature of their grievances to the Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of West Bengal within a week from the date of the order.
The Principal Secretary was also directed to consider and dispose of the said representation of the petitioners within a period of one month from the date of submission of such representation to him.
6.
Pursuant to the said order the Principal Secretary, considered the grievance of the petitioners and ultimately by his order dated 25th May 2004, being annexure `P-5' to this writ petition, expressed that Housestaffship arrangements should be introduced for the Internees of the homoeopathic students in the Hospitals attached to the State Government-run-Homoeopathic Medical Colleges subject to availability of the finances of the State Government.
In the said order it was also indicated that the Department of Health & Family Welfare had already initiated a proposal for running Housestaffship in those 4 Government-run- Homoeopathic Medical Colleges and Hospitals.
The said order further discloses that the matter is now under active consideration before the Finance Department of the State Government and necessary orders in this respect will be issued in due course after receiving concurrence of the Finance Department of the State Government.
7.
In spite of expression of such feeling, the State Government has not yet introduced the said housestaffship for the homoeopathic students as yet.
Accordingly, the instant writ petition has been moved for necessary direction upon the State Government for introduction of housestaffship for the internees of the homoeopathic students in the State Government, run- Homoeopathic Medical Colleges and Hospitals in the State.
8.
Mr. Supratik Roy, learned Advocate, appearing for the petitioners, submitted that the action of the State authorities by not introducing similar scheme for housestaffship for the internees of homoeopathic students, is highly discriminatory in nature, inasmuch as the students who were selected through a common entrance examination for different uniform parallel courses of studies, are treated differently without any reasonable basis.
9.
Mr. Roy further submitted that housestaffship is nothing but a specialized training course though which the inertness can acquire practical experience in medical colleges and hospitals as to how the patients are required to be treated.
Mr. Roy further submitted that the utility of housestaffship cannot be denied by the State Government, particularly when housestaffship has been made a compulsory training course by the State Government for the allopathic and ayurvedic students who are required to undergo the said training course as a condition precedent for grant of licence for commencement of medical practice.
10.
Accordingly, Mr. Roy invited this Court to pass necessary direction upon the State Government for introduction of housestaffship of the homoeopathic internees.
11.
In spite of service of notice upon the Secretary, Finance, Government of West Bengal, being the respondent no. 5 herein, no affidavit has been used on behalf of the said respondent for controverting the claim of the petitioners.
However, the respondent nos. 1,3 and 4 contested this writ petition by filing affidavit-in-opposition in connection therewith.
12.
In the said affidavit-in-opposition, it is stated that introduction of the said houestaffship is under active consideration in the Department of Health & Social Welfare and the Finance Department of the Government of West Bengal.
It is also stated in the said affidavit that the concerned file is moving from one department to another and presently the Finance Department is waiting for the replies from the Director of Homoeopathy with regard to certain queries of the Finance Department.
The Director of Homoeopathy, in turn is waiting for the supply of certain government orders regarding stipend admissible to junior/senior housestaff of BHMS Course from the Principal of J.B. Roy State Ayurvedic Medical College and Hospital.
Thus, due to delay in internal communication between different departments of the State Government, the introduction of Housestaffship is being unnecessarily delayed.
13.
Mr. Nath, learned Advocate appearing for the State, submitted that the proposed introduction of housestaffship for the internees of t1ie homoeopathic students is under active consideration of the State Government and the State Government will introduce the said houestaffship for the homoeopathic students as and when concurrence will be obtained from the Finance Department in this regard.
14.
Thus, it appears to me that according to the State Government, financial constraint and/or crunch is the only barrier which stands in the way of introduction of the said housestaffship for the homoeopathic internees.
15.
1, however, do not find any substance of such contention of the learned Advocate, appearing for the State Government , particularly when I find that the concerned respondent, viz, the respondent no. 5 herein who is in proper position to explain the said situation, has not come forward with an affidavit in this regard.
16.
I find that even in the order dated 25th May 2004 passed by the Principal Secretary, being annexure `P-5' to this writ petition, an indication was given to the effect that as if, the said housestaffship could not be introduced only due to financial constraint of the State.
But in the absence of any affidavit, disclosing the details of such financial constraint from the competent respondent, being the respondent no. 5 herein, this Court is unable to believe that financial constraint is standing in the way for introduction of the said housestaffship.
17.
In any event when the State Government has already felt the necessity for introduction of such housestaffship for the homoeopathic internees, in my view, the introduction of the said scheme should not be delayed on the ground of financial constraint.
The plea of financial constraint does not appear to me as sound and convincing in view of the fact that the State Government has already lifted various embargo imposed on new recruitments and/or payment of various benefits to its employees.
18.
In any event, the State Government has to arrange finance for introduction of the said scheme of housestaffship for the homoeopathic students.
In my view, the action of the State respondent for not introducing such a scheme for the homoeopathic internees is highly discriminatory, as the housestaffship by way of a compulsory training has been introduced for the other two branches of studies, viz, for the internees of allopathic and ayurvedic students.
19.
Before parting with, it is also kept on record that Mr. Roy, learned Advocate, appearing for the petitioners, under instruction from his clients informed this Court that if the State Government is faced with any financial constraint for paying stipend to the petitioners, the petitioners are even agreeable to undergo housestaffship on deferred payment basis for any reasonable period.
20.
In such view of the matter, I direct the concerned respondents to introduce the Housestaffship for the petitioners, positively within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order.
21.
In view of the submission made by Mr. Roy, as aforesaid.
I make it clear that in case of any financial difficulty, the State Government may defer the payment of stipend to the petitioners for a period of six months front the respective date of admission of the petitioners in the said Housestaffship.
The application is, thus, disposed of.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the parties, as expeditiously as possible, upon compliance with the requisite formalities..  Order accordingly