MM Kumar, J - The petitioner is a minor daughter of one Shri Man Singh, who has been working on the post of Senior Clerk in Motilal Nehru Sports School, Rai, District Sonepat (for brevity `the School').
She has invoked the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution with a prayer for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the school authorities to grant her admission in 6th standard as a day scholar instead of a `boarder'.
She had applied for admission to the 6th standard for the session 2005-06.
On 232005, she was found medically fit and the following day on 332005, the school authorities issued a letter to her father regarding her admission to 6th standard as a boarder.
He was asked to contact the Administrative Officer in the Meeting Room on 2332005.
It is appropriate to mention that the respondent institute is a 100 per cent boarding school and as a policy no day scholars are admitted.
However, an exception has been carved out in favour of the children of the staff of school permitting them to study as a day scholar by imposing an embargo to the extent of two children.
The father of the petitioner represented on 732005 (Annexure P-2) to the school authorities for admission of his third daughter as a day scholar citing the ground that he would not be able to provide funds for sending her to hostel.
However, the application has been rejected on 25.4.2005 (Annexure P-3) by citing the policy decision that not more than two children of the same parents were to be granted the facility of studying as a day scholar at any given time.
2.
The petitioner through her father again stated to have submitted a detailed representation on 2742005 (Annexure P-4), representing that one of his daughters namely Ritu was admitted under the SAI Day Boarding Scheme on 2672003.
A copy of her admission letter dated 16.6.2003 has been placed on record as Annexure P-5.
It was asserted that she was studying as day scholar and her status was changed from day scholar to that of boarder under SAI Day Boarding Scheme.
It has also been urged in para 10 of the writ petition that there is another employee Shri Rajinder Singh Hooda, Athletic Coach, and all his three daughters namely Nidhi Hooda, Priyanka Hooda and Gaytri Hooda have been admitted as day scholars.
3.
The stand of the school in its written statement is that it is a residential school and as an exception the children of staff members are admitted as day scholars with the embargo of two children of the same parents and that too subject to vacancy position.
The petitioner is third child in addition to other two, who are already studying as day scholars and, therefore, it is claimed that she has to study as a Boarder.
It has further been explained that all students admitted by the Sports Authority of India under the Day Boarding Scheme are studying as Boarders except the children of the school employees.
Under the aforementioned scheme no child of the employees of the school has been admitted as a Boarder.
A reference in that regard has been made to a letter dated 2081999, written by the school to the Sports Authority of India informing them that the scheme concerning admission of students as a day scholar cannot be started at the school because as a policy no student is allowed to study as a day scholar except two children belonging to each of the parents from the school staff.
A copy of the aforementioned letter has been placed on record as Annexure R-1.
Reference has also been made to the decision of the meeting of the Empowered Committee, held on 162005 (Annexure R-2) reiterating the same decision.
The respondents have also placed reliance on a policy decision dated 1841990, which has been taken in the 37th meeting of the Special Board under the Chairmanship of His Excellency the Governor of Haryana (R-3).
According to Clause 3(d) of this policy decision, the facility of day scholar has been extended to not more than two children of the same parents, subject to the condition that the child has acquired a place in the merit list and no change is to be permitted in the status of such a child as a day scholar to that of a Boarder.
4.
Mr. Sanjeev Kodan, learned counsel for the petitioner has made two-fold submission before us.
He has firstly argued that the school is bound to grant admission to the petitioner as a day scholar because the policy decision, dated 1841990 (R-3), has not been followed by the school in other cases.
According to the learned counsel in the case of Shri Rajinder Singh Hooda, Athletic Coach, all his three children have been granted admission as day scholar.
Learned counsel has also submitted that in any case the petitioner would be entitled to study in the school as day scholar because otherwise her rights would be adversely affected as her father did not have financial resources to bear the expenses of hostel etc.
He has then submitted that one of the two sisters of the petitioner namely Ritu has already been shifted under the SAI Day Boarding Scheme and she has to be treated as a boarder.
Therefore, it has been asserted that the case of the petitioner falls within the policy (R-3) and she deserved to be admitted.
5.
Mr. Harish Rathee, learned State counsel has argued that respondent is exclusively a residential school but as an exception it has been kept open to the employees of the school to send their children as day scholars.
Learned counsel has submitted that a ceiling of two children has been imposed keeping in view the overall availability of seats.
He has further submitted that the assertion made by the petitioner with regard to the daughter of Shri Rajinder Singh Hooda is not factually correct because his two daughters are studying as day scholars and the third one has been given admission as a boarder.
In that regard reference has been made to the averment in para 10 of the written statement.
He has then argued that according to the policy decision dated 1841990, only two children of the staff members could be admitted as day scholar and the policy decision has never been deviated.
Learned counsel has also submitted that it is also factually incorrect that one of the sisters of the petitioner namely Ritu has been shifted from day scholar and has become day boarder from 2003 because she has been studying as a day scholar till date.
6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at a considerable length, we are of the view that this petition lacks merit and is, thus, liable to be dismissed.
It is true that primary education is a fundamental right and the same cannot be denied to the petitioner.
However, the aforementioned right can be regulated in a fair and reasonable manner.
The respondent school has been following consistently the policy of granting admission to the children of the employees of the school as day scholar as an exception since 1841990.
The aforementioned policy has never been deviated.
Although the allegations were made that three daughters of one Shri Rajinder Singh Hooda, Athletic Coach, have been admitted but it is factually incorrect.
7.
It is well settled that judicial review of a policy decision is not permissible unless a policy is found to be violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
The aforementioned view has been expressed in the case of Government of Tamil Nadu v. S Arumugham, 1998(1) SCT 227 (SC) 1998(2) SCC 198.
In that case various categories of employees after promotion were encadred in one common seniority list.
However, the Central Administrative Tribunal, Madras Bench, issued direction, which resulted into deviation of specified percentage of allocation by tinkering with the scheme.
It is in these facts and circumstances that the Supreme Court has observed that the Tribunal could not have substituted its own views for the views of the Government or direct framing of a new policy based on the views of the Tribunal as to how the allocation was to be made.
It has been observed that unless there has been a clear violation of any provision of the Constitution, the Tribunal did not act within its jurisdiction by giving direction for formulating a new policy and allocation of a different quota than the one envisaged by the Government policy.
Similar view has been expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of Indian Railways Service of Mechanical Engineers Association v. Indian Railways Traffic Service Association, 1993(3) S.C.T.
283 : 1993(2) SLR 579 (SC) and Dev Parshad v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, 1980(2) SLR 558 (SC).
Therefore, we are of the view that the policy decision dated 1841990, which has been consistently followed by granting admission to two children of the members of the staff as day scholar does not deserve to be tinkered with because it would amount to re-writing a policy and disturbing the ratio of the boarder vis-a-vis day scholar.
It appears to us that as a concession the facility has been carved out for the children of the members of the staff, which is in fact an exception to the rule.
The rationale appears to be that the children are already living in the campus with their parents and they are as good as boarders.
But the policy has been confined only to two children.
It is significant to highlight that there is no challenge to this policy either in the writ petition nor any argument has been advanced against the policy.
Therefore, we are of the view that no mandamus can be issued to the respondents to admit the petitioner only as a day scholar because there is no legal right vested in the petitioner with a corresponding duty imposed on the respondent.
8.
The other argument raised by the petitioner asserting that the respondent school has treated Ritu, a sister of the petitioner, already as a boarder has to be necessarily rejected because Ritu has been studying as a day scholar till date.
The aforementioned factual position could not be successfully disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Moreover, already detailed pleadings are available in this regard showing that the school has declined the proposal of Sports Authority of India as is evident from the decision of the respondents highlighted in Annexures R-1 and R-2.
Therefore, we do not find any substance in the aforementioned argument of the petitioner.
For the reasons aforementioned, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.