Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner Daya Singh Maan has approached this Court through the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
A prayer has been made for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus for directing the respondents to permit the petitioner to opt for the new pay scales with effect from April 1, 1997 instead of January 1, 1996.
A further prayer has been made to quash the order passed by the Principal, Govt. Senior Secondary School, Kheri Naru (Karnal) whereby the prayer made by the petitioner, for change of option has been declined.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as an SS Master on September 29, 1969.
With effect from July 10, 1973, the petitioner was appointed as an SS Master on regular basis after his regular selection by the competent authority.
Through a notification dated January 7, 1998, revised pay scales were granted to the State Government employees with effect from January 1, 1996.
The employees were also granted ACP scales with effect from January 1, 1996.
However, teachers/masters, including the petitioner were not granted the benefit of ACP scales.
They were granted revised functional pay scales with effect from January 1, 1996.
The petitioner at that stage opted for new pay scales with effect from January 1, 1996.
Later on, the petitioner moved an application citing the case of one Roshan Lal Jain, Math Master, Govt. Senior Secondary School, Ballah (Karnal) who was allowed to change his option.
The petitioner also requested that he be permitted to change his option with effect from April 4, 1997 as the revised pay scales with effect from January 1, 1996 had resulted in a financial loss and hardship to the petitioner.
The request of the petitioner was not entertained by the Principal, since it was observed that the same had been made after the expiry of four months of the exercise of option.
Still further through a notification dated July 18, 2001 the State Government granted ACP scales to the teachers/masters also instead of revised functional scales of pay, with effect from January 1, 1996 ie retrospectively.
3.
The petitioner has now approached this Court claiming that he was also entitled to change his option to the revised pay scales.
He has based his claim on two facts.
Firstly, he has relied on the right of change of option granted to Roshan Lal Jain.
Secondly, the petitioner has claimed that after the grant of ACP scales with effect from January 1, 1996 ie retrospectively the petitioner was still entitled to a right of option to the revised pay scales.
4.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
The respondents in the written statement have maintained that Roshan Lal Jain had been granted revised pay scales with effect from April 1, 1997 and the next increment in his case had fell due on April 1, 1998.
However, in the case of the petitioner revised scales had been verified on March 26, 1998.
The respondents have further maintained that the petitioner had full opportunity to claim the revision of his option as in the case of Roshan Lal Jain but the same had not been done within reasonable time.
It has also been maintained by the respondents that the grant of ACP scales did not entitle the petitioner to exercise his option to the revised scales in any manner.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and have also gone through the records of the case.
In our considered opinion, the claim of the petitioner deserves to be accepted.
Firstly, the petitioner as well as the aforesaid Roshan Lal Jain had been getting the same salary.
Roshan Lal Jain was permitted to opt for new pay scales with effect from April 1, 1997 and as such his salary was fixed at Rs. 8,700/-.
However, because of the option exercised by the petitioner, the revised scales became admissible to the petitioner with effect from January 1, 1996 and his salary was accordingly fixed at Rs. 8,500/-.
Once the aforesaid Roshan Lal Jain was permitted to change his option, there is absolutely no justification to deny the same benefit to the petitioner.
Merely because the petitioner had not exercised the aforesaid right for a couple of months would not dis-entitle him to claim the aforesaid benefit.
6.
Even otherwise, we find that in the year 2001, through a notification dated July 18, 2001, ACP scales had been granted to the employees, such as the petitioner with effect from January 1, 1996 ie retrospectively.
On the grant of pay scales retrospectively the petitioner had a right to opt for new pay scales from such a date as was thought appropriate by him.
The earlier option exercised by the petitioner on the happening of the new event i.e. the grant of ACP scales and withdrawal of revised functional scales with effect from the retrospective date would definitely entitle the petitioner to review and change his option.
Reliance in this regard may be placed upon a judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Mangat Ram Nain and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(3) SCT 653 (P&H) : CWP No. 16364 of 1999, decided on September 24, 2001, which further relied upon another Division Bench judgment of this Court in Des Raj and others v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 17996 of 1997, decided on March 12, 1998.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner shall now exercise his revised option within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is received and on receipt of the aforesaid order, the respondents shall accordingly fix his pay.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.