Surya Kant, J - The petitioner herein, while working as District Attorney (Prosecution) and posted at Ludhiana, was inflicted punishment of stoppage of three increments without cumulative effect vide order dated March 25, 1994 (Annexure P-2), which is being impugned in this writ petition.
2.
It appears that a State case titled as State v. Amarjit Singh, arising out of FIR No. 381 of 1989, Police Station Sadar Ludhiana, under Section 326 IPC, was being conducted by the petitioner on behalf of the State.
An application was moved by Surinder Singh, complainant in the aforesaid case on 1871992 (Annexure P-4) alleging that the petitioner was hobnobbing with the accused party.
The said complaint was entrusted for preliminary enquiry to Shri HPS Sidhu, Joint Director (Prosecution), who, vide a report bearing diary No. 9807 dated 2581992, found the petitioner guilty of helping the accused-Amarjit Singh.
It appears that the said preliminary enquiry report also revealed the reasons as to why the petitioner helped the said accused.
Having accepted the said preliminary enquiry report and having drawn the conclusion that the petitioner was guilty of helping the accused in the aforementioned case, a "show cause notice" under Rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short `the Rules of 1970') calling upon him as to why minor penalty as provided under Rule 5(i) to (iv) should not be imposed upon him, was issued.
The petitioner responded to the said show cause notice vide his reply dated 29.12.1993, but the same, having not convinced the competent authority, impugned order dated 25.3.1994 (Annexure P-2) came to be passed.
Aggrieved at the said order the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
3.
Mr. Pawan Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned order has been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice and fair play; the impugned action was nothing but a colourable exercise of power inasmuch as the accused in the aforesaid case was convicted way back on 27.10.1992, i.e., much before the passing of the impugned order yet it has been projected as if the petitioner was helping the accused.
Reference has been made to the averments made in para 2 of the writ petition wherein the petitioner had questioned some punitive administrative orders passed against him in the past, as according to him, he having challenged these orders, annoyed the authorities.
He further points out that while issuing notice of motion, a Division Bench of this Court, vide order dated 1241994, though had suspended the operation of order, Annexure P-2, but the said interim stay was subsequently vacated while admitting the writ petition on 1751994.
4.
On the other hand, Ms. Manisha Beri, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, contends that only a minor punishment has been imposed upon the petitioner, therefore, no regular enquiry was required to be held and that the impugned order has been passed after issuing a show cause notice to the petitioner and, thus, there is a sufficient compliance of the principles of natural justice.
5.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties and after perusing the impugned order dated 25.3.1994 (Annexure P-2), there remains no doubt that the conclusions drawn by the competent authority with regard to delinquency of the petitioner are solely and exclusively based upon the fact finding enquiry which was conducted by the Joint Director (Prosecution).
It is also evident that after forming a definite opinion with regard to the guilt of the petitioner, namely, that he was helping the accused in the criminal case as aforesaid, that a show cause notice under Rule 10 of the Rules of 1970 was served upon him.
The impugned order further reveals that despite having taken notice of the fact that the accused had been convicted by the Court of competent jurisdiction vide judgment dated 17101992 and no aspersion was caused against the prosecuting agency and/or the petitioner by the Court, the competent authority, apparently with a closed mind, refused to consider the explanation given by the petitioner.
6.
It is true that for imposition of a minor punishment, regular enquiry is not envisaged by the 1970 Rules.
However, the Rules mandate issuance of a charge-sheet, consideration of the reply thereto and a discretion to the competent authority to hold an enquiry, if so required, to resolve some disputed questions of fact.
Of course, the competent authority is not precluded from taking a decision only on consideration of reply to the charge-sheet.
In my view, there is a basic distinction between the issuance of a charge-sheet and then to give an opportunity to an employee to tender his explanation on one hand and affording a post-decisional hearing to such an employee on the other hand.
If, on the basis of the material on record, the competent authority has already formed an opinion with regard to commission of a misconduct by the petitioner, show-cause notice under Rule 10 of the Rules was merely a post-decisional hearing which does not satisfy the rules of natural justice as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Shri H.L.
Trehan and others v. Union of India and others, 1989(1) SLR 7.
It is not disputed that the complaint was entertained and enquiry thereupon was conducted behind the back of the petitioner and no copy thereof was supplied to him.
It is also evident that the said enquiry report is based upon statements of various persons, to whom the petitioner could never cross-examine.
7.
For the reasons afore-mentioned, I am of the view that the petitioner has not been given a fair trial and an effective opportunity to defend himself with regard to the allegations made against him.
There appears to be no independent and objective consideration of the stand taken by him by the competent authority, especially in the light of the apparent fact that the prosecution case was not damaged by the petitioner when it successfully resulted into conviction and sentence of the accused.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated 25.3.1994 (Annexure P-2) is quashed.
Since the impugned order has been quashed for non-compliance of the principles of natural justice, it will be open for the respondents to take fresh decision in the matter in accordance with law by treating the show-cause notice, previously served upon the petitioner on 1691993 as a charge-sheet under the Rules of 1970.
If, however, no such decision is taken within a period of two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order, the consequential benefits, arising out of this judgment shall be released to the petitioner within three months thereafter.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.