Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the prayer made is that a direction be issued to the respondents to grant/release family pension to the petitioner with effect from 2891983 on account of the death of her husband, Ramesh Chander, who died on 2791983.
The petitioner has also prayed for a direction to pay the arrears of family pension with interest at the rate of 18% per annum and also to pay compensation to the tune of Rs. one lac with interest at the rate of 18% per annum for suffering and mental torture.
2.
Briefly, the case of the petitioner is that her husband, Ramesh Chander was a regular employee of the State of Haryana and he had been working as a Mate in the Hospitality Organisation since 1979.
Due to some illness, he died on 2791983.
The petitioner made a representation to the Director, Department of Hospitality Organisation, Haryana on 2021984 for giving her appointment under the ex gratia scheme and also for grant of family pension under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 as applicable to the employees of the State of Haryana.
Respondent No. 2 asked the petitioner to furnish necessary documents regarding proof of qualification and age vide letter dated 731984, Annexure P-1.
The petitioner filed affidavit dated 1231984.
Annexure P-2.
Finding no response, the petitioner made another representation dated 2641988 seeking the requisite relief.
Still no action having been taken, the petitioner sent a reminder dated 10.3.1996 reiterating her prayer made in the earlier representations.
The claim of the petitioner regarding compassionate appointment was, however, rejected and an information in this behalf was sent to the petitioner vide letter dated 12.11.1999, Annexure P-5.
The petitioner then submitted another representation dated 4102001 (Annexure P-6) for grant of family pension only.
On receipt of this request, though certain documents were asked for and formalities got completed from the petitioner, but even then no action was taken which constrained the petitioner to serve a legal notice dated 1512004 (Annexure P-11) on the respondents.
Ultimately, the petitioner was granted family pension at the rate of Rs. 1,275/- per month, with effect from 13.5.2002 as conveyed to her vide letter dated 1022004 (Annexure P-12).
Grievance of the petitioner, therefore, is that her husband having died on 2791983, she became eligible for family pension from 2891983 and granting the same with effect from 13.5.2002 was illegal.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that the application dated 2021984 made by the petitioner was with regard to seeking an appointment on compassionate ground and therein the petitioner did not make any claim for grant of family pension.
It was further submitted that family pension has been granted from the date of application made by the petitioner, as per advice of the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, a copy of which was filed along with written statement as Annexure R-2.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner while reiterating the claim as set out in the petition has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in SK Mastan Bee v. The General Manager, South Central Railway, 2003(1) Service Cases Today 367 and vehemently contended that it is the mandatory duty and obligation of the employer to compute and disburse the family pension to the dependents of deceased employee and if the employer illegally denies and rejects the claim for family pension to illiterate and destitute dependants of the deceased, the claim of the petitioner cannot be restricted or curtailed for the fault of the employer.
5. we have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
On a careful reading of the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, we are of the opinion that the case of the petitioner is covered by the said decision.
At this stage, it would be appropriate to note the observations of the Supreme Court in the abovesaid cases, which read thus:  "We notice that the appellant's husband was working as Gangman who died while in service.
It is on record that the appellant is an illiterate who at that time did not know of her legal right and had no access to any information as to her right to family pension and to enforce her such right.
On the death of the husband of the appellant, it was obligatory for her husband's employer, viz. Railways, in this case to have computed the family pension payable to the appellant and offered the same to her without her having to make a claim or without driving her to a litigation.
The very denial of her right to family pension as held by the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench is an erroneous decision on the part of the Railways and in fact amounting to a violation of the guarantee assured to the appellant under Article 21 of the Constitution.
The factum of the appellant's lack of resources to approach the legal forum timely is not disputed by the Railways.
Question then arises on facts and circumstances of this case, the Appellate Bench was justified in restricting the past arrears of pensions to a period much subsequent to the death of the appellant's husband on which date she had legally become entitled to the grant of pension ?
In this case, as noticed by us hereinabove, the learned Single Judge had rejected the contention of delay put forth by the Railways and taking note of the appellant's right to pension and the denial of the same by the Railways illegally considered it appropriate to grant the pension with retrospective effect from the date on which it became due to her.
The Division Bench also while agreeing with the learned Single Judge observed that the delay in approaching the Railways by the appellant for the grant of family pension was not fatal in spite of the same it restricted the payment of family pension from a date on which the appellant issued a legal notice to the Railways i.e. on 141992.
We think on the facts of this case inasmuch as it was an obligation of the Railways to have computed the family pension and offered the same to the widow of its employee as soon as it became due to her and also in view of the fact her husband was only a Gangman in the Railways who might not have left behind sufficient resources for the appellant to agitate her rights and also in view of the fact that the appellant is an illiterate.
The learned Single Judge, in our opinion, was justified in granting the relief to the appellant from the date from which it became due to her, that is the date of the death of her husband.
Consequently, we are of the considered opinion that the Division Bench fell in error in restricting that period to a date subsequent to 141992."
6.
In the present case, it is not disputed that Ramesh Chander, husband of the petitioner had died on 2791983 and that on his death, the petitioner was entitled to family pension.
The question is, as to from which date, the petitioner is entitled to the grant of family pension.
It is the specific case of the petitioner that she made a representation dated 2021984 for seeking appointment on compassionate ground and also for the grant of family pension, which was followed by other representation dated 2641988 and reminder dated 10.3.1996.
She also made various other representations even thereafter as well.
A reading of petitioner's representation dated 2641988, Annexure P-3 clearly goes to show that the petitioner had referred to her application dated 1231984, which had been made for grant of family pension as well as for ex gratia appointment.
Not only this, the respondents have admitted having received the representation dated 1231984 of the petitioner.
The stand which the respondents are taking in the written statement regarding the date from which the petitioner is entitled to family pension, is that the application dated 2021984 made by the petitioner, was with regard to compassionate appointment only and in that application there was no claim made for family pension and the claim of the petitioner for family pension has been released on the receipt of papers from the petitioner and clarification from the Government.
Be that as it may, it was the duty of the respondent-employer to have released the family pension, to which the petitioner was undisputedly entitled, on account of death of her husband even if no specific prayer was made by her in that behalf.
In view of the above and also the observations of the Supreme Court in SK Mastan Bee's case (supra), we are of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to family pension with effect from 2891983, her husband having died on 2791983 and, therefore, the order dated 1022004, Annexure P-12, whereby the respondents have granted family pension with effect from 13.5.2002 and not from 2891983 deserves to be modified.
7.
As regards the question of granting interest, and the compensation for mental suffering in view of facts and circumstances of the case, since the receipt of representation specifically asking for family pension has been seriously disputed by the respondents, the petitioner cannot be held entitled to any interest on the arrears of family pension or any amount of compensation as claimed by her.
8.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated hereinabove.
The respondents are directed to release family pension to the petitioner with effect from 2891983 and after computing the same from the said date in accordance with relevant rules, the arrears shall be paid to her within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.