MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 24.3.1989 (Annexure P-5) passed by respondent No. 2 granting promotion to Prem Pal, respondent No. 3 from the post of Fisherman to that of Pumping Set Driver/Operator.
A further direction has been sought to the official respondents to promote the petitioner from the date respondent No. 3 has been considered and promoted.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Fisherman in the Fisheries Department on 9121975 and respondent No. 3 Prem Pal was appointed as such on 22.8.1977.
According to the rules titled as Haryana Fisheries Department (State Group "C") Rules, 1979 (for brevity, `1979 Rules'), the post of Pumping Set Driver/Operator is required to be filled up by promotion to the extent of 50 percent.
The further requirement of the Rules is that a candidate should have passed middle and must be possessing two years experience as fisherman.
It is claimed that the petitioner being senior by almost two years was entitled to be considered and promoted ahead of respondent No. 3.
It has also been claimed that his service record has always been Good/Very Good and he was never conveyed any adverse entry till then.
The petitioner has also placed reliance on instructions dated 3031973 (Annexure P-2) as clarified further on 561973 (Annexure P-3) to argue that the principle of seniority-cum-fitness was applicable to the case of the petitioner and on the fulfilment of educational qualifications and the requirement of experience the petitioner was entitled to be promoted.
Further reliance has been placed on instructions Annexure P-6 dated 751974 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana, instructions dated 1681983 (Annexure P-7) and the instructions dated 171991 (Annexure P-8) which provides that no notice is required to be taken of uncommunicated adverse remarks and the criterion for promotion that a person must have 50 percent good record till the year 1985 and 70 percent good record after 1985.
It is claimed that the record of the petitioner has been Good/Very Good to the extent of 70 percent in accordance with those instructions.
3.
In the written statement it has been admitted that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3 as per rule of seniority governing the service known as Punjab State (Class IV) Services Rules, 1963.
It has further been admitted that according to 1979 Rules Fisherman can be considered for promotion to the extent of 50 percent of the posts provided he fulfils the qualification of Middle pass with two years experience of the line with mechanical knowledge.
It has further been accepted that the petitioner duly fulfilled the qualification for the post of Pumping Set Driver/Operator.
However, it has been asserted that the post of Pumping Set Driver/Operator has to be filled up by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit as per the directions issued by the Chief Secretary, Haryana stating that the administrative department would enjoy power to promote on the basis of seniority-cum-merit in the absence of a specific provision in the service rules governing promotion to higher posts as mentioned in Appendix `A' attached to the Rules.
The afore- mentioned presumption has been read into rules after obtaining opinion of the Legal Remembrancer, Haryana and therefore it has been urged that the instructions dated 561973 and 1361973 (Annexures P-3 and P-4) on which reliance has been placed by the petitioner would not be applicable.
In para 7, the stand taken is that the A.C.Rs.
of the petitioner for the years 1984-85 and 1986-87 with regard to `integrity' have been recorded to be doubtful.
It was on account of the afore-mentioned reason that his case was considered but he could not be promoted to the higher post on the basis of record.
4.
On account of the fact that there was denial of communication of adverse report with regard to `integrity doubtful', the record had to be summoned.
A perusal of the record shows that reports were not communicated before the date of promotion of respondent No. 3, i.e. on 24.3.1989.
After the filing of the writ petition one report was communicated by Registered AD post on 10.7.1989.
This explains why the written statement was silent with regard to the assertions made by the petitioner that no adverse entry has been conveyed to him.
5.
The question which arises for the determination of this Court is whether any reliance could be placed on an uncommunicated adverse report regarding `doubtful integrity' while considering the case of an employee for promotion to the higher post.
6.
Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that once the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3 and the rule of seniority-cum- fitness as is evident from instructions Annexures P-3 and P-4 dated 561973 and 1361973 then the seniority has to be given an overwhelming significance.
The record of the petitioner has to be considered in the year 1989 as Good or Very Good because no adverse entry was ever conveyed.
The learned counsel has maintained that had there been any adverse entry conveyed then the petitioner could have represented against such an adverse entry.
Another submission made by the learned counsel is that in any case in accordance with the instructions Annexure P-8 dated 171991 the criterion for promotion is 70 percent Good reports.
He has further maintained that according to the earlier instructions dated 951985 the criterion was 50 percent Good reports.
Therefore, upto 951985 the reports of the petitioner are required to be 50 percent Good reports and thereafter till the date of promotion 70 percent Good reports.
According to the learned counsel, on the basis of the afore-mentioned criterion, the petitioner deserves to be promoted despite the fact that there were adverse entry for the two years ie 1984-85 and 1986-87.
The afore- mentioned submission made by the learned counsel is subject to the first submission that uncommunicated adverse entry regarding doubtful integrity cannot be taken into account.
7.
Ms. Mamta Shingal, AAG, learned State Counsel on the other hand has argued that the rule concerning promotion as per the directions issued by the Chief Secretary in consultation with the Legal Remembrancer is seniority-cum-merit and therefore, it cannot be claimed that instructions Annexures P-3 and P-4 would govern the service condition of the petitioner.
The learned counsel has further argued that a person with doubtful integrity cannot be rewarded with promotion because such an approach would have demoralising effect on the service.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief Distt.
Medical Officer, (1992)2 SCC 299 and State of Gujarat v. Surya Kant Chunni Lal Shah, (1999)1 SCC 529 and argued that even uncommunicated adverse remarks can be taken into consideration for deciding the cases of pre-mature retirement.
She has submitted that the same principles were to apply to the cases of promotion.
Therefore, the prayer has been made for the dismissal of the writ petition.
8.
The first question which would require consideration is whether the adverse entries doubting integrity of the petitioner were communicated before considering his case and granting promotion to respondent No. 3 Prem Lal on 24.3.1989.
There are two files produced before me.
One file concerning the instant writ petition and the other file is in respect of character roll of the petitioner.
Page 48 of the first file would show that the Annual Confidential Report (for brevity, `ACR') for the year 1986-87 was sent to the petitioner on 1271989 which obviously is after the passing of order of promotion of respondent No. 3 and in fact after the filing of the writ petition.
A perusal of the other file concerning character roll of the petitioner shows that the petitioner had earned reports of `Integrity doubtful' for the years 1984-85 and 1986-87.
His ACRs for the last 10 years preceding the date of his consideration are reflected in the character roll file commencing from 1979-80 which are as under :-  Sr. No. Year Remarks 1.
1979-80 Very Good  2.
1980-81 Good  3.
1981-82 Average  4.
1982-83 Average  5.
1983-84 Good  6.
1984-85 Good (Intergrity doubtful) 7.
1985-86 Good  8.
1986-87 Average (Intergrity doubtful) 9.
1987-89 Good  10.
1988-89 Very Good  It is, thus, obvious that no remarks with regard to `integrity doubtful' for the years 1984-85 and 1987-87 were communicated to the petitioner.
The position continues to be the same in respect of the remarks for the year 1984-85, although the remarks of the later year were conveyed after the filing of the petition.
9.
It is well settled that uncommunicated adverse remarks cannot constitute a basis for denial of promotion.
The object of communicating adverse remarks is to grant an opportunity to an employee to make a representation to the authority concerned for expunging of remarks by explaining those entries in the ACRs.
The other object is to grant him an opportunity to improve and come up to the expected level of efficiency.
The non-communication of adverse remarks results into depriving an employee of both the benefits.
Therefore, the respondents have committed an illegality by taking into consideration the uncommunicated adverse remarks against the petitioner while considering his case for promotion to the post of Pumping Set Driver/Operator.
The aforementioned legal position is supported by instructions dated 751974 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana (Annexure P-6) which provides that the adverse remarks whenever recorded in the ACR should always be conveyed to the employee promptly.
All concerned are required to ensure that adverse remarks are so conveyed and that no notice should be taken of adverse remarks if the same have not been communicated.
In the present case, adverse remarks for the years 1984-85 and 1986-87 have not been conveyed and respondent No. 2 while considering the case of the petitioner for promotion has taken those remarks into consideration.
Therefore, the action of respondent No. 2 for ignoring the petitioner for promotion on that basis is liable to be set aside.
10.
The other question which requires consideration is whether the rule of seniority-cum-merit as pleaded by the respondents in paragraph 6 of the written statement on the basis of advise received from the Chief Secretary specifically concerning 1979 Rules would be applicable or the general instructions contained in Annexures P-3 and P-4 would apply.
The Chief Secretary in General Services Branch III has advised the administrative departments that in the absence of specific provision in 1979 Rules regulating to the posts mentioned in Appendix `A', the promotion has to be governed by (relating ?)
the principle of `seniority-cum-merit'.
The aforementioned advice of the Chief Secretary reads as under :-  "The Administrative Department is advised that in the absence of specific provision in the Departmental Service Rules that the promotion to the posts as mentioned in Appendix `A' except to the posts of Commercial Fisherman shall be made on Seniority-cum-merit, it shall be presumed that the promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Thus the benefit of reservation shall be admissible on all the posts mentioned in the Haryana Fisheries Department (State Service Group C) except on the post of Commercial Fisherman.
The above advice is based on LR's opinion."
The executive instructions which specifically have been issued in connection with 1979 with Rules are within the legal competence of respondent No. 2 in the absence of any statutory rules governing the question of promotion framed under Article 309 of the Constitution or proviso thereto.
Such a course is available to the respondent-State and it has force of law as has been held by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Lalit Mohan Dev v. Union of India, (1973)3 SCC 862.
Therefore, the principle of seniority-cum-merit would be applicable to the facts of the present case which would mean that giving the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration, the senior though less meritorious would have priority.
For the aforementioned view reliance can be placed on a Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Kerala and another v. NM Thomas and others, AIR 1976 SC 490.
In other words, the senior amongst the Fishermen are to be selected subject to their suitability.
It is only if a candidate is found unsuitable, he would warrant supersession.
Otherwise, the senior would get promotion.
11.
It is admitted position in the instant case that the petitioner is qualified to be considered for promotion and his service record for the last ten years shows that more than 70% ACRs are Good/Very Good.
Therefore, the petitioner would deserve consideration for promotion to the post of Pumping Set Driver/Operator w.e.f.
24.3.1989 when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
However, the respondents are not to take into consideration the uncommunicated adverse remarks of the years 1984-85 and 1986-87.
It is made clear that the later communication would also not make those adverse remarks relevant.
The principle of seniority-cum-merit is requried to be followed while considering the case of the petitioner for promotion.
For the reasons aforementioned, this petition succeeds.
Respondents 1 and 2 are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Pumping Set Driver/Operator w.e.f.
24.3.1989 when his junior respondent No. 3 was promoted.
In case of his promotion, he would rank senior to respondent No. 3.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits with regard to fixation of seniority, arrears of salary and other related issues.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months.
Petition allowed.