Jasbir Singh, J - By filing this writ petition, petitioner has laid challenge to letter/memo dated 18102002 (Annexure P-6), vide which, claim of the petitioner for reimbursement of medical bills amounting to Rs. 73,391/- in respect of chronic disease of his wife, was declined.
It has further been prayed that the respondents be directed not to effect recovery, in respect of amount of Rs. 24,288/-, which was earlier paid towards medical reimbursement of bills, submitted by the petitioner, for the period from September, 2001 to November 2001.
2.
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner is an employee of Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala (in short, the Corporation).
He joined service in the month of July, 1978.
As per policy of the Corporation, employees/dependant members of the family are entitled to get reimbursement of medical expenses for treatment of chronic diseases, as an indoor patient.
On 2851999, wife of the petitioner, who was suffering from kidney problem, was admitted in Dayanand Medical College & Hospital, Ludhiana.
She was operated upon on 761999, her right side kidney was transplanted.
Before her surgical operation, as referred to above, petitioner had brought to the notice of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that expenditure amounting to Rs. 1,32,000/- would have to be incurred on the treatment of his wife and he made request for advance loan towards expenditure to be incurred on the said treatment.
3.
However, matter was taken up after conduct of operation and vide order dated 822000, it was ordered that 75% amount be advanced to the petitioner on account of medical treatment and accordingly an amount of Rs. 77,253/- was released.
After discharge of his wife from the hospital, petitioner had submitted medical bills for reimbursement for the period from September, 2001 to November, 2001.
That amount was sanctioned and duly paid to the petitioner.
Petitioner has stated that since post operational medication is most essential for a patient of kidney transplant, he had incurred huge expenses on medicines, after discharge of his wife from hospital under the advice of the doctors.
4.
On account of expenditure incurred, as referred to above, petitioner submitted bills for reimbursement for the period from 19.12.2001 to 632002, bills were duly sanctioned by the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab and permission was accorded, for release of amount at All India Institute of Medical Sciences rates vide letter dated 872002.
Petitioner then submitted those bills to the authorities of Corporation, for reimbursement, which was declined vide order Annexure P-6 dated 18102002, on the ground that those expenditures were incurred by his wife for `outdoor treatment of chronic disease' and reimbursement in respect of which was not available to employees of the Corporation.
Hence, this writ petition.
5.
After notice, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 appeared and have vehemently opposed claim of the petitioner, by stating that as per policy, applicable to employees of the Corporation, for outdoor treatment, an employee is entitled to get Rs. 250/- per month w.e.f.
111998.
Since the bills pertained to the period during which wife of the petitioner was not admitted in the hospital, as an indoor patient, rather she was getting treatment as an outdoor patient, petitioner was not entitled to reimbursement of the bills submitted by him.
So far as payment regarding expenditure incurred, as an indoor patient, on the treatment of the wife of the petitioner is concerned, there is no dispute regarding the same.
Only dispute herein pertains to the post operative medical bills.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contended that medicines consumed by the wife of the petitioner, after her kidney transplant in a surgical operation, were most essential for her survival and reimbursement of those bills cannot be declined merely on the ground that she was discharged from the hospital and was getting treatment as an outdoor patient.
7.
To support his contention, he has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Ravi Kant v. The State of Haryana and others, 1998(4) SCT 206 (P&H) : 1998(3) RSJ 705, wherein, similar controversy, as to whether, after kidney transplant of an employee/dependent, he is entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses incurred for post operative medical treatment came up for consideration.
After discussing provisions of policy in that regard, it was observed as under :-  "It has been submitted that only a person who receives treatment as an indoor patient, is entitled to be reimbursed, may be that he is in receipt of fixed medical allowance as per the medical reimbursement rules as applicable to him.
It has been submitted that the petitioner is alleged to have taken treatment as an outdoor patient, he cannot claim reimbursement.
It is true that the petitioner will not be entitled to reimbursement for this treatment if we go by the strict definition of "indoor and outdoor patients."
If we go by the strict definition of indoor and outdoor patient, the petitioner will not be an indoor patient.
Fixed medical allowance to the tune of Rs. 100/- is meant to compensate the employee/his family only for the treatment of casual diseases.
Intention behind the provision of providing fixed medical allowance does not seem to be that employee/his family should not be compensated for such diseases which can prove fatal if constancy (consistency ?)
in treatment is not observed.
It would bear repetition that petitioner is constantly taking medicines, he is on medicines, he has to take medicines daily.
If he does not take medicines daily, his remaining alive will be seriously in danger.
When he is constantly under treatment and treatment is indispensable for him, it has to be viewed as if he is receiving that treatment in the hospital.
Petitioner placed his body and mind with his employer.
It is for the employer to keep him in good health so that he is able to perform the duties expected (sic) expenses which he has to incur for keeping him in a fit state of body and mind so that he his able to discharge his duties enjoined upon him by the nature of his employment.
Treatment being taken by him now is extension of the treatment which he was getting on account of kidney failure.
Viewed from this angle also, this treatment has to be tagged on to the treatment he received earlier."
To the same effect is the ratio of this Court in C.B.
Gupta v. State of Haryana and others, 2003(1) SCT 316 (P&H) : 2003(1) PLR 343.
A Single Bench of this Court in Sat Parkash Arora v. State of Haryana, 2000(4) SCT 662 (P&H) : 2001(1) RSJ 185, has opined that medical expenses incurred by a patient, after surgical operation as a follow up, which is necessary for survival, he is entitled to get reimbursement for those expenses.
To the same effect is the ratio of judgment in Renu Sehgal v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) SCT 565 (P&H) : 1998(4) RSJ 557.
8.
When confronted with settled proposition of law, as referred to above, counsel for the respondents has failed to show anything to the contrary.
He only argued that the case of the petitioner is not covered under the policy prevalent with the Corporation.
9.
In this case, respondents have not controverted and denied that after getting kidney transplant, medicines consumed by the wife of the petitioner, were not necessary as a follow up and for her survival.
Under these circumstances, this Court is of the considered opinion that the medical expenses incurred by the petitioner on the post operative treatment of his wife were in continuation of her treatment as an indoor patient and respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have no justification to deny reimbursement of those bills to the petitioner, especially, when bills were verified and sanctioned by the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
10.
Keeping in view facts and circumstances, referred to above, this writ petition is allowed, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to reconsider case of the petitioner in the light of ratio of judgments, discussed in this order and disburse and reimburse medical expenditure bills of the petitioner.
Needful be done within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.