JS Narang, J - The petitioner had been admitted to the two year regular course of MSc.
(Botany) in the department of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as "the University").
She scored 439 marks out of the aggregate of 650 marks i.e. 6754% marks in the first year examination held in April, 2002.
She appeared in the second year ie final year examination in April, 2003 and she is stated to have scored 578 marks out of 850 marks in the aggregate.
The result-cum-detailed marks card dated 6102003, was received by her.
It has been averred that her marks in all the papers of the 2nd year were 139 out of 200 marks and that according to her own assessment, her performance in the examination was much better and, therefore, the expected marks by her had not been awarded.
Consequently, she applied for re-evaluation in the subject "Plant Molecular Biology and Biochemistry (Bot- 611)" and that she deposited the requisite fee accordingly.
2.
The re-evaluation result was declared and in the re-evaluated subject earned an increase by seven marks.
Consequently, her aggregate score in both the years stood increased to 585 out of 850 marks and that her percentage came to be 6882%.
She received the result-cum-detailed marks card dated January 8, 2004, copy Annexure P2.
The cumulative effect thereof came to be that she stood first in the MSc (Hons.)
Botany in the examination held by the University in April, 2003.
Since she had passed all the examinations in the first attempt, she was entitled and eligible to a Medal awardable by the University.
However, another student namely Sharanjit Kaur Randhawa had secured one mark less than the petitioner i.e. 584 marks out of 850, was recommended for being awarded the Medal accordingly.
In view of the result declared, she would have to be placed in the second position and not first.
She had made a number of representations to the concerned quarters claiming that she had topped in the aforestated examination, as such, is entitled to be awarded the "Gold Medal".
3.
The petitioner found out upon enquiry that she has been denied the Medal on account of proviso to the Regulation 8(i) of Chapter XI of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar Volume-III, 1999 (hereinafter referred to as the "University Calendar").
The aforestated regulation which was applicable at the time of examination in April, 2003 is reproduced as here under:-  "8.
The panel of examiners for re-evaluation will be supplied by the Chairperson for the Board of Studies in that subject and approved by the Vice-Chancellor.
i) Each script will be re-evaluated as a whole by two examiners separately.
The average of the two nearest scores out of the three awards including the original shall be taken as final : Provided that if the change in marks after re-evaluation is more than 10% of the maximum marks of that paper, leads to a change of result then the script shall be re-evaluated by the fourth examiner and the average of the three nearest scores out of the four shall be taken as final : Provided further that no medal shall be awarded to any candidate on the basis of re-evaluation result.
However, this condition shall not apply in the case of change of scores due to re-checking of answer books.
(emphasis added)."
4.
It has been averred that the second proviso to the aforestated regulation is illegal, arbitrary, capricious, ultra vires to the Constitution of India and, therefore, is liable to be struck down.
The right of re-evaluation is an integral part of the examination, if an examinee is not satisfied with the academic result, he or she has the option to seek re-evaluation in the particular subject pursuant to the rules and regulations applicable to such examinations.
If such re-evaluation is applied for and the result is beneficial to the examinee, the fruits thereof cannot be denied to the examinee.
It shall be anomalous situation that upon re-evaluation the benefit/right which accrues to the examinee under the Regulations is being negated by virtue of the aforestated proviso i.e. in the present case, the rightful claim to the medal to which the petitioner may become entitled to.
It has also been averred that by virtue of regulation 12 Chapter IX of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar Volume-II, 1999, it has been provided that the score in re-evaluation shall supersede the original one.
The said regulation reads as under :-  "12.
The score in re-evaluation shall supersede the original one."
5.
In view of the above, the original score of the examinee, for all practical purposes would stand wiped out.
Thus, the examinee cannot be denied the right/entitlement/claim to the "medal".
There is another stipulation contained in Chapter XIII(2) of the University Calendar wherein it is contained that all awards shall be made on the result of annual examination only and that no award is to be made on the result of biannual or supplementary examination.
Further, only those candidates shall be entitled to an award, who pass the examination as, a whole at the first attempt.
The said regulation reads as under :-  "1.
All awards shall be made on the result of annual examination only.
No award is to be made on the result of biannual or supplementary examination.
2.
Only those candidates shall be entitled to an award who pass the examination as a whole at the first attempt."
6.
Thus, it is obvious that a person who does not pass the examination as a whole at the first attempt, is not entitled to an award even if by appearing in an biannual or supplementary examination he or she scores higher than the candidate who scored high est in the regular examination.
However, the case of the candidate seeking re-evaluation would stand on different footings.
The re-evaluation would not non-suit such candidate under any of the aforestated regulations.
The aforestated Regulation 12 of the University Calendar, categorically provides that the original re-evaluation shall stand superseded upon re-evaluation, meaning thereby that the previous result in the paper and in the aggregate shall be no longer the result of the candidate.
7.
Thus, the perusal of the stream of the regulations categorically provides that the second proviso to regulation 8, as aforestated, does not fall within the regulated stream of the regulations.
Obviously, the said proviso would run counter to regulation 12 of the University Calendar.
8.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated 242004 returnable for July 12, 2004.
The respondents have filed detailed written statement and have contested the claim of the petitioner.
Reliance has been placed upon clause 8(i) of the University Calendar which has been reproduced hereabove.
It is stated that the amendment was approved by the Syndicate vide para 49(iii) dated 7122002.
Since the marks of the petitioner stood increased only after re-evaluation and, therefore, she does not qualify for the medal.
Reliance has been placed upon a judgment of this Court rendered in re : Anita v. Panjab University, Chandigarh, 1995(3) SCT 392.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the judgment rendered in Anita's case (supra) is not at all applicable to the case of the petitioner as reference made to rule 92 of the Panjab University Calendar Volume-III (1985), has not been considered as no eventuality had arisen.
The appeal was dismissed on the factual status alone because by granting the benefit to the appellant in its entirety, she could not be declared to have acquired the first position.
However, learned counsel has placed reliance upon a judgment of a Division Bench of this Court rendered in re : Ms. Deepa v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, and others, 2003(2) RCR(Civil) 342 (P&H) : 2003(1) PLR 555.
It has been argued that the similar clause in respect of re-evaluation was not permitted to count towards determining the position in order of merit and distinction and award of Gold Medal.
Similarly situated petitioner in that case also acquired first position upon re-evaluation of one of the papers.
The sustainability and legality of the said rule had also been challenged as the same could not stand the test of reasonableness as required under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It may be noticed that no clause, such as contained in Regulation 12, has been referred to or relied upon as in the present case.
Probably none is contained in the University Calendar of Maharishi Dayanand University.
It shall be apposite to reproduce the clause which is similar to the second proviso of Regulation 8(i) of the University Calendar.
The same reads as under :-  "42.
The marks obtained as a result of re-evaluation of the paper(s) of the last examination of the course concerned shall not count towards the position in the order of merit, distinction and award of Gold Medal."
10.
Reliance has also been placed upon various other judgments which need not be examined by us need be referred as the same have been discussed by the Division Bench of this Court in the aforesaid judgment.
11.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length, have also perused the regulations relied upon and reproduced in the pleadings of the parties and have also perused the judgments rendered by the Division Bench of this Court, in Ms. Deepa's case (supra).
12.
We are of the considered opinion that the "proviso" contained under regulation 8(i) is not at all sustainable as the same does not go along with the normal stream of regulations promulgated by the university.
Especially, Regulation 12 of the University Calendar provides specifically that the score in re-evaluation shall supersede the original one meaning thereby that the previous result i.e. prior to re-evaluation shall not be the result of the examinee.
In this view of the matter, the earlier result is of no consequence and that for all practical purposes, provisions, rules and regulations promulgated by the University, the re-evaluated result is the result of the candidate.
If the second proviso is read into this, anomalous situation would be created that two results shall have to be read so far as the candidate is concerned - one upon re-evaluation and the other prior to the re-evaluation.
Thus, for the purpose of academic warrants the result will be upon re- evaluation but for the purpose of awarding of a medal the previous result shall have to be kept in view.
It shall not be possible for the examinee to tell the world that he/she has not been able to get the award because of the second proviso to Regulation 8 contained in the University Calendar but otherwise the said candidate had topped the University.
Such situations are not platable (Palatable ?)
and definitely suffer rigour of arbitrariness and unreasonableness as protected under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
13.
The comparison of the two rules, the one which was contained in the Maharishi Dayanand University Calendar and the one which is provided under the second proviso in the University Calendar under consideration, would show that import of both is same and is identical.
Though, in the case of Maharishi Dayanand University Regulation like Regulation No. 12 has not been referred to which is added circumstance for us to hold that the second proviso to regulation 8(i) is not sustainable under law and the same suffers from the rigour of the protection guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
We are in respectful agreement with the view expressed by their Lordships in Ms. Deepa's case (supra).
14.
We allow the petition and strike down the second proviso to Regulation 8(i) of Chapter XI of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar Volume-III, 1999, i.e.  "Provided further that no medal shall be awarded to any candidate on the basis of re-evaluation.
However, this condition shall not apply in the case of change of scores due to re-checking of answer books.
(emphasis added)."
declaring it to be ultra vires to Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
15.
Consequently, we direct the respondent-University to declare the petitioner having acquired the Ist position in MSc (Botany) in the examination held in April, 2003 and also to award the Gold Medal to the petitioner.
16.
Before parting with this judgment, we may observe that the petitioner had filed an application for impleadment of Ms. Sharanjit Kaur Randhawa as a respondent in the petition.
She has been already awarded a Gold Medal for having earned the Ist position in the aforestated examination.
Since, the second proviso to the aforestated Regulation has been struck down by us by virtue of this judgment, it shall not be fair on our part to direct the University to ask Miss Sharanjit Kaur Randhawa to return the medal, however, she shall rank at No. 2 and the rest of the ranking shall follow accordingly in the result so declared.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances, we hold that the medal awarded to Sharanjit Kaur be also allowed to be retained by her.
Resultantly, we find that it shall be an exercise in futility in dealing with the application filed under Order 1 rule 10 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Thus, the same is declined.
Petition allowed.