Rajive Bhalla, J (Oral) - In August, 1998, the petitioner was admitted to the MBBS course in the Government Medical College, Nagpur, under the 15 per cent quota.
Thereafter, pursuant to a 4th counselling, the petitioner was admitted to the Dayanad Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, respondent No. 2 (hereinafter referred to as `D.M.C.
Ludhiana').
As the Panjab University, Chandigarh, respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as `the University') declined permission to the petitioner to sit in the 1st Professional, MBBS Examination on the ground that she had not undergone the requisite training in D.M.C.
Ludhiana, the petitioner preferred the present writ petition.
2.
Vide interim order dated May 10, 1999, a Division Bench of this Court passed the following order :-  "Issue notice to the respondents to show cause why the writ petition be not admitted, returnable on 1271999.
Meanwhile, in view of the averments made in paragraphs 2 to 5, 7 and 10 of the writ petition, the respondents are directed to permit the petitioner to sit in the Annual Examination of the Ist Professional of MBBS Course commencing w.e.f.
11.5.1999, provisionally subject to further orders of the Court."
3.
Pursuant to the afore-mentioned order, the petitioner sat in the 1st Professional Examination.
However, as the University refused to declare the result, the petitioner filed Civil Miscellaneous No. 18781 of 2000 praying therein for the issuance of a direction to the University to declare her result.
Vide order dated September 14, 2000, the petitioner's result, for the First Professional Examination, was declared.
Thereafter, affiliation of the College was transferred to Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, respondent No. 3.
The University-respondent No. 3 as also the College permitted the petitioner to sit in the examinations for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Professional Examinations.
Result of the petitioner was also declared for the afore-mentioned examinations.
The petitioner has thereafter even completed her internship, on December 31, 2003.
4.
As the petitioner has completed the entire course, counsel for the parties agree that it would be highly inequitable at this belated stage to examine the admission granted to her, on merits.
The only dispute that survives for consideration is - whether in view of the afore-mentioned facts, the University was justified in declining to issue Marks Sheet for the 1st Professional Examination, on which account, the petitioner's MBBS Degree has been withheld.
5.
On the last date of hearing, Mr. BL Gupta, learned counsel for the University, had sought time to seek instructions as to whether the University was ready to issue the petitioner's Marks Sheet regarding the 1st Professional Examination.
Mr. BL Gupta, on instructions from the University, fairly states that in view of the fact that Baba Farid University of Health Sciences has permitted the petitioner to take all the subsequent examinations and has declared the results, the University (respondent No. 1) would have no objection to the issuance of the Marks Sheet for the 1st Professional.
However, he prays that the consent of the University be not treated a precedent.
6.
In view of the above statement made by Mr. BL Gupta, the University is directed to hand over the Marks Sheet to the petitioner within a period of one week from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
7.
Counsel for the parties are ad idem that the writ petition has become infructuous and be disposed of as such.
Ordered accordingly.
A copy of this order be given to the counsel for the parties under the signatures of the Court Secretary.
Petition disposed of.