GS Singhvi, J - This petition is illustrative of how negligence on the part of authorities/bodies entrusted with the task of making admissions and taking examination lead to the filing of avoidable litigation in the Courts.
2.
The petitioner appeared in 10+2 examination conducted by Punjab School Education Board (for short, `the Board') in March, 2000.
In the Gazette published by the Board, his roll number was included in the list of candidates who had passed the examination, though he had actually got reappear in the paper of English.
He took reappear examination in June, 2001 and was declared pass.
In the meanwhile, he applied for admission in Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) Course.
He was admitted in the College of Management and Technology (for short, `the College').
On receipt of the mark-sheet of 10+2 examination, he brought it to the notice of the authorities of the College that he had not passed 10+2 examination.
The Principal of the College forwarded the mark-sheet to the University alongwith other documents, but no objection was raised by the concerned authority of the University to his eligibility.
Rather, he was allowed to take BCA Part-I examination in April, 2001.
He got reappear in papers I, V and VI of that examination.
He took reappear examination held in September, 2001 but could not clear the same.
Notwithstanding this, he was allowed to prosecute studies in BCA Part-II.
In April, 2002, he applied for permission to appear in the reappear papers of BCA Part-I and the main examination of BCA Part-II.
At that stage, the petitioner was informed that he is not eligible to take the examination because he had not passed 10+2 examination at the time of admission in the BCA Course.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the decision of the University on the ground of arbitrariness and legal mala fides.
He has also invoked the doctrine of equitable estoppel by asserting that after having admitted him to BCA Part-I and permitted him to take the examination of BCA Part-I (main as well as reappear) and prosecute studies in BCA Part-II, the University and its functionaries are estopped from questioning his eligibility to be permitted to the BCA Course.
4.
The stand taken by the University is that as per the Ordinances framed by the University, the petitioner was not eligible to take BCA Part-I examination without passing 10+2 examination and, therefore, he cannot take the benefit of mistake committed by the authorities in allowing him to appear in BCA Part-I examination held in April, 2001 or reappear examination held in September, 2001.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the University, it has also been averred that the petitioner manipulated his admission in connivance with respondent No. 3 and he cannot seek a direction from the Court for regularisation of his admission.
5.
In a separate written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, it has been averred that detailed marks card of the petitioner was forwarded to the University in December, 2000 but no objection was raised in relation to his eligibility to take the examination.
It has been further averred that on receipt of letter dated 19.11.2001 (Annexure R.3/2) from Deputy Registrar (Registration and Migration), Punjabi University, Patiala, a detailed reply (Annexure R.3/3 dated 6.12.2001) was sent to the University and thereafter, no action was taken in the matter.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Shri Harsh Aggarwal argued that even though the petitioner had not made any misrepresentation for the purpose of securing admission in BCA course, he cannot seek a direction from the Court for being allowed to take examination of reappear papers or BCA Part-I and main examination of BCA Part-II because without passing 10+2 examination, he could not have been admitted to the Course.
On the other hand, Shri Tribhuvan Singla argued that after having admitted him to the Course and allowed him to take the examination, the respondents are estopped from questioning his eligibility.
7.
Before adverting to the respective arguments, we consider it proper to mention that in pursuance of interim orders dated 1142002 and 25.10.2002 passed by this Court, the petitioner was provisionally allowed to take examination and his result has also been declared provisionally.
8.
In our opinion, the provisional permission granted to the petitioner to take BCA Part-I (reappear) and BCA Part-II (main examination) deserves to be regularised.
In his writ petition, the petitioner has categorically averred that he had not concealed any fact or document from the respondents.
According to him, he had sought admission on the basis of result published in the Gazette issued by the Board and as soon as the mark-sheet was received from the Board, he had submitted the same to the College authorities.
This shows that the petitioner had not made any misrepresentation to respondents No. 1 to 3 to secure admission in the BCA Course.
Indeed, it is not even the case of respondents No. 1 and 2 that the petitioner had secured admission by making misrepresentation or playing fraud.
In paragraph 3 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No 1 and 2, a mild suggestion has been made that he managed to secure admission in connivance with respondent No. 3, but this has been controverted in the written statement of respondent No. 3.
Thus, the petitioner cannot be blamed for the irregularity, if any, committed in his admission to the BCA Course.
The blame for wrongly admitting the petitioner and allowing him to appear in BCA Part I examination squarely lies with the University.
9.
We are further of the view that after having allowed the petitioner to prosecute the studies in BCA Part-I and also to take examination in April, 2001 and September, 2001, respondents No. 1 and 2 are estopped from questioning his eligibility to be admitted to BCA Part-I Course or deny him the benefit of his studies in BCA Part-I and Part-II.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed and it is directed the provisional declaration of the result of the petitioner's examination of BCA Part-I (reappear) and BCA Part-II (annual) shall be treated as final and he shall be entitled to get all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.