Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondent commanding them to count the work-charge period of service rendered by them in the State of Haryana as part of their regular service for grant of additional increments at the stage of 8/18 and 10/20 years of service.
2.
It will be appropriate to refer to the facts giving rise to this writ petition.
Petitioner No. 1 joined as jeep driver on work-charge basis with the Executive Engineer, Sonepat on 1741978 while petitioner No. 2 joined as pump-operator on work-charge basis in the same department on 141977.
The services of the petitioners were regularised by the Government with effect from 111987.
Government of State of Haryana issued instructions for grant of additional increments after 8/18 years of service and higher standard scale after completion of 10/20 years of service.
The petitioners requested the respondents to grant them benefit under the scheme.
However, the respondent- State declined to grant this benefit to the petitioners on the ground that they had not completed the requisite period of service.
According to the petitioners the State Government illegally and arbitrarily excluded the period of service rendered by them in the same departments on work-charge basis while computing the total period of service of 8/18 years.
3.
The petitioners served a notice dated 1222002 through their counsel upon the respondents, despite which no relief was granted to them and immediately therafter, on 1232002, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
It is also contended in the writ petition by the petitioners that their claim is squarely covered by a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as the various judgments of this Court which were also mentioned in the legal notice, despite which the relief has not been granted of them.
4.
When the matter came up for motion hearing before us, we had issued notice, which was accepted the Deputy Advocate General, Haryana.
On our asking the learned Advocate General, Haryana also addressed us on the merits of the case as well as on vital aspect as to how unnecessary litigation of the present kind could be avoided, which is increasing day-by-day.
This increase in litigation is attributable to inaction or patently arbitrary orders of the State, in denying identical relief to some of its employees, which the State has already granted to other similarly situated other employees in furtherance to the judgments of the Court which have attained finality.
The present case is a glaring example of this kind.
5.
Despite rejection of various contentions raised by this Court as well as the Hon'ble Apex Court, the State has been denying similar relief to identically situated employees.
The Court has to take notice of the fact that in this court alone, there are two or three matters listed before the Court for admission where petitioners are claiming the very same relief.
This is in addition of the after notice or regular matters which are listed in the Court.
In other words, hundreds of cases are filed every month in the High Court by the employees claiming the relief which the Government ought to have granted to the employees without intervention of the Court in view of the settled position of law.
6.
At the very outset we may notice that there are various judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as different Division Benches of this Court wherein the relief prayed for by the petitioners had been granted.
In a very recent judgment a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Varinder Kumar and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 799 (P&H) CWP No. 16317 of 2001, decided on 14.2.2002 again considered the various contentions raised on behalf of the State and allowed the writ petition.
In this petition it was also contended on behalf of the State and that the judgment of the Hon'ble High Court in the case of Varinder Kumar (supra) was per incuriam.
This contention was dealt with at great length and rejected by the Court.
The Court held as under :-  "The learned Counsel for the State has not been able to demonstrate as to how after orders of the Apex Court and Larger Benches of this Court, the judgment in Ravinder Kumar's case can be said to be per incuriam.
In our humble view, the judgment does not offend any law nor is contrary to the statute.
The instructions issued by the Government are no way contrary.
In fact the Government itself accepted the interpretation given to the word regular service in the Full bench judgment of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand (supra) as they amended the rules accepting the said verdict.
In these circumstances the principle of precedence must prevail.
At this stage we can usefully refer to the following observations of a Full Bench of this Court in another case titled as Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2002(1) SCT 931 (P&H) CWP No. 14050 of 1990, decided on 13122001, in regard to binding precedents :- "The principle in regard to following of precedents has been subject-matter of various pronouncements even before the Hon'ble Apex Court.
Wherever the view of the Hon'ble Apex Court are at variance the view of the larger Bench would be binding upon the High Court as afore-noticed.
But when there were equi- Benches of the Apex court, taking divergent views, the High Court has to follow the view which is more appropriate/applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case and not avoid judgments on the merits of the case.
In the case of M/s. Indian Petrochemicals Corpn.
Ltd. and another v. Shramik Sena, JT 2001(7) SC 567 : 2001(1) SCT 827 (SC), the Hon'ble Court took the view that requiring the parties, by the High Court, to seek clarification from the Supreme Court, is not the appropriate course of action and even if there are diametrically opposite interpretation of the judgment of the Apex Court, still the High Court is expected to decide the matter on merits.
Emphasising the need for receipt to the law of precedence, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of SI Rooplal and another v. Lt.
Governor through Chief Secretary, Delhi and others, AIR 2000 Supreme Court 594 : 2000(1) SCT 630 (SC), held as under :-  "Precedents which enunciate rules of law form the foundation of administration of justice under our system.
This is a fundamental principle which every Presiding Officer of a Judicial Forum ought to know, for consistency in interpretation of law alone can Head to pubic confidence in our judicial system.
This court has laid down time and again precedent law must be followed by all concerned; deviation from the same should be only on a procedure known to law.
A subordinate court is bound by the enunciation of law made by the superior Courts.
A coordinate Bench of a Court cannot pronounce judgment contrary on declaration of law made by another Bench.
It can only refer it to a larger Bench if it disagrees with the earlier pronouncement.
"We are indeed sorry to note the attitude of the tribunal in this case which, after noticing the earlier judgment of a coordinate Bench and after noticing the judgment of this Court, has still thought, it fit to proceed to take a view totally contrary to the view taken in the earlier judgment thereby creating a judicial uncertainly in regard to the declaration of law involved in this case.
Because of this approach of the latter Bench of the tribunal in this case, a lot of valuable time of the Court is wasted and the parties to this case have been put to considerable hardship."
The decisions of the Court which are not part of the ratio decidendi are classed as obiter dicta and are not authoritative.
Precedents sub- silentio and without argument are of no meant.
When the matter is argued at length and is decided normally, it should not be permitted to be re-opened (Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, Judgments Today, 1988(4) SC 11.
But doctrine of ratio decidendi would apply with complete force when the judgment provides reasoning and conclusions on a controversy arising of somewhat similar circumstances which arise in subsequent cases.
The decisions pronounced on litigated facts and necessary questions decided would operate as precedent in similar circumstances so as not to unsettle the settled law.
A deliberate and solemn decision of court made after argument on question of law fairly arising in the case, and necessary to its determination, is an authority, or binding precedent in the same Court."
The controversies being the same in the present cases, as raised in the afore-noted cases, the principles settled, thus, must squarely apply to the facts of the present cases.
The judgment in Ravinder Kumar's case (supra), therefore, cannot be tendered inapplicable on the plea of exception of per incuriam or subsilentio, to the rule of precedent, in the facts of the cases in hand.
The points raised by the State were considered in the earlier judgments and even if not specifically mentioned in the judgment would be deemed to have been considered and rejected by the Courts.
More particularly the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition of the State in Babu Ram's case and rejection of view petition in Ravinder Kumar's case leaves no scope for this Court to accept any of the pleas raised by the State in these petitions.
In view of the above detailed discussion, we allow these writ petitions and direct the State not to exclude the period of work-charged service rendered by the petitioners under the State of Haryana towards counting the total service of the petitioners for the purposes of granting the reliefs under the schemes afore-referred."
7.
In the case of Varinder Kumar and others's (supra), the Court had relied upon the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, Recent Services Judgments, 1950-88 Vol. 1 Page 433 and the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Ravinder Kumar and others, C.A.
No. 5740-5741 of 1997.
The petitioners were entitled to the relief claimed in their demand notice on the strength of these judgments which had squarely decided all the matters in issue.
Furthermore, the judgment had attained finality and in numerous cases, following these judgments, the High Court had granted relief to the petitioners in those petitions.
In the light of the above, we have no doubt in our mind and the learned Advocate General has fairly conceded that petitioners are entitled to the relief claimed.
8.
We consider it not only appropriate but necessary for us to discuss with some elucidation the pertinent aspect of issuing directions for preventing generation of frivolous or unnecessary litigation by the State.
Such litigation can certainly be avoided by timely and suitable action being taken by the State and appropriate orders passed, remedying the grievances of its employees.
Where the matters have settled; rival contentions of the parties duly adjudicated by the courts and judgments have attained finality, there an order of the State denying identical relief to similarly situated employees would certainly be judicially chastised.
Apathetic attitude of persons in office in finding ways and means to circumvent the judgments of the Court, must entail certain serious consequences.
This practice must be deprecated.
The expenditure incurred by the State in defending such frivolous litigation is an avoidable burden on the State exchequer.
Expenditure so incurred would also inferring (infringe ?)
public interest and amounts to waste of public money.
We see no reason as to why the State should not recover such expenditure from the salary of the erring officer(s) after following due procedure.
9.
It is an accepted fact that the State is largest employer in our country.
Discontentment and dis-satisfaction in employees requesting from intentional omissions and inactions of the State is bound to generate multifold litigation between the two.
In discharge of its normal duties and proper functioning, the State is expected to act fairly in such matters.
To prevent litigation, particularly unnecessary litigation, is bounden duty of the State.
Various facets of this duty caste an obligation upon the State an its various departments and unlike a private employer it must grant relief to its employees, which they are entitled to get in law or under rules.
Default on the part of the State results in waste of public money, public time and unnecessarily burdens the functioning of the court.
State cannot be allowed to take immutable stands and its instructions or directions always should tilt in favour of reason and fairness.
State must respect and enforce the law laid down by the Courts, particularly the highest court of the land.
10.
Articles 141 and 142 of the Constitution of India make the judgment of the Apex Court binding on all courts.
All authorities including the State must implement the orders effectively in comety to the law of the land.
The constitutional mandate imposes an obligation on the State to ensure enforceability throughout the boundary of India of the orders passed by the Apex Court.
Attempts to by-pass and circumvent the orders of the Court could never achieve any object of the State.
On the contrary, it would certainly introduce an element of discontement and frustration in its employees.
In a large society like ours, the steps taken on behalf of the State to eliminate unnecessary litigation is essence of proper administration.
The maxim boni judics est causas litium dirimere even requires the Court to remove causes of litigation.
Such maxim is indented to further the principle of precedents and is essential to maintain consistency in judicial pronouncements.
The command in judgments which attain finality must not only appears to be respected, but should be enforced and implemented with respect as `lex nil frustra jubet'.
11.
State has pervasive obligations to discharge in relation to maintaining its expected standards of employer-employee relationship.
As already noticed, one of the important facets of such obligations is to be reasonable and fair in granting service benefit to its employees in accordance with service rules and the principles enunciated on pronouncement of judgments by the Courts.
When judgments attain finality to which the State is a party, duty is casted upon the State to grant relief to its employees who are similarly situated and on identical facts.
Benefit of such approach are many and it causes no disadvantage to the interests of the State.
It is not necessary for the State to require each one of its employees to approach the Courts of law for grant of a relief which the State ought to grant to the employees in normal course of its administration, particularly, the cases of the kind afore-referred.
Such principles is well known and accepted for years now.
By referring to few judgments we would only predicate the principle with greater emphasis of its application in the day-to-day affairs of the State.
In the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Santosh Kumari v. Union of India and others, JT 1994(7) SC 565 : 1995(1) SCT 527 (SC) the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "The allotment of seats should go according to merit.
It does not depend upon who comes to Court and who does not.
The matter is one of principle and should not depend upon who comes to the court.
A more deserving candidate may not have the means of approach the Court."
12.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Satyapal Singh and others v. The State of Haryana and another, 1999(2) RSJ 377 also observed as under:-  "The respondents as a welfare State should rather see to it that the litigation in the Courts is minimised.
After this Court or the Apex court lays down the law, it should see to it that similarly situated persons automatically get the same relief without resorting to litigation."
13.
In one of its very recent judgments in the case of Union of India and another etc. etc. v. Lalita S Rao and others, etc. etc., AIR 2001 Supreme Court 1792 : 2001(2) SCT 1010 (SC), while dealing with the cases of determination of seniority in the Indian Railways Medical Department, emphasised the need of adherence to this principle of relief being granted even to the parties who had not approached the court as the judgment pronounced squarely covers their interests as well.
The Court held as under :-  "In view of the apprehended confusion in the mind of the Railway Administration on account of the judgments of this Court, referred to earlier, and for doing complete justice in the matter of determination of seniority amongst the medical officers recruited by the Railway Administration through the UPSC, we have approached the problem on consideration of the different Rules in force as well as the orders issed by this Court in several earlier cases and this should apply irrespective of the fact whether some are parties to this proceeding or not."
14.
Yet in another case titled as ESP Rajaram and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 2001 SC 581 : 2001(1) SCT 759 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that per se discrimination even by judicial pronouncements should be avoided.
Undesirable situation emerging in the same cadre particularly where large number of employees are working in big establishments like Indian Railways of Government should also be avoided.
The benefits in furtherance to the judgments of the Court must the equally and effectively granted to employees of the same cadre.
The Apex Court in order to achieve the object of this principle even set aside the judgments of the Central Administrative Tribunal which had attained finality on earlier occasions.
15.
The cumulative effect of the above settled principles is that the State must avoid discrimination in grant of service benefits to the members of the same cadre identically situated.
If the employees had not approached the Court, but the judgments otherwise pronounced relating to the same matter have attained finality, the State must show its grace and in fact carry out its implicit duty to grant benefit to the other members of the cadre.
16.
Mechanical functioning must be substituted by reasonable and purposeful approach.
Where the State Government has lost its battle repeatedly after filing special leave petitions as well as review petitions before the Hon'ble Apex court, it would be desirable for the State to retrace its steps than to proceed improperly in passing unjustified and unsustainable orders.
In the present case, the relief claimed by the petitioners was squarely covered on facts and law by above judgments and the State was expected to grant the same relief to the petitioners at its own level, in all fairness.
Such an approach would not only further the object of healthy employer-employee relationship but would also take away unnecessary burden of the Court arising from such frivolous litigation.
To say the least, it is inappropriate for the State to compel the petitioners to approach the Court for redressal of their grievances.
It will be legitimate expectancy on the part of the employee that he would be given the same relief which his co-employee similarly situated has been granted.
Must the State act unfairly by denying such a claim, compulsion of the employee becomes the cause for approaching the Court.
Denial of justice despite service of justice demand notice is a violation of basic rule of law on the part of the department.
17.
We are of the considered view that the State ought to have granted or at least attended, responded to the notice served by the petitioners in which judgments of the Court in their favour on all force were specifically mentioned.
The learned Advocate General, Haryana fairly conceded that the times have come when the State must take preventive measures to avoid unnecessary litigation.
Wherever the Courts have settled the law and the State has taken all available remedies in law of appealing against the judgments upto highest court of the land, in that event the State must accept the judgment and implement it is its true spirit and command.
18.
Further, we are of the considered view that the State must react and respond to a legal notice/representation served by a person, particularly its employee, within a reasonable time.
There are two obvious advantages of such action.
Firstly the employee would know how and for what reasons he is being denied the benefit/relief, and secondly, the reasoned version of the State would be on judicial record before the Courts for its judicial scrutiny at the very initial hearing.
We must notice with appreciation that the learned Advocate General, Haryana, not only supported the issuance of such directions but also brought to the notice of the Court that the Advocate General's office had already taken up the matter with the Government and the Government is expected to deal with the same effectively and expeditiously.
19.
Be that as it may, particularly in the afore-referred premises, we still feel that it is the bounden duty of the Court to issue the following directions to the State in the larger public interest and for proper administration of justice :-  (i) Wherever the rights of the parties have been settled by a judgment of the Court, the State has taken all remedies available to it in law against that judgment even upto the highest court of the land and the judgments has attained finality, then the State must accept the judgment and implement it in its true spirit and command.
There is implicit obligation on the part or the State to grant same relief to other members of the cadre whose claim was based upon identical facts and points of law.
(ii) The State Government shall as expeditiously as possible in any case not later than four months re-act and respond to a legal notice/representation served upon it by any of its employees in redressal of his grievance/grant of relief, which has been granted to his co-employees similarly situated, in furtherance to the judgment of the Court.
Unless, for reasons to be indicated in the reply, the State feels compelled to deny such relief.
Needless to point out that denial must neither be evasive nor intended to circumvent the orders of the Court.
(iii) In the event such an employee is compelled to approach the court of law, whereupon the court awards interest and/or costs while allowing such a petition, then the expenditure incurred by the State including the costs/interest paid in furtherance to the orders of the Court should be recovered from the erring officer(s).
(iv) The concerned quarters of the Government are expected to work out the details in furtherance to the above directions and issue pervasive but definite instructions to all its departments forthwith to ensure compliance.
20.
For the reasons afore-stated, we direct the respondents to grant the relief to the petitioners in accordance with the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court and of this Court in case of Virender Kumar and others (supra).
The petition is allowed with the above directions to the State.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
21.
A copy of this judgment be sent to the Chief Secretaries of the States of Haryana and Punjab and the Adviser to the Administrator of Union Territory, Chandigarh immediately.
The compliance report thereof to be submitted to the Registrar of this Court, who shall place the same before this Bench on the administrative side, within two months.
Petition allowed.