Swatanter Kumar, J - Haryana Public Service Commission vide its advertisement No. 3 dated 3092002 invited applications for appointing five District Public Relation Officers Group-B in the Public Relation Department of State of Haryana amongst other posts.
Out of these two posts were reserved for Scheduled Caste category, one each for Block `A' and Block `B' respectively.
The essential qualifications were stated in the advertisement and they read as under:-  "Essential qualifications :-  (i) Master's degree in Mass Communication or Journalism from a recognized university and two years media experience in a National Daily Newspaper or Television Channel or Publicity Organisation of Government or Public Undertaking or University.
OR  MA (Hindi or English) from a recognized university and one year Post Graduation Diploma in Mass Communication or Journalism and two years media experience in a National Daily Newspaper or Television Channel or Publicity Organisation of Government or Public Undertaking or University.
Note :- The required experience should be after attaining the requisite qualification.
(ii) Hindi upto Matric Standard  Desirable : (i) Experience of media writing; (ii) Proficiency in use of computer (Word Processing); (iii) Proficiency in English Writing; (iv) Specialisation in Public Relations at Master's Degree level."
2.
The petitioner, who possessed academic qualification of MA Hindi and Bachelor of Journalism and Mass Communication from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, also submitted his application for the post of District Public Relations Officer before the closing date.
Vide order dated 24102002 the Commission rejected the candidature of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner does not possess the requisite experience in terms of the advertisement.
Thus, he was not called for interview.
After receiving this letter, the petitioner made a representation to the respondents dated 31102002, which was rejected vide letter dated 11112002, copy of which has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/4.
The relevant clause on the basis of which the candidature of the petitioner was rejected reads as under :-  "(c) You do not possess two years Media Experience in a National Daily Newspaper or Television Channel or Publicity Organization of Government or Public undertaking or University after passing Master's degree in Mass Communication/Journalism or MA in Hindi or English."
3.
In this petition, the petitioner challenges the said rejection of his candidature by the respondents and prays for issuance of a direction to the respondents to consider him eligible and process his case in accordance with law.
4.
Upon notice, the respondents filed reply where the facts are hardly in controversy.
The stand of the respondents is consistent with the letter of rejection.
The contention raised on behalf of the respondents is that the petitioner does not possess the requisite experience in terms of the advertisement.
The petitioner does not have two years media experience after obtaining the requisite qualifications.
It is also argued that the petitioner cannot clam equivalence of qualifications in the present case as advertisement does not permit the same.
5.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner placed on record the Result-cum-Detailed Marks Card issued by the Controller of Examinations, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, on 1392000 showing that the petitioner had passed his Bachelor of Journalism and Mass Communication Examination in May, 2000, while the last date for submission of application was 3092002.
The petitioner had passed his MA (Hindi) examination in April, 1997, as such, on 3092002 he had acquired two years experience after obtaining the essential qualifications.
In the reply, the respondents have referred to the educational qualifications of the petitioner in order to demonstrate lack of experience after attaining of essential qualifications.
The same read as under :-  Sr. No. Qualification Date of acquisition i) MA (Hindi) 17.7.97 ii) Bachelor in Journalism and Mass Communication 1392000 iii) Master in Mass Communication 2972002 iv) Experience :- Worked as Sub Editor on adhoc basis in Editorial Department of the newspaper (Hindi) `Hari Bhoomi' Rohtak.
From 1592000 to 25.9.2002 6.
From the above narrated facts, which are undisputed, the petitioner had done his Bachelor of Journalism and Mass Communication on 1392000 while Master in Mass Communication was completed on 2972002, as such, he did not possess the requisite experience after attaining of essential qualifications.
This controversy need not detain us any further as this point already stands settled by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Rajiv Kumar v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 17058 of 2003, decided on 6112003, wherein it was held as under :-  "It is settled principle of law that Commission is bound by the terms published advertisement and are under obligation to complete process of selection in terms thereof.
The note below the advertisement make it very much clear that experience acquired after the attainment of minimum qualification will be considered (by the) Commission.
In this regard reference can be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of S Jangluji Bagde v. Bhaiyya son of Govindrao Kar others etc., 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 468 the Apex Court while dealing with the similar clearly held as under :- "However, in direct recruitment the 10 years experience after acquiring the post-graduate qualification was retained.
On the interpretation of the rule prior to its amendment which was relevant for considering Civil Appeal No. 2146 of 1984 we are of the view that the view taken by the Aurangabad Bench does not call for any interference.
Normally when we talk of an experience after acquiring the minimum qualifications required and, therefore, necessarily will have to be posterior to the acquisition of the qualification."
In somewhat similar facts and circumstances Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ashok Kumar v. Haryana Staff Selection Commission, 2002(3) S.C.T.
572, H.C.W.P.
No. 16924 of 2001 after noticing the rules/conditions of eligibility similar to the ones incorporated in the advertisement in question, held as under :-  "A bare reading of the above clearly shows that a person should acquire the requisite experience after he has obtained the minimum qualification provided.
In other words the experience must precede passing of the requisite diploma.
If the candidate had acquired the experience without obtaining the minimum qualification first, that will not be counted.
Furthermore, the eligibility was to be considered with reference to the last date fixed for receipt of applications.
It cannot be disputed that the petitioner was not possessed of the requisite experience of two years after passing the diploma as on the last date of submission of application.
The petitioner in fact became eligible only in June, 2001 when he acquired the requisite qualification and from that date he absolutely could not satisfy the condition of requisite period of experience from a reputed industrial concern or the institute."
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the qualifications/degree in Bachelor of Journalism and Mass Communication from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, is being treated equivalent to the Post Graduate Diploma of the Kurukshetra University.
In this regard, he relied upon a letter issued by the Assistant Registrar of Maharshi Dayanand University dated 482003.
This letter is of no help to the petitioner.
It is for the employer to prescribe essential qualifications for appointment to a particular post.
The Government in its wisdom provided the essential qualifications specifically excluding the expression "or any other course equivalent to the prescribed qualifications."
Absence of this clause clearly indicates that the State and the Commission did not desire to appoint people possessing equivalent qualifications.
A clause of equivalence as treated for academic purposes may not essentially be true or universally applicable for employment purposes as well.
In the field of employment a specific stipulation should be provided in the rules/instructions and/or the advertisement which should empower the employing authority to treat qualifications equivalent to the specified qualifications.
Nothing has been brought to our notice which vests the respondents with such power in relation to the present advertisement.
On the other hand, by very absence of such clause, exclusion of such power is clear.
We are of the considered view that the petitioner cannot compel the respondents to treat his degree of Bachelor in Journalism and Mass Communication from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak as a Post Graduate Diploma for the purposes of satisfying the prescribed essential qualifications.
8.
We find no merit in this writ petition.
The same is dismissed, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.