SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner seeks a direction from this Court for quashing the reservation policy for category `A' in para `H' of the prospectus issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as the `GNDU'), whereby the reservation of seats in favour of the Scheduled Castes has been restricted only to 25 per cent meant for students who are domicile of Punjab.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner had applied for the course known as Master in Sports Physiotherapy (MSPT) for the academic session 2003-2004.
There were total 14 seats out of which, 3 were reserved for Scheduled Caste category.
Apart from the prospectus, the University had also issued guidelines containing the eligibility criteria for seeking admission to reserved seats for various categories.
The petitioner applied under the Scheduled Caste category alongwith the necessary Scheduled Caste certificate.
Her Admission Form was accepted and she was allotted Roll No. 183.
She subsequently cleared the test and she was called for interview on 2662003.
At this stage, she was denied admission.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the reservation policy is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as they do not provide equal opportunity to the candidates of other States belonging to the Scheduled Caste category vis-a-vis candidates of general category.
He further submits that the University is estopped from denying admission to the petitioner as she has undergone the entire process successfully.
He further submits that since 3 seats are reserved for the category of Scheduled Castes, at least one seat should have been reserved in the 85 per cent quota which is meant for the students whose parents are not domicle of the State of Punjab which would only make a reservation of 33 per cent which would not be in violation of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in a number of cases to the effect that reservation can extend upto 50 per cent of the seats.
2.
Learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that no writ of mandamus can be issued directing the respondents to grant admission against the prospectus and the provisions of the GNDU Calendar.
He further submitted that at the time when the petitioner submitted the application form for admission, the same was incomplete and ought to have been rejected.
The necessary certificate indicating that the petitioner belonged to the reserved category of Scheduled Caste, was only sent by the father of the petitioner on 1062003.
The application form being incomplete, the petitioner was not even eligible.
He further submitted that the reservation in favour of the Scheduled Castes is only with regard to 85 per cent seats which fall to the share of the students who are domicile of the State of Punjab.
There is no reservation so far 15 per cent seats are concerned which relate to the students who are not domicile of the State of Punjab.
3.
We have considered the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
We find that no relief can be granted to the petitioner on the basis of compassion and equity.
Admittedly, there is no reservation with regard to the seats which are to be filled out of the 15 per cent quota.
This reservation is limited against 85 per cent seats which are meant for the students who are domicile of the State of Punjab.
Mr. Patwalia has pointed out that the reservation of 85 per cent quota of domicile has already been upheld by the Supreme Court in Anant Madaan v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SLR 714 : 1995(2) SCT 449 (SC).
We are also of the opinion that Mr. Patwalia is correct in his submission that the reservation which has been made in the 85 per cent quota, cannot be transferred to 15 per cent quota.
This is a legislative act which would have to be performed by the appropriate authority.
This Court would not be justified in issuing such instructions while exercising jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Petition stands dismissed.
Petition dismissed.