Syed Bashir-ud-din, J - Despite repeated opportunities, petitioner or his counsel has not taken steps required of him for service on respondents and the matter has come on board for dismissal pursuant to the court direction dated 1992003.
Be as it may, petitioner's counsel is heard at this pre-admission stage.
2.
Petitioner, an Assistant Registrar in the Department of Cooperative Societies, has been transferred and posted as Assistant Registrar, Block Baramulla, by order dated 1962000 (Annexure-I).
After he took over on 2062000 (as displayed by Annexure-3), this transfer and posting order has been stayed so far as petitioner is concerned on the ground that the transfer was ordered prematurely.
This is done on 2562001 (Annexure-4).
This order is impugned in the petition and petitioner has been working at Baramulla pursuant to the impugned transfer and posting order on an interim direction dated 1172001 of a coordinate Bench of this court.
Obviously more than two years have passed by and the petitioner has clinged to this Baramulla posting because of above intervention of the court and on the basis of interim order.
The impugned transfer order is not acted upon for last two years and by now the petitioner's transfer and posting should be mature even in his new ordered posting at Baramulla (Annexure-2).
The grounds of challenge to the impugned rescinding order (Annexure-A) of earlier transfer and posting order (Annexure-2) are not well founded in facts and law.
Transfer and posting is not a punishment.
Where to serve best and when to serve is a matter for the employer and the competent authority.
Writ jurisdiction cannot be used as a court of Appeal or revision to question the day to day transfer and posting orders of employees by the employer department, as in this case.
The order has otherwise by passage of time perhaps lost the punch the utility.
3.
In this view of the matter petition is dismissed, leaving open to the competent authority, the Cooperative Society Deptt.
of the Government to pass appropriate transfer and posting orders, if any required with regard to the petitioner, an Assistant Registrar Cooperative Societies of the department, of course, in the interest of administration or in public interest.
Disposed of.
Petition dismissed.