Virender Singh, J - Surinder Kumar Conductor of Punjab Roadways Batala has preferred the present appeal against the impugned judgment of the lower appellate Court dated 2011987 allowing the appeal of the respondent/State partly holding that the order dated 28.9.85 whereby the services of the appellant were terminated as legal but at the same time the appellant was declared entitled to his pay and allowances permissible to him for the period he remained under suspension.
2.
Briefly said the whole controversy revolves round the official punishment order dated 28.9.85 passed by General Manager, Batala of Punjab Roadways.
The gavamen of the charge is that the appellant had defrauded the government.
The salient features of the case are that on 8883 when a State Bus No. 1122 was coming from Amritsar to Jammu, it was intercepted by the Inspecting staff at Batala.
The appellant had not timely issued the tickets for fare to some passengers.
On seeing the Inspectors, the Conductor (appellant) became non- plussed and in all confusion punched the tickets and flung them on the floor of the bus near the passengers in a bid to show that he had already performed his duty.
Those tickets were gathered up by the Inspectors and are part of the file.
According to the allegations, the appellant had, thus, committed a fraud of Rs. 13/- from the government revenue.
3.
It is worth mentioning here that there was another allegation against the appellant to the effect that on 7883, the same bus when it was coming from Pathankot to Amritsar, was checked by Inspector Banarsi Lal and it was found that the appellant had charged from 14 passengers the tax in excess by 005 paise per passenger and the said amount comes to the tune of Rs. 140 paise.
So far as the charge of 7883 is concerned, in inquiry it was not proved.
The General Manager has, however, found the appellant guilty in matter of 881983 vide his order dated 28.9.85.
The order of General Manager was reversed by the Court of first instance.
The lower appellate court has, however, upheld the termination but has set aside the forfeiture of the pay for the suspension period.
In its own words the appeal was decided partly in favour of the government and partly in favour of the appellant.
Hence, this appeal.
4.
I have heard Mr. RS Bains, learned counsel for the appellant and Sh. SS Gill, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab.
With their assistance, I have also gone through the entire record.
5.
The solitary argument advanced on behalf of the appellant is that the cash of the appellant was not checked by the inspecting agency at the time of inspection and as such, the order passed by the General Manager is absolutely illegal.
Developing his arguments, Mr. Bains further submitted that the perusal of the statements of the Inspectors shows that they are silent about the checking of the cash of the appellant at the time of inspection and in the face of the said flaw it is highly unfair to come to the decision that the appellant had embezzled Rs. 13/-.
It is then contended that the inquiry officer has also not deeply and critically examined the statements of the witnesses in so much so that the defence of the appellant has also not been considered properly to reach a just conclusion.
The mainstay of the appellant, thus, is that the inquiry has not been properly conducted and as such, the order the General Manager (Punishing Authority) dated 28.9.85 removing the appellant from service is untenable in law.
6.
On the other hand, the learned State counsel has argued with vehemence that there is no illegality in the impugned judgment of the lower appellate court and it does not call for any interference as the services of the appellant had been rightly terminated after holding a full inquiry in which the appellant was afforded a complete opportunity to participate.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the case.
The relevant records have also been scanned by me.
The records have been kept in a very haphazard manner, the paging of which has been done at the pleasure of the dealing hands and there is welter of confusion creating avoidable difficulties.
I have made a complete endeavour to see the inquiry file which stands exhibited as Ex. P1.
The inquiry file was made a part of the proceedings at the instance of the appellant.
8.
Amongst other issues, the main issue which was framed from the pleadings of the parties is an under :-  "Whether the impugned order dated 28.9.85 is illegal, null and void etc ?"
9.
The central point that emerges in this case is as to whether the appellant is or is not free from fault.
The perusal of the inquiry file Ex. P1 shows that the appellant while discharging his duty as Conductor of Bus No. 1122 had received Rs. 13/- on 8883 and Rs. 140 on 7883 from the passengers and as such embezzled the said amount.
So far as the charge of 7883 is concerned, it does not need any discussion because the appellant was exonerated in the inquiry.
10.
The perusal of inquiry file shows that a very fair trial has been conducted in this case.
All the aspects have been critically examined by the inquiry officer.
The appellant was given full opportunity to defend his case.
He has examined all the witnesses at length.
The appellant cannot show his grouse now in any manner so far as the inquiry is concerned.
11.
The contention of Mr. Bains that the cash bag of the appellant was not checked by the Inspectors and this flaw in itself is enough to throw the charge, is not at all appealing to me.
In the instant case the checking staff had recorded the statements of the passengers who were not given the tickets.
Those statements are also available in the inquiry file.
I have once again perused page Nos. 27 and 28 of the inquiry file Ex. P1.
In fact on page No. 28, there is a consolidated statement of three passengers namely Pritam Kaur, Kartar Kaur and Piara Singh.
These three passengers have thumb marked this consolidated statement.
It cannot be said that all this exercise done by the inspecting staff is farce in order to implicate the appellant.
No ill will or animous is even suggested.
I have also seen 12 tickets on the inquiry file.
Four tickets are of 020 + 005 paise whereas 8 tickets are of 120 + 0.40 paise.
The allegation is that he had issued four tickets of 020 + 005 paise to the passengers and had charged the fare of Rs. 14/-.
The eight tickets of 120 + 0.40 amounting to Rs. 1280 were thrown by the appellant on the floor after seeing the checking staff and punching the same in a state of confusion.
The punching of tickets itself is a clincher of collection of fare from the passengers.
The thumb impressions of the passengers cannot be forged by the inspecting staff.
No doubt the cash of the conductor (appellant) was not checked by the checking staff but there is sufficient material on the inquiry file to show that the passengers were not given the tickets worth Rs. 1300.
The fault is convincingly established.
The factum of checking is not denied by the appellant.
The argument of Mr. Bains thus in this regard is repelled.
12.
No other point has been raised by the learned counsel for the appellant in support of his case before me.
13.
I have otherwise gone through the entire judgment of learned Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur and found no infirmity or illegality on any point.
In my view no question of law much less substantial question of law is made out.
Resultantly, the present appeal is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
Appeal dismissed.