SS Saron, J - The petitioner who was appointed as a driver on regular basis with the Punjab Roadways, Moga has been invalided out of service on medical grounds.
He has filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, for issuance of directions to release his residual pensionary benefits i.e. ex-gratia grant as admissible vide Punjab Government Circular dated 16.7.1998 (Annexure P-4) as also balance payment on account of gratuity along with interest at the rate of Rs. 18% per annum.
2.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as a driver on regular basis with the Punjab Roadways, Moga on 26.6.1974.
During service he felt himself as medically incapacitated.
He was examined by the Civil Surgeon, Moga who vide the certificate Annexure P-I certified that he considers the petitioner to be completely and permanently incapacitated for further service as driver of any kind in the Punjab Roadways.
He was suffering from chronic simple glaucoma of both eyes and therefore was unfit for the post of Driver.
It was also certified that his incapacity did not appear to have been caused by irregular or intemperate habits.
Accordingly the Civil Surgeon, Moga also issued a medical certificate in terms of Rule 526 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules declaring the petitioner as unfit to drive the bus.
On the basis of the above certificate the petitioner was retired on medical grounds (invalided out of service) on 372000 AN vide order dated 472000 (Annexure P-3).
The claim of the petitioner is that he has not been issued the ex-gratia grant of Rs. 50,000/- to which he is entitled to in terms of the letter dated 16.7.1998 (Annexure P-4).
3.
Notice in the petition was issued and the respondents have put in appearance and filed their written statements.
The stand taken in the written statement is that the petitioner is not entitled to the amount claimed because ex-gratia grant of Rs. 50,000/- is payable to those employees who are permanently disabled and rendered unfit for further service.
The petitioner is not unfit for further Government service and he has been declared unfit for the post of Driver only by the Civil Surgeon, Moga.
Besides it is stated that in the order dated 472000 (Annexure P-3) retiring the petitioner from service it has been indicated that the petitioner cannot be adjusted against the post having equal pay-scale to the post of Driver due to non-availability of any vacancy in this depot.
Besides it is stated that the petitioner would be entitled to invalid pension in terms of Rules 511 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume-II.
In these circumstances the claim of the petitioner is stated to be baseless and that the writ petition merits dismissal.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance gone through the records of the case.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action on the part of the respondents in not granting ex-gratia grant to the petitioner despite his fulfilling the eligibility for the same in terms of the circular dated 16.7.1998 (Annexure P-4) is arbitrary and illegal.
The petitioner is entitled to the statutory benefits of the Punjab Civil Service Rules and the instructions of the Government for the grant of ex-gratia amount as claimed.
6.
On the other hand learned counsel appearing for the State contends that the petitioner is not entitled to ex-gratia amount of Rs. 50,000/- as he has not been found unfit for further Government service by the Civil Surgeon, Moga but has only been declared unfit for the post of Driver.
Besides he states that there was no post equivalent to the post of Driver against which the petitioner could be adjusted.
Therefore he is not entitled to the ex-gratia amount besides it is stated that the petitioner is being paid invalid pension in terms of Rule 511 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume-II.
Therefore the petition is liable to be dismissed.
7.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of the parties the provisions of Rule 27 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume-II and the relevant part of the instructions dated 16.7.1998 (Annexure P-4) may be noticed.
Rule 27 reads as under :-  "27 Government may allow ex gratia grant to the members of the family of a Government employee, including a member of All India Service serving under the Punjab Government who dies while in service as indicated in the Annexure to this Chapter."
Para 6 of the instructions dated 16.7.1998 which relates to ex-gratia grant of Rs. 50,000/- reads as under :- Ex-Gratia Grant "Ex-gratia grant admissible vide Rule 27 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-II to members of family or an employee who dies in harness shall be paid at the rate of Rs. 50,000/- on a uniform basis.
It has also been decided that the employees who, while in service are permanently disabled and rendered unfit for further service shall also be given ex-gratia grant at the rate of Rs. 50,000/- on a uniform basis".
The perusal of above Rule 27 shows that Government may allow ex-gratia grant to the members of the family of a Government employee including the member of the All-India Service under the Punjab Government who dies while in service in accordance with the annexure appended to Chapter-II.
A reading of Para 6 of the Instructions dated 16.7.1998 shows that this benefit is also admissible to the employees who while in service are permanently disabled and rendered unfit for further service at the rate of Rs. 50,000/- on an uniform basis.
The question that requires to be considered is whether the petitioner is entitled to the grant of Rs. 50,000/- as ex-gratia amount on account of his being permanently disabled and rendered unfit for further service ?
8.
The stand of the respondents-State is that the petitioner has not been rendered unfit for further service and he has only been rendered unfit for the post of Driver.
However it may be noticed that the respondents have not given any alternate post to the petitioner so as to utilise his services at an alternative or equivalent post.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner has been not rendered unfit for any other post.
In our view this stand is not tenable as insofar as the petitioner is concerned he has been invalidated out of service and therefore he has been rendered unfit for further service.
It would have been a different matter if the respondents adjusted or utilized the services of the petitioner by engaging him against an alternative or equivalent post.
This has admittedly not been done.
Therefore, after having taken the stand that the petitioner cannot be adjusted against a post having equal pay-scale to the post of Driver due to non- availability of any vacancy in the depot, they cannot at the same time say that the petitioner has not been rendered unfit for further service so as to disentitle him for the ex-gratia grant of Rs. 50,000/-.
The State Government having taken a policy-decision to grant ex-gratia amount to employees who while in service are permanently disabled and rendered unfit for further service are bound by their decision and grant the necessary relief in accordance with its policy, which has been issued within its legally permissible powers.
9.
The stand of the respondents that the petitioner has been granted invalid pension in terms of Rule 511 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-II is also without merit.
Rule 511 relates to conditions for grant of invalid pension.
It is provided therein that an invalid pension is awarded to a Government employee on his retirement from public service who by bodily or mental infirmity is permanently incapacitated for public service or for the particular branch of it to which he belongs.
Rule 511 reads as under :-  "511.
An invalid pension is awarded, on his retirement from the Public Service, to a Government employee, who by bodily or mental infirmity is permanently incapacitated for the public service, or for the particular branch of it to which he belongs."
10.
It may be noticed that the very award of invalid pension is dependent upon permanent incapacitation by bodily or mental infirmity.
In fact by the grant of invalid pension it is rather accepted by the respondents that the petitioner has been permanently incapacitated.
However, to get the benefit of ex-gratia amount, the grant of invalid pension is not to work to the disadvantage of an employee.
Ex-gratia grant is independent of the invalid pension and both the provisions are mutually exclusive and are not dependent on each other.
The object of granting an ex-gratia amount is on account of permanent disablement rendering an employee unfit for further service.
The petitioner who is a driver admittedly cannot drive further.
Besides he has been invalided out of service by retiring him on account of his physical disability.
He has not been adjusted anywhere and has also been granted invalid pension.
These circumstances would show that he has been permanently incapacitated for Public Service and rendered unfit.
This Court in the case of Raghbir Chand v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) Service Cases Today 503 while interpreting Rule 511 relating to grant of invalid pension held that it is a special Rule which operates in exclusion to the general rule for pension available on qualifying service of 10 years.
It was held that invalid pension was granted on account of becoming physically or mentally unfit to serve before the age of superannuation or qualify service.
The petitioner therein was invalidated out of service on medical grounds.
Pension was denied to him on the ground he did not have ten years of qualifying service.
This Court held he was entitled to invalid pension under Rule 511.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Mohinder Singh v. State of Haryana, 2000(1) Service Cases Today 149 which is also a case of a bus driver while interpreting Rule 511 and 512 and also after noticing the judgment of this Court in Raghbir Chand's case (supra) held that the petitioner in the said case had been declared unfit to drive heavy vehicle and was retired for reasons of bodily infirmity which incapacitated him to discharge his duties.
He was held entitled to pensionary benefits.
In the said case the petitioner was only partially incapacitated and therefore he was held entitled to pensionary benefits determined under Rule 512.
It was also held that according to the policy in the said case, the first and foremost duty cast on the authorities, when a driver has been rendered unfit to discharge his duties, is to follow the procedure laid down in Rules 511 and 512 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-II.
The second duty of the employer, it was held, is to find an alternative employment not necessarily in the same scale of pay as the one in which the employee was holding prior to his medical infirmity.
In case an alternative employment was not made compensation in terms of paragraph 3 of the instructions as were applicable in Haryana State in the said case.
11.
The position in the present case is also somewhat similar.
The petitioner admittedly has been invalided out of service, he has been granted invalid pension and he has not been given any alternative job.
Therefore, it was incumbent for the respondents, to grant compensation in terms of its policy instructions dated 16.7.1998, Rule 511 was rightly adopted by the respondents.
By adopting the same it has been accepted that the petitioner was permanently incapacitated on account of bodily infirmity.
This is so far as the reason that invalid pension is granted to a Government employee when he is permanently incapacitated for the public service.
Once having accepted this position of permanent incapacitation it is not for the authorities to take the stand that the petitioner had been rendered unfit for the post of driver only and not for other services.
Therefore, the authorities have failed to take into consideration all relevant factors which were required to be taken into consideration in the decision making process for declining the benefit of ex-gratia amount of Rs. 50,000/- to the petitioner to which he entitled to in accordance with Rule 27 read with Para-6 of the Instructions dated 16.7.1998 (Annexure P-4).
This has vitiated the decision of the authorities in declining to grant ex-gratia amount of Rs. 50,000/-.
12.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the petitioner is held entitled to the grant of Rs. 50,000/- as ex-gratia amount on account of his being permanently disabled and rendered unit for further service.
In these circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.