KC Gupta, J - This judgment shall dispose of C.W.P.
No. 3935 of 1985 (Dr. Neeti Rajan Singh v. State of Punjab and others), C.W.P.
No. 645 of 1987 (Dr. Ranbir Singh Pannu v. State of Punjab and others) and R.S.A.
No. 3601 of 2000 (Dr. Harmit Singh v. Punjab State and another) as common question of law and fact is involved in all these cases.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts as extracted from CWP No. 3935 of 1985 are that Dr. Neeti Rajan Singh petitioner had been in service of the State of Punjab since 1974 on regular basis.
He was PCMS (II) and was interested in higher studies.
Therefore, he applied for admission in the course of Master of Surgery in the Medical College, Amritsar commencing from 111978 which was for a period of 2 years.
He had applied for study leave during the said period but was granted extra ordinary leave under Rule 8.
137(iv) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part-I (for short the 'Rules').
The Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, gave a certificate on the application for leave submitted by the petitioner that it was in the public interest and thus, the extra ordinary leave was granted to him.
3.
It was next averred that before joining the course, in addition to complying with other formalities, the petitioner had executed a bond that he would serve the Department for at least for 5 years after getting the decree of Master of Surgery.
It was further averred that after getting the decree of Master of Surgery, the petitioner had applied to the Department with a prayer that extraordinary leave for prosecuting higher studies should be counted for increments under Rules 4.9(b)(ii) of the Rules and accordingly, vide order dated 16/25-8-1983 it was ordered that the extra ordinary leave granted to the petitioner shall be counted for increments and thus, two increments were granted to him during the period, he remained on extraordinary leave from 111978 to 31.12.1979.
4.
It was further averred that subsequently on 2821985, the Under Secretary to Govt. Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department cancelled the order of granting two annual increments to the petitioner during the period he remained on extra ordinary leave and it was further ordered that the payments already made to him should be recovered.
5.
The petitioner challenged the said order by way of writ petition on the ground that the period of extra ordinary leave granted to him for prosecuting higher studies was counted for increments under Rule 49(b)(ii) of the Rules by the competent authority after considering all the relevant circumstances of the case and even payments on the basis of two increments granted to him have already been made.
It was further averred that no show cause notice was given to him before withdrawing the order of granting increments and further a reasonable opportunity of being heard was not granted to him and that the said order had not been cancelled by a speaking and well reasoned order.
So, the same was against the principles of natural justice.
Therefore, it was prayed that the same be set aside.
6.
On similar lines CWP No. 645 of 1987 was filed by Dr. Ranbir Singh Pannu.
He was also granted extraordinary leave for prosecuting higher studies i.e. for joining the course of Master of Surgery in the Medical College, Amritsar, commencing from 111978.
After passing the said degree course in the Master of Surgery, he applied to the Department that extra ordinary leave for prosecuting higher studies should be counted for increments under Rule 49 (b)(ii) of the Rules, Volume I, Part-I and vide order dated 3111981 he was allowed two increments.
Later on, the said order was withdrawn vide letter dated 2821985 and the amount already paid to him was ordered to be recovered from him.
7.
However, the case of Dr. Harmit Singh in R.S.A.
No. 3601 of 2000 is different.
He joined the Department as PCMS (II) on the basis of merit-cum- selection and was promoted as PCMS (I) in the year 1983.
He applied for leave for pursuing his MD studies while working as PCMS (II) which was rejected.
Thereafter, he applied for extraordinary leave which was granted on 2141982 with the rider that the period of extra ordinary leave would not be counted for increments.
He had challenged the said order dated 2141482 by filing a civil suit, for declaration on the ground that the order was illegal, arbitrary and in fact, he was entitled to increments during the period of his extraordinary leave commencing from 1671975 to 31.12.1976.
He had made the last representation in the year 1990.
The suit was filed on 221991 against the State of Punjab, Secretary Health and Family Planning Department and Director, Research and Medical Education.
8.
The respondent-defendants contested the suit and stated that the appellant was not entitled for study leave as there was no such rule before 1980.
On merits, they stated that leave could not be claimed as a matter of right under Rule 815 of the Rules.
It was further stated that the appellant was granted extra ordinary leave by the Government on the condition that the period of such leave would not be counted for annual increments.
Thus, he was not entitled to the benefit of annual increments for the period 1671975 to 31.12.1976.
They also denied the rest of the allegations.
9.
Various issues were framed.
After hearing counsel for the parties, the Civil Judge (Jr.
Div.)
Amritsar, vide his Judgment and decree dated 591988 held that the order dated 2141982 was null and void as the same was discriminatory and against the principles of natural justice and the appellant was entitled to two increments during extra ordinary leave period.
However, he dismissed the suit on the basis of limitation by stating that the plaintiff had challenged the order dated 2141982 in the year 1991 and as such, it was time barred.
10.
Aggrieved by the said judgment and decree, the plaintiff filed an appeal which was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar vide his judgment and decree dated 122000.
11.
Still dissatisfied, the plaintiff has filed the present regular second appeal which was admitted and was ordered to be heard along with the aforesaid two writ petitions.
I have heard Mr. Shailender Sharma, learned counsel for Dr. Neeti Rajan Singh petitioner; Mr. Karminder Singh, learned counsel for Dr. Ranbir Singh Pannu petitioner; Mr. DR Bansal, learned counsel for Dr. Harmit Singh appellant; Mrs. Rupinder K Wasu, Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents and carefully gone through the files.
12.
It is an admitted case that Dr. Neeti Rajan Singh and Dr. Ranbir Singh Pannu were granted extra ordinary leave under Rule 8137(iv) of the Rules for two years for pursuing higher studies.
Consequently, after getting permission for the extra ordinary leave, they joined the course of Master of Surgery in the Medical College, Amritsar and successfully completed the same.
There is no dispute about it that before joining the course in addition to complying with other formalities, they had executed bonds that they were to serve the department for at least for 5 years after getting the degree of Master of Surgery.
It is also an admitted fact that they had applied to the department that extra ordinary leave granted to them for pursuing higher studies should be counted for increments under Rule 49 (b)(ii) of the Rules and they were allowed increments for the period during which they remained on extra ordinary leave vide order Annexure P1.
Later on the said order was withdrawn vide order Annexure P-2 dated 2821985.
The State of Punjab in their written statement stated that it was the prerogative of the State Government, in exercise of powers under Rule 49(b)(ii) of the Rules to consider the period of extra ordinary leave for the purpose of increments, but as a matter of policy, the said benefit had been withdrawn.
In my opinion, a benefit once granted in exercise of power under the aforesaid rule, could not have been unilaterally withdrawn by the State Government without issuing notice to the petitioners.
This is against the principles of natural justice.
It has been observed by this court in ML Chopra v Union of India, 1967 SLR 588 that once a certain protection or benefit has been afforded to the petitioners, they were certainly entitled to be heard and entitled to be given sufficient and adequate opportunity to show cause against their being deprived of the same benefit particularly with retrospective effect.
This is necessary in order to conform to principles of natural justice which were enshrined in the guarantee rule of law.
Same view was taken by this Court in Harbans Singh and another v. The District Education Officer, Ludhiana and others, 1980(1) SLR 639.
Therefore, the order Annexure P-2 being illegal is not sustainable in the eyes of law and the same is set aside.
A direction is given to the State Government not to effect recovery of the benefits already granted under the aforesaid Rules.
Both the writ petitions are disposed of accordingly.
13.
So far as R.S.A.
No. 3601 of 2000 is concerned, both the Courts below have found as a matter of fact that the order dated 2141982 (Annexure P2) is discriminatory and against the principles of natural justice.
As per Rule 49(b)(ii) of the Rules, the extra ordinary leave of the appellant should have been counted for increments.
Therefore, the said order is null and void and is discriminatory.
14.
Now the only question to be seen is whether the suit filed by the appellants is time barred.
The order vide which it was stated that the extra ordinary leave period for pursuing higher studies which had been granted to the appellant would not be counted towards increments was passed on 2141982.
The present suit for declaration had been filed on 221991 i.e. beyond a period of three years.
It has been observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in MR Gupta v. Union of India and others, 1996(1) SCT 8 (SC) : 1995(4) RSJ 502 that the appellant's grievance was that his pay fixation was not in accordance with the rules and as such, there was a continuing wrong against him which gave rise to a recurring cause of action each time he was paid salary which was not computed in accordance with the rules.
Therefore, as long as the appellant is in service, a fresh cause of action arises every month when he is paid his monthly salary on the basis of a wrong computation made contrary to the rules.
Thus, he was getting less salary every month and a fresh cause of action has arisen to him every month.
He had also made representation/letters dated 2821985 and 25.11.1988 and then gave legal notice dated 16.7.1990.
Thus, he had been clamouring to seek redress from the respondents although he fulfils all the conditions.
So, he cannot be deprived from the benefits on the question of delay.
It has been held by this Court in State of Punjab and others v. Jagdish Ram Mittal, 1989(1) RSJ 41 that there is no limitation for challenging a void order.
However, in the present case the appellant will be entitled to arrears and other benefits from 221988 i.e. three years prior to the presentation of the suit.
Therefore, I hold that the appellant is entitled to two increments during the period he remained on extra ordinary leave i.e. from 1671975 to 31.12.1976 but he will be entitled to arrears commencing from period from 221988 i.e. three years prior to the institution of the suit and not from 1671975 and considering the grant of two increments from 31-12-76 his pay should be again fixed.
Accordingly, the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are set aside and the regular second appeal is accepted in the above terms.
Appeal allowed.