Swatanter Kumar, J - Smt. Usha Devi daughter of Smt. Maya Devi (since deceased) has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India with a prayer that the impugned letter dated 8112002 vide which her request for transfer of the licence for running a trolley in her favour was rejected, be quashed.
Late Smt. Maya Devi, the mother of the petitioner, was the approved vending contractor of trolley No. 15 since 16.9.1997 at Railway Station Rewari.
A will dated 881996 was executed by the mother in favour of her daughter bequeathing all properties to her including the rights in the said trolley.
In fact, she suffered a decree dated 1431992 before a Civil Court in a suit for declaration to the effect that the petitioner is owner in possession of Trolley No. 15.
Smt. Maya Wati, during her life time, submitted an application dated 16.9.1997 requesting the concerned authorities for inclusion of the name of petitioner in the contract relating to trolley No. 15.
She submitted the documents as required under the instructions.
This application was processed and ultimately recommended by the Divisional Commercial Manager vide his letter dated 572000 for inclusion of the name of the petitioner.
The relevant part of the said letter reads as under :-  "Keeping in view of the facts explained above, there will be no otherwise adverse effect against any contractors of station, so kindly accord necessary approval for inclusion the name of Usha Puri in the vending contractor (one Hot and cold drinks and snacks, trolley at Rewari) of her mother, Smt. Maya Devi, as the case is already much delayed and contractor is pressing hard.
Sd/- Divl.
Coml.
Manager,  DA/As above.
N Rly.
Bikaner."
2.
The petitioner, in fact, had even paid licence fee upto 31122000, on 372000.
As no effective steps were taken by the concerned authorities, the petitioner submitted a representation dated 3122002 seeking permission to deposit the licence fee as well as to complete the documents as in the meanwhile Maya Wati died in 2002.
A notice under Section 80 CPC was also served on her behalf by the counsel for the petitioner, which was not responded to.
Thus, the petitioner was compelled to file a civil writ petition No. 12093 of 2002 before this Court which was finally disposed of on 682002 directing the respondents to decide the said representation.
In furtherance to the orders of the Court, the authorities concerned vide their order dated 8112002 declined the request on the ground that she has no locus-standi and that licence fee of Rs. 1860/- was deposited without disclosing the fact that Maya Wati had expired.
As the licensee had died, licence had expired and as such the notice was liable to be rejected.
Thereafter the petitioner clarified all the documents expressed by the respondents in the impugned order and had already submitted a detailed representation in consonance with the policy of the department on 3172002 for transfer and necessary documents had been annexed thereto.
The instructions of the Government issued are annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/14.
3.
The respondents, particularly, respondent No. 3 filed a written statement upon notice.
The objection taken in the written statement is that the petitioner has no locus-standi and that the licence cannot be assigned or sublet by the licensee.
According to the respondents, the legal representatives of the deceased cannot claim any benefit.
The request of the petitioner, had already been declined by the department for valid reasons.
There is a dispute pending between other heirs of the deceased and the petitioner.
Furthermore, she had not approached the department with clean hands and as such not entitled to any relief prayed for in this petition.
4.
From the above narrated pleadings of the parties, it is clear that during the life time of the licensee Maya Wati, she had made an application for inclusion of the name of her daughter in the vending contract at Rewari.
This application was being effectively considered by the respondents and inclusion of her name was duly recommended by the authorities.
Before any decision could be taken, she had expired.
According to the petitioner, she is entitled to the transfer of the licence in her favour in accordance with the policy of the department.
5.
In furtherance to the offer of the Division Bench, the respondents rejected the representation as well as the legal notice served upon them by the petitioner for transfer of the said licence in her favour.
The objections taken in the written statement deserve to be considered with some merit.
The fact that an application for inclusion of the name was filed by the licensee during her life time could be taken to its logical conclusion only during the life time of the licensee and continuation of the licence period.
One either of them elapsed, the question of consideration of application for inclusion could not arise.
The essential feature of such consideration is that the licensee is alive and intends to have the name of another person included in the existing licence deed.
It is not disputed before us that prior to her death, no such inclusion was permitted.
Though the inclusion was recommended vide letter dated 572000, but, unfortunately before its culmination into appropriate sanction and issuance of an order, she expired in June, 2000.
6.
After her death, the only question that survived for consideration was whether she was entitled to get the licence in her own name, being the heir of the deceased or not.
This request of the petitioner had been declined by the respondents for variety of reasons.
Clause 30 of the agreement as referred to in the written statement, would be of no consequence, inasmuch as it is not a case of subletting or assignment.
However, clause 34 of the licence agreement clearly provides that the legal representatives of the licensee shall have no interest under the agreement or in respect of return of deposit money will only be subject to the conditions of this agreement.
The policy, which has been relied upon by the petitioner postulates catering/vending contract to the legal heirs dependent on the licensee, subject to satisfaction of eligibility condition or of reference as stated in the agreement and is entitled to meet the entire financial need of the family upon death of the licensee.
May be, the petitioner does not strictly satisfy the prescribed criteria, the orders of rejection are not clear.
They are vague and indefinite in terms.
The plea that there is litigation pending between the heirs of the deceased licensee including the petitioner and, therefore, she had no locus-standi, is contrary to the record before us.
7.
In the representation filed by the petitioner on 3172002, affidavits of the legal heirs of Maya Devi, the deceased licensee were annexed to say that they have no objection if the licence in relation to Trolley No. 15 was transferred in the name of their sister.
In terms of the clauses of the agreement referred and the policy of the respondents, Annexure P/14 to the writ petition, there appears to be no apprehension in such transfer except, of course, subject to the satisfaction of the ingredients specified therein.
Under Clause (3) of the policy, the widow/widower or the sons have a preferential right to the daughter, but they had already given affidavits in favour of the petitioner.
The petitioner is stated to be a divorcee and during the life time of her mother, she had started living with her and in order to make her ends meet she was dependent upon the deceased and as such she has every reasonable expectancy for transfer to the licence in her favour.
It the written statement it is nowhere stated as to what eligibility the petitioner does not satisfy.
The clauses of the agreement read in conjunction with the policy of the respondents, persuade us to hold that the reason given in the order is an arbitrary exercise of power and the respondents ought to have considered the case of the petitioner for transfer of such licence objectively and in line with their own policy.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, quash the impugned order annexure P/12 dated 8122002 and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner afresh in accordance with the policy and the rules for transfer of licence in her favour.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.