SS Saron, J - The petitioner - State of Punjab and others have filed this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the orders dated 1812000 (Annexure P-1) and 892000 (Annexure P-2) passed by the Hon'ble Lok Adalat whereby it has been directed to grant family pension to respondent No. 1 Phulan Rani and by the subsequent order the review application has been dismissed.
2.
The facts leading to the case are that Mohinder Singh Walia, husband of respondent No. 1 Phulan Rani, was employed as Tubewell Operator in the Punjab Tubewell Circle in 1956.
He continued as Tubewell Operator with the Punjab Irrigation Department up to 9121983 when his services were terminated as the tubewells of the Irrigation Department stood transferred to the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation, Ltd. (Corporation - for short).
However, after litigation on the orders of the Court, Mohinder Singh Walia was absorbed in the Corporation and he continued to work there as Tubewell Operator upto 3041989 when he retired.
Mohinder Singh Walia was granted pension for the period of service rendered with the State in the Punjab Irrigation Department upto 9121983 vide Pension payment Order No. 56660/Pb.
At the time of retirement from the Corporation, he was paid terminal benefits like Contributory Provident Fund including the employer share for the portion of service rendered with the Corporation.
He died on 18121992.
During his retirement he received pension from the office of District Treasury Officer, Kapurthala from 151989 up to the date of his demise.
3.
Phulan Rani respondent No. 1 claimed family pension on the demise of her husband Mohinder Singh Walia by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 13555 of 1994 filed in this Court.
The case was referred to the Lok Adalat.
This claim of respondent No. 1 was allowed by the Lok Adalat vide its order dated 1812000 (Annexure P-1).
Thereafter, the Corporation filed Civil Misc. No. 15398 of 2000 in the aforesaid writ petition for review of the said order dated 1812000 which was dismissed by the Lok Adalat on 892000 (Annexure P-2).
Now the present petition has been filed challenging the aforesaid orders dated 1812000 (Annexure P-1) and 892000 (Annexure P-2).
4.
We have heard Shri C.M.
Munjal, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the petitioner-State and Shri SD Sharma, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by Shri Neeraj Sharma, Advocate, for respondent No. 1 and with their assistance gone through the record of the case.
5.
Shri Munjal learned Additional Advocate General, appearing for the petitioner-State, has contended that the Lok Adalat is a Court of settlement and disputes can be settled with mutual consent of the parties and that, therefore, it has erred in deciding the matter on merit.
He further contends that Rule 53 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II Part I debars family pension in cases like that of respondent No. 1 and that the Government has no liability for payment of such pension.
Lastly, that the deceased Mohinder Singh Walia, was a member of the Contributory Provident Fund (CPF - for short) and from 9121983 he had been contributing towards the CPF and on his retirement he also got terminal benefits like CPF including the employer's share.
As such, double benefits cannot be granted for the same service.
6.
On the other hand, Shri Sharma learned Senior Advocate, appearing for respondent No. 1, has contended that pension had been given to Mohinder Singh Walia, the deceased husband of the respondent No. 1, for the period of service rendered by him with the State Government and that for the period rendered with the Corporation, he was given the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund.
He further contends that even if the Hon'ble Lok Adalat had no jurisdiction to grant said benefit, the benefit of family pension was liable to be granted as the deceased Mohinder Singh Walia was receiving pension at the time of his demise.
7.
The contention as regards the competence of the Hon'ble Lok Adalat to decide the matter on merit, it may be mentioned that the Lok Adalat is a forum constituted for resolving the disputes amicably between the parties.
If the parties agree to a settlement the Lok Adalat gets jurisdiction to pass an award with the consent of the parties.
This aspect, however, would not come in the way of this Court for deciding the matter on merit as to whether respondent No. 1 is otherwise entitled to the grant of family pension.
The objection of the petitioner-State to the grant of family pension to respondent No. 1 is based on the first proviso to Sub-rule (3) of Rule 53 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II Part I.
In order to appreciate this contention, the said Rule may be noticed which reads as under:-  "53(1) When a Government employee is transferred from pensionable Government service to a non-pensionable establishment, he cannot be granted any pension or gratuity admissible to him for the qualifying portion of his service until he actually retires from the non-pensionable establishment to which he is transferred.
(2) A permanent Government employee who may be permitted to be permanently absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government or in or under a body controlled or financed by Government, or Municipality, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, shall, if such absorption is declared by Government to be in the public interest, be deemed to have retired from Government service from the date of such absorption and shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits which he may have elected or deemed to have elected, and from the date of such absorption or the date of his voluntary retirement, whichever is later.
Each such Government employee is required to exercise an option within six months of his absorption from either of the alternative indicated below :- (a) receiving the monthly pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity under the usual Government arrangements; or (b) receiving the death-cum-retirement gratuity and a lump sum amount in lieu of pension worked out with reference to the commutation table obtaining on the date from which the commuted value becomes payable.
(3) Where no option is exercised within the specified period the employee will be automatically governed by alternative (b).
An employee opting for alternative (a) is entitled to commutation of a portion of the pension admissible to him in accordance with the provisions of rules contained in Chapter XI.
Provided that Government shall have no liability for the payment of family pension in such a case; Provided further that no declaration regarding absorption in the public interest in a service or post in or under such Corporation, Company, Municipality, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad shall be required in respect of a Government employee whom Government may, by order, declare to be a scientific employee."
Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 53 provides that when a Government employee is transferred from pensionable Government service to a non-pensionable establishment, he cannot be granted any pension or gratuity admissible to him for the qualifying portion of his service until he actually retires from the non-pensionable establishment to which he is transferred.
Sub-Rule (2) envisages that a permanent Government employee who may be permitted to be permanently absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government or in or under a body controlled or financed by Government, or Municipality, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, shall, if such absorption is declared by Government to be in the public interest, be deemed to have retired from Government service from the date of such absorption and shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits which he may have elected or deemed to have elected, and from the date of such absorption or the date of his voluntary retirement, whichever is later.
Each such Government employee is required to exercise an option within six months of his absorption from either of the alternative indicated therein.
8.
In terms of sub Rule (3) where no option is exercised within the specific period the employee will be automatically governed by alternative (b).
An employee opting for alternative (a) is entitled to commutation of a portion of the pension admissible to him in accordance with the provisions of rules contained in Chapter XI.
Reliance that has been placed by the petitioner- State, as already noticed, is on the first proviso below sub-rule (3) of Rule 53 which envisages that the Government shall have no liability for the payment of family pension in such a case.
9.
In the case in hand, as already noticed, Mohinder Singh Walia the deceased husband of respondent No. 1 was transferred to the Corporation where he was reappointed and permanently absorbed on 9121983.
He retired from non- pensionable service of the Corporation on 3041989 and was granted pension for the portion of service rendered by him up to 9121983 with the Punjab Irrigation Department.
Therefore, with the grant of pension with effect from 151989 onwards to Mohinder Singh Walia, it is to be taken that his absorption was declared by the Government to be in public interest within the meaning of Rule 53(2).
It is only as a consequence of such declaration that Mohinder Singh Walia retired from Government service from the date of his absorption in the Corporation i.e. 9121983.
10.
A reading of sub-rule (2) Rule 53 envisages the requirement of such a Government employee to exercise an option within six months of his absorption for either (a) receiving the monthly pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity under the usual Government establishment; or (b) receiving the death-cum- retirement gratuity and a lump sum amount in lieu of pension worked out with reference to the commutation table obtaining on the date from which the commuted value becomes payable.
11.
It is not in dispute that Mohinder Singh Walia was receiving pension under the usual Government establishment.
Therefore, he was getting the benefit in terms of alternative (a) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 53 and that option was exercised.
In case an employee within the specified period does not exercise an option in terms in sub-rule (3) of Rule 53 that he is to be automatically governed by alternative (b).
It is a different matter if the employee otherwise opts for alternative (b).
An employee opting for alternative (a) is entitled to commutation of the portion of the pension admissible to him in accordance with the provisions of Rules contained in Chapter XI.
12.
The position, therefore, is that alternative (b) is inapplicable as Mohinder Singh Walia was getting monthly pension in terms of alternative (a).
An employee opting for alternative (a) is entitled to commutation of portion of pension admissible to him in accordance with provisions of rule contained in Chapter XI.
The proviso below sub-rule (3) to Rule 53 provides that the Government shall have no liability for the payment of family pension in such a case.
The State wants to absolve its liability to pay family pension in terms of the first proviso to sub-rule (3) of Rule 53.
The said proviso below sub-rule (3) of Rule 53 is to be interpreted in a manner which would be in conformity with the object of the Rule.
The object of sub-rule (3) of Rule 53 is that where no option is exercised in terms of the alternatives (a) and (b) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 53 then the employee will be automatically governed by alternative (b).
It is, therefore, in an eventuality where an employee is governed by alternative (b) and had received the death-cum- retirement gratuity and a lump sum amount in lieu of pension worked out with reference to the commutation table obtaining on the date from which the commuted value becomes payable that, in such case the Government shall have no liability for the payment of family pension.
It is not the case of the State Government that Mohinder Singh Walia is governed by alternative (b) of sub- rule (2) of Rule 53 or that he had got his pension commuted so as to disentitle the family of Mohinder Singh Walia for receiving the family pension.
13.
The provisions relating to Family Pension Scheme may also be noticed.
The Family Pension Scheme is governed by the provisions of Rule 617 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II, Part I.
Rule 617 reads as under :-  "617.
The provision of this rule shall apply : (a) to a regular employee of Punjab Government in a pensionable establishment on or after the Ist July, 1964; and (b) to a Punjab Government employee who was in service on the 30th June, 1964 and came to be governed by the provisions of Family Pension Scheme, 1964, for Punjab Government employees."
14.
The provisions of this rule, were applicable to the deceased Mohinder Singh Walia inasmuch as he was a regular employee of the Punjab Government in a pensionable establishment or after 1.7.1964 and he was in service on 3061964 and came to be governed by the provisions of Family Pension Scheme 1964 for Punjab Government employees.
The Note below Rule 617 envisages that in case of a Government employee who retired from service or died at any time before the publication of the said rule, the provisions of Family Pension Scheme, 1964 as in force on the date that Government employee retired or died shall apply.
Thereafter, the family pension benefit admissible to the family of a deceased employee are indicated.
Note 2(i) reads as follows :-  "The Scheme will be administered as below :- (i) The family pension will be admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement if at the time of death the retired Government employee was in receipt of a compensation, invalid, retiring or superannuation pension.
In case of death while in service, the Government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service, without break.
The family pension will not be admissible in case of death after retirement, if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only."
The above shows that family pension will be admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement if at the time of death the retired Government employee was in receipt of retiring or superannuation pension.
Mohinder Singh Walia at the time of his death, was receiving retiring or superannuation pension.
The inadmissibility of the family pension in cases of death after retirement is confined in terms of Note 2(i) to a case if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
Mohinder Singh Walia as already noticed, was receiving retiring or superannuation pension and was not in receipt of gratuity only so as to disentitle his family for the grant of family pension.
Note 3 defines family for the purpose of the Scheme.
Note 9 provides for the inapplicability of the scheme in respect of certain cases.
The same reads as under :-  "(9) This scheme is not applicable to :- (a) Staff paid from contingencies.
(b) Work-charged staff; (c) Casual labour; (d) Contract employee; and (e) Employees without a minimum service of one year".
15.
The respondent No. 1 does not fall in any of the categories as provided in Note 9 below Rule 617 so as to disentitle her for the grant of family pension.
Therefore, the reliance placed by the petitioner-State on the proviso below sub-rule (3) to Rule 53 is without any force and the bar for the liability for payment of family pension would only be in case the employee does not exercise option and is automatically governed by alternative (b) to sub-rule (2) of Rule 53 or otherwise opts for alternative (b) and has received the death-cum-retirement gratuity and a lump sum amount in lieu of pension worked out with reference to the commutation table obtaining on the date from which the commuted value becomes payable.
16.
The last contention of the petitioner-State is that Mohinder Singh Walia had been member of the Provident Fund and from 9121983 onwards, he had been contributing towards Contributory Provident Fund is equally without any force as even as per Rule 53(1) Mohinder Singh Walia on his transfer from pensionable Government service to a non-pensionable establishment he was entitled for pension admissible for the qualifying portion of his service until he actually retired from the non-pensionable establishment to which he was transferred.
Mohinder Singh Walia the deceased employee was granted pension for the portion of service rendered by him up to 9121983 which is in accord with the provisions of Rule 53(1).
The family pension is to be calculated and given on the said basis in accordance with the Family Pension Scheme of the Punjab State.
The Contributory Fund benefit has been given to Shri Mohinder Singh Walia for the period of service he rendered with the Corporation and he has admittedly not been getting any pension for the said period of service rendered by him with the Corporation i.e. for the period from 9121983 to the date of his retirement on 3041989.
Therefore, it cannot be said to be a case of double benefits being granted for the same service as benefits have been granted for different periods of service i.e. pensionary benefits for the period of portion of service rendered by Mohinder Singh Walia up to 9121983 and thereafter, Contributory Provident Fund benefits for the period of service rendered with the Corporation till the date of his retirement on 3041989.
17.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this writ petition.
Even if it is taken that the Hon'ble Lok Adalat had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute on merit being a forum constituted for resolving the disputes amicably between the parties, in view of the above observations the respondent No. 1 is even otherwise entitled to family pension.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.