Tejinder Singh Doabia, J - Petitioner is challenging Government order No. 22nd Jan 1999 whereby the petitioner has been placed at Serial No. 257 of the seniority list.
This is the list of those officers who stand inducted in the Kashmir Administrative Service.
He submits that he should have been placed at serial No. 51.
He submits that he was to be clubbed with Sh. GN Bodha, Smt. Suriya Bhat, S. Jagat Singh, Sh. M Abas Dar, Sh. MS Koka and Smt Shagufta Parveen.
2.
Respondent authorities have filed objections.
The stand taken by them is that the seniority is determined as per merit obtained by the concerned officer.
Reliance is being placed on Rule 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir Administrative Service Rules of 1979.
As the merit of the petitioner, it is submitted was lower, he has been rightly placed at serial No. 257.
3.
Rules 8 and 16 which are relevant are being reproduced below :-  "8.
Preparation of Select list :- (1) The Selection Committee shall prepare a list of officers from the members of the Services mentioned in Clause (b) of sub-rule (i) of rule 5 whom it considers on the basis of merit, suitable for appointment to the service.
The list shall contain names of not more than twice the number of vacancies existing at the time of the selection and those expected to occur until the next selection.
(2) The Selection Committee shall classify assessment of their service records.
(3) Those classified as "Outstanding", "Very Good" shall be included in the select list in the same order i.e. those classified as "outstanding", will appear first and the remaining thereafter according to respective classification.
(4) The Selection Committee shall adopt the same procedure as laid down in sub-rules (1), (2) and (3) above while considering the suitability of officers, referred to in clause (c) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 herein above, for appointment to the service at its Time scale."
"16.
Seniority : (1) The relative seniority interest of persons appointed to the service shall be determined on the basis of the order in which names are arranged in the select list prepared under rule 8 of these rules.
(2) The inter se seniority of those belonging to one and the same feeding service and who have been classified under rule 8 in the same category shall be determined by reference to their seniority in the feeding service.
(3) The inter-se seniority of those who belong to different services but have been grouped in one class by the Selection Committee under rule 8 shall be Time scale level of the feeding service.
Wherever the dates of appointment to the Time Scale are the same, the persons higher in age would be given seniority over the younger persons.
(4) The inter-se seniority of the direct recruits on their promotion to the Time scale vis-a-vis those appointed by promotion/selection shall be determined in the manner in which the senior scale posts have to be allocated for promotion/selection/direct recruitment as prescribed in the rules.
For this purpose a calender year shall be taken as a unit for determination of the seniority.
In case appointment of any group does not take place in a particular calender year, such a group shall have no claim for relating its seniority with those appointed to the Time Scale in the previous year/years.
(5) Seniority of the Members of the Service appointed to at its junior scale through competitive examination shall be regulated under the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956."
4.
A perusal of rule 8 does indicate that it is the merit position and classification which is done by the competent authority is to determine the seniority.
"Outstanding" is to be placed above "Very Good" and an officer with "Very Good" record is naturally to rank over and above "Good".
If this be the position then the complaint of the petitioner is without any basis.
As a matter of fact, this aspect of the matter has been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ali Asgar Choudhary and ors. v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and ors., LPA (SW) No. 665/99, decided on 21st Sept 2000.
What was observed in the above case is being reproduced below :-  "The merit has to be determined by the respondents.
Selection based on merit tested impartially and objectively is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
The object of any process of selection for entry and further promotion into a public service is to secure the best and the most suitable person for the job avoiding patronage and favouritism.
The terms `merit system' finds elaborated in Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 57 at page 1070.
The origin of this system under the American Constitutional set up has been traced in the following words : "Merit system in American government are comparatively recent development.
The federal government began about 1886 in a tentative way to make certain appointments based at least upon an effort to ascertain the ability of the appointee to perform properly the services of his position, rather than his contributions to the success of the party which happened to be in power and this system has spread to a greater or less extent in all parts of the country, although it no means universal, Taylor v. McSwain, 95 P, 2d 415, 421, 54 Ariz 295.
After tracing out the origin of the term, the term `merit system' has a well defined and well-understood meaning.
It is defined as the system of appointing employees to office in the civil service, and of promoting them for competency only; a system whereby selection for appointments in certain branches of the public service may be made on the basis of demonstrated relative fitness, without regard to political considerations.
Such a system would necessarily include a fair and impartial selection and appointment of all personnel on the basis of open and competitive merit examinations specific reasons for removal and a reasonable hearing.
The purpose and effect of the merit system is to take from the appointing officer the right of arbitrary removal, either directly or indirectly of an appointee which he otherwise would have.
The system is some time referred to as a `non-partisan merit system'.
In the United States it is opposed to the `spoils system.'
A person to be inducted in the administrative service has to display his ability to deal with pressing problems of economic and alertness, resourcefulness, dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for clear and logic presentation, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead intellectual and moral integrity are to be seen.
This is a function to be performed by the respondents.
They have done so.
In this exercise, they have gone by the record and the rules applicable to the service.
This Court is not to sit as a Court of appeal in these matters.
This has not be done by a Committee."
5.
What is said in the above case would apply to the facts of this case also.
In view of the rules noticed above and which rules have been interpreted by this Court, no case is made out for interference.
This petition as such is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.