Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioners have filed this writ petition in the nature of Certiorari for a direction to quash award dated 1811994, Annexure P-1 and further to quash order dated 3181999, Annexure P-2 passed by the Lok Adalat.
2.
The petitioners have averred that respondent No. 1.
Dilbag Singh was appointed as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways on 24111970.
On a report of fraud of Rs. 450 and misbehavious with the Checking/Inspectorate Staff, he was charge-sheeted.
He filed reply to the charge-sheet.
The General Manager i.e.
Punishing Authority considered the reply and since the reply was found unsatisfactory, an Enquiry Officer was appointed.
A regular enquiry was conducted and the Enquiry Officer submitted his finding.
He held respondent No. 1 guilty of the charges levelled against him.
A Show Cause Notice for termination of his services was issued to him.
He was also called for personal hearing by the Punishing Authority i.e. General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Nawan Sehar.
After considering all the relevant documents and the reply of respondent No. 1, his services were terminated vide order dated 10101980.
3.
Notice of motion was issued.
4.
Respondent No. 1 took up the plea in his written statement that the award dated 3181999 passed by the Lok Adalat is a decree of Civil Court and, therefore, it was binding.
He has further stated in his reply that though an enquiry was conducted against him but it was not conducted in a fair and proper manner.
The only charge against him was that he issued tickets to nine lady passengers for Rs. 450.
On these allegations, the respondent No. 1 was awarded penalty of dismissal.
5.
Counsel for the petitioners has stated that the order of the Lok Adalat is not proper and as per law as no compromise was effected between the parties.
The order was passed on the statement of counsel for respondent No. 1.
Going through the order Annexure P-2, it comes out that the Law Officer of the Punjab Roadways Nawan Shehar was present.
He did not take up any objection to the passing of this order.
The counsel for the petitioners has rightly pointed out that this order should have been a compromise order.
The counsel for respondent No. 1 has stated that the extreme penalty of termination of service of the workman is very severe.
6.
Three annual grade increments of respondent No. 1 have been stopped.
It itself is a severe punishment for respondent No. 1.
The respondent No. 1 before the Lok Adalat had given up backwages awarded in his favour by the Labour Court.
The counsel for respondent No. 1/workman has stated that the workman is bound by his statement which he made before the Lok Adalat that he was ready to forgo back wages which were awarded to him by the Labour Court.
7.
Award dated 18121994, Annexure P-1 is set aside.
As the operative part of the order of the Lok Adalat, Annexure P-2, has been incorporated in my order, there is no need for me to quash the order of Lok Adalat, Annexure P-2.
8.
It is directed that the respondent/workman be reinstated from the date he joined service i.e. some where in the year 1995.
He will be entitled to continuity of service with consequential fixation of pay but without backwages.
With the above directions, this writ petition stands disposed of.
Petitions allowed.