S.H.A.
Raza and RP Nigam, JJ.
It was vehemently urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the pronouncement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sabhajit Tewari v. Union of India, 1975(1) SCC 485 : AIR 1975 SC 1329 has become obsolete in view of the pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487, PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India, 1984(2) SCC 141 : AIR 1984 SC 541 and UP State Co- operation Land Development Bank Ltd v. Chandra Bhan Dubey, 1999(1) SCT 593 (SC) : 1999(1) SCC 741 : AIR 1999 SC 753 and several other subsequent pronouncements, hence the writ petition should be entertained as the action of the respondents the CDRI is totally non est.
2.
The argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner has substantial force.
Much water has flown since the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sabhajit Tewary v. Union of India (supra).
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the recent years have enlarged the jurisdiction of the Court in entertaining the writ petitions against the order passed by the other instrumentalities of the State like ICAR.
In an ever-fast changing society, the law should be vibrant and dynamic.
It cannot remain static.
3.
The doctrine of stare decisis cannot stall the progress of law as the Courts often reconsider its own judgments and pronouncements.
4.
In Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (supra), while discussing the pronouncement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Subhajit Tewary v. Union of India (supra), Hon'ble Supreme Court held in para 13 of the report that :  "The test which the Court applied for determining the question was the same as the one laid down in the International Airport Authority's case approved by us, namely, whether the Council was an instrumentality or agency of the Government.
The Court implicitly assented to the proposition that if the Council were an agency of the Government, it would undoubtedly be an "authority".
But, having regard to the various features enumerated in the judgment, the Court held that the Council was not an agency of the Government and hence could not be regarded as an "authority".
The Court did not rest its conclusion on the ground that the Council was a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, but proceeded to consider various other features of the Council for arriving at the conclusion that it was not an agency of the Government and therefore not an "authority".
This would have been totally unnecessary if the view of the Court were that a society registered under the Societies Registration Act can never be an "authority" within the meaning of Art.
12."
5.
In Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi (supra), Sabhajit Tewari v. Union of India (supra), was although diluted, but Hon'ble Supreme Court did not hold that Sabhajit Tewari did not hold the field.
But in Ajay Hasia, Hon'ble Supreme Court summarised the relevant tests gathered from the decision in the International Airport Authority's case as follows :  (1) "One thing is clear that if the entire share capital of the corporation is held by Government, it would go a long way towards indicating that the corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government."
(2) "Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the corporation, it would afford some indication of the corporation being impregnated with Governmental character."
(3) "It may also be a relevant factor ....whether the corporation enjoys monopoly status which is the State conferred or State protected."
(4) "Exercise of deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that the Corporation is a State agency or instrumentality."
(5) "If the functions of the corporation of public importance and closely related to governmental functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of Government."
(6) "Specifically, if a department of Govt. is transferred to a corporation, it would be a strong factor supportive of this inference of the corporation being an instrumentality or agency of Government."
6.
More or less similar view was taken by Hon'ble Supreme Court in UP Warehousing Corporation v. Vijay Narain, 1980(3) SCC 459.
7.
But in a subsequent judgment in PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India, 1984(2) SCC 141 : AIR 1984 SC 541, ICAR was held to be a State and the Subhajit Tewary v. Union of India supra was reconsidered.
The following observation as occurring in Para 12 is relevant in that regard.
It is quoted below :  "This Court accordingly concluded that CSIR is not an instrumentality of the Government comprehended in the expression "other authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, and the writ jurisdiction cannot be invoked against it.
Much water has flown down the Jamuna since the dicta in Sabhajit Tewary case and conceding that it is not specifically overruled in later decision, its ratio is considerably watered down so as to be a decision confined to its own facts.
The case is wholly distinguishable on the facts apart from the later indicia formulated by the Court for ascertaining whether a body is "other authority" within the meaning of Article 12.
A mere comparison of the history of ICAR as extensively set out herein before and the setting up of CSIR would clearly show that ICAR came into existence as a department of the Government, continued to be an attached office of the Government even though it was registered as a society and wholly financed by the Government and the taxing power of the State was invoked to make it financially viable and to which independent research institutes set up by the Government were transferred.
None of these features was present in the case of CSIR and, therefore, the decision in Sabhajit Tewary case would render no assistance and would be clearly distinguished."
It was further observed in Para 13 of the judgment that :  "The ratio, if any, of the decision in Sabhajit Tewary case was examined by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Ajay Hasia case and it was held that decision is not an "authority" for the proposition that a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 can never be regarded as an `authority' within the meaning of Article 12.
The Court further held that having regard to the various features enumerated in the judgment in Sabhajit Tewary case, the conclusion was reached that the CSIR was not an agency of the Government, but the Court did not rest its conclusion on the sole ground that CSIR was a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, and on the contrary proceeded to consider various other features of the Council for arriving at the conclusion that it was not an agency of the Government and therefore, it was not an authority for the proposition that a society registered under the Societies Registration Act for that reason alone would not be comprehended in the expression "other authority".
In Ajay Hasia case, this Court after taking note of the decisions in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, 1979(3) SCC 489 : AIR 1979 SC 1628 and UP Warehousing Corporation v. Vijay Narayan, 1980(3) SCC 459, and after extracting various indicia for determining whether the particular body was an agency or instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12, proceeded to examine whether the society which had established Regional Engineering College, Srinagar and which was registered under the Jammu and Kashmir Registration of Societies Act, 1898 was an instrumentality or agency of the State and would be comprehended in the expression "other authority" in Article 12."
In this connection the Hon'ble Supreme Court further observed that :  "The State and the Central Government have even the power to appoint any other person or persons to be members of the Society and any member of the Society other than a member representing the State or the Central Government can be removed from the membership of the Society by the State Government with the approval of the Central Government.
The Board of Governors, which is in charge of general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of Society and of its income and property is also largely controlled by nominees of the State and the Central Governments.
It will thus be seen that the State Government and by reason of the provision for approval, the Central Government also, have full control of the working of the Society and it would not be incorrect to say that the Society is merely a projection of the State and the Central Governments and to use the words of Ray, CJ in Sukhdev Singh case, 1975(1) SCC 421 : AIR 1975 SC 131 the voice is that of the State and the Central Governments and the hands are also of the State and the Central Governments.
We must, therefore, hold that the Society is an instrumentality or the agency of the State and the Central Governments and it is an "authority" within the meaning of Article 12."
8.
Applying the aforesaid principles in PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India (supra), which is a registered society was held that ICAR is an "authority" falling within the definition of "State" under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
9.
In UP State Co-operative Land Development Bank Limited v. Chandra Bhan Dubey (supra), the Bank which was registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, was held to be the State.
10.
Considering the ratio of the aforesaid decisions, we have to consider as to whether the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), which is India's largest Research and Development Organization having 40 laboratories spread over the length and breadth of the country, which is controlled, superintended and governed and funded by the Ministry of Human Resources and Development and Science and Technology is a State.
11.
In Sabhajit Tewary case supra, it has been mentioned that :  "The CSIR is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act and the Prime Minister of India is the ex-officio President of the Society.
The Governing Body is appointed by the Government of India representing the administrative ministry under which the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research is included, and the Ministry of Finance and one or more members appointed by the Government of India.
The Government of India may terminate the membership of any member or at one and the same time of all members other than the ex-officio members of the Governing Body.
The Governing Body shall have the management of all the affairs and funds of the society.
The Governing Body shall have power, with the sanction of the Government of India to frame, amend, or repeal bye-laws not inconsistent with the rules for the administration and management of the affairs of the Society and in particular to provide for the terms and tenure of appointments, emoluments, allowances, rules of discipline and other conditions of service of the officers and staff of the Society."
12.
The CSIR is controlled, managed and administered by a Council, which is appointed and funded by the Government of India.
The only reason for which it was not held as the "other authority", within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution was that the society does not have a statutory character like the Oil and Natural Gas Commission, or the Life Insurance Corporation or Industrial Finance Corporation, but it is a society incorporated in accordance with the provisions of the Societies Registration Act.
13.
A full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Sri Konaseema Co-op.
Central Bank Ltd v. N Seetharama Raju, AIR 1990 AP 171, considered the question whether a writ petition lay against a co-operative society and if it did, in what circumstances.
After examining various decisions and treatises on the subject, it was stated that even if a society could not be characterized as a "State" within the meaning of Article 12, even so a writ would lie against it to enforce a statutory public duty which an employee is entitled to enforce against the society.
In such a case, it is unnecessary to go into the question whether the society is being treated as a "person" or an "authority", within the meaning of Article 226 of the Constitution.
What is material is the nature of the statutory duty placed upon it and the Court is to enforce such statutory duty public duty.
14.
In UP State Co-operative Land Development Bank Ltd v. Chandra Bhan Dubey supra, Hon'ble Supreme Court held in Para 27 of the report at Page 762:  "In view of the fact that control of the State Government on the appellant is all pervasive and the employees had statutory protection and therefore the appellant being an authority or even instrumentality of the State, would be amenable to writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 makes a divide (division) between public law and private law.
Prima facie from the language of Article 226, there does not appear to exist such a divide.
To understand the explicit language of the article, it is not necessary for us to rely on the decision of the English Courts as rightly cautioned by the earlier Benches of this Court.
It does not appear to us that Article 226 while empowering the High Court for issue of order of directions to any authority or person, does not make any such difference between public functions and private functions.
It is not necessary for us in this case to go into this question as to what is the nature, scope and amplitude of the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari.
They are certainly found on the English system of jurisprudence.
Article 226 of the Constitution also speaks of directions and orders which can be issued to any person or authority including, in appropriate cases, any Government.
Under clause (1) of Article 367, unless the context otherwise requires, the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, subject to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under Article 372, apply for the interpretation of the Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act of the legislature of the Dominion of India.
"Person" under Section 2(42) of the General Clauses Act shall include any company or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not.
The Constitution is not a statute.
It is a fountainhead of all the statutes.
When the language of Article 226 is clear, we cannot put shackles on the High Courts to limit their jurisdiction by putting an interpretation on the words which would limit their jurisdiction.
When any citizen or person is wronged, the High Court will step in to protect him, be that wrong be done by the State, an instrumentality of the State, a company or a cooperative society or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or even an individual.
Right that is infringed may be under Part III of the Constitution or any other right which the law validly made might confer upon him.
But then the power conferred upon the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution is so vast, this Court has laid down certain guidelines and self-imposed limitations have been put there subject to which the High Court would exercise jurisdiction, but those guidelines cannot be mandatory in all circumstances."
15.
In subsequent judgments Hon'ble Supreme Court has diluted rather watered down the principle, which was evolved in Sabhajit Tewary's case supra and exercised a view that a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, which is controlled and funded by the State comes within the definition of the words "other authority" with the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution hence, the arguments advanced by Sri Asit Chaturvedi that the dicta of Sabhajit Tewary has attained finality and the CSIR cannot be subjected to be an instrumentality of the State, does not appear to be sound.
CSIR fulfils all the six relevant tests gathered from the decision in the International Airport Authority and Ajay Hasia's Case, hence we hold that the CSIR is deemed to be "other authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
This view, which we have taken is fortified by the fact that the CSIR has been included in the Government of India's notification issued under Section 14(2) of the Central Administrative Tribunal Act; meaning thereby that the Scientists and the staff working in CSIR are public servants.
16.
But the contention of Shri Asit Chaturvedi that as the CSIR has been included in the Government of India's Notification issued under Section 14(2) of the Central Administrative Tribunal Act, the petitioner cannot be permitted to short circuit the process of law by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India without exhausting the alternative remedy available to him as provided under Section 19 of the Central Administrative Tribunal Act by filing an Original Application before the Tribunal, has substantial force.
17.
We are definitely of the opinion that, in view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court decision in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, 1995(2) SCT 674 (SC) : 1997(3) SCC 261 : AIR 1997 SC 1125 the writ petition is not maintainable and it is accordingly dismissed, only on the ground of availability of alternative remedy.
However, it is provided that in case the petitioner files on Original Application along with an application for grant of interim relief before the Central Administrative Tribunal, the Tribunal will consider the same and pass appropriate orders on the application for interim relief expeditiously.
Petition dismissed.