Amar Dutt, J - This plaintiff's appeal seeks to challenge the judgment and decree dated 20.2.1992 passed by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, by which he has affirmed the view taken by the sub judge 1st Class, Jalandhar on 2131989.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant had brought a suit against the respondent for challenging the order passed on 16.3.1986 by the Managing Director-respondent terminating his service as illegal, null and void.
According to the plaintiff, who was working as an Accountant with the defendant-respondent, he had filed a report against one Mahavir Singh, Branch Manager of the defendant at Goraya Branch for making payment of Rs. 7115/- vide cheque No. 392176 dated 26101981 as also payment of the balance as on 31101981 for a sum of Rs. 118119.
According to him, he was on leave with effect from 26101981 till 31101981 and had rejoined the duties on 2.11.1981, when he found that the aforesaid sum of Rs. 7115/- had been paid to Jit Ram, Ram Lok and Darshan Lal Ex-labour Contractors of wheat; that the aforesaid amount was not due; that the amount had been paid without the prior sanction from the District Manager, Jalandhar; that at the time of issuance of cheque the amount which was required to meet the payment was not lying in the Bank and the Branch Manager had deposited a sum of Rs. 4650/- in the Bank from the sale of the fertilizer in utter violation of the procedure; and that the cheque was also not entered in the cheque issue register and signatures of the Contractor too were not obtained.
The plaintiff further claimed that while proceeding on leave, he had left a cheque book with the Manager, which got cheque Nos. 392176 to 392200 and had handed over an amount of Rs. 355465 in cash and, thereafter, a sum of Rs. 208010 from the sale of fertilizer, Rs. 671/- by sale of the cattle feed and a sum of Rs. 630575 was also there in cash, out of which Rs. 4650/- were deposited in the State Bank of Patiala at Goraya to facilitate the payment of Rs. 7115/- by way of cheque.
On coming to know of these circumstances, he had brought the facts to the notice of the Manager and requested him to hand over the balance, which was lying with him, to which he flatly refused.
Thereafter, Shri Jaswant Sharma, Internal Auditor made the observation on 23111981, whereupon a charge sheet was served against the appellant as well as Mahavir Singh and Inquiry Officer submitted a report.
Inquiry Officer mechanically conducted the inquiry, which is replete with illegalities irregularities and improprieties.
After finalisation of the report, the plaintiff was served with a how cause notice, which was duly replied by him and without applying its mind the authorities removed him from service.
This removal was sought to be challenged by way of a suit on the ground that the final order had been passed by the Managing Director and not by the Administrative Committee; that the same as based on no evidence; and that Mahavir Singh Branch Manager has been given lesser punishment.
3.
After service of notice, the defendant respondent put in appearance and contested the suit on the ground of maintainability, the defendant being a co-operative society and is not an authority under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It was also submitted that the order of dismissal was passed on 16.3.1986 and the plaintiff was required to serve the defendant a notice under Section 79 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961.
The defendant also pleaded estoppel against the plaintiff.
On merits, it was submitted that though the plaintiff had made a complaint that Mahavir Singh had forged his signatures and issued cheque in question but during the departmental inquiry, it was revealed and even admitted by the plaintiff that the cheque was duly signed by him and he had handed over the same to Mahavir Singh before proceeding on leave.
The plaintiff had also admitted during the course of inquiry that he had issued blank cheques to ensure the payment of the fertilizer transportation charges and signing of the blank cheques by him was viewed as a serious lapse on his part and the plaintiff was found guilty and removed from service after a valid inquiry.
4.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether the impugned order is illegal, ultra vires, against rules, principles of natural justice, retaliatory in nature, bad in law, based upon non-existing facts, malicious in law and whether the plaintiff still continues in service of the defendant and is entitled to all benefits as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 3.
Whether the defendants are entitled to special and compensatory costs, if so, how much ?
OPD 4.
Whether the notice under Section 79 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 is required to be served in the present case, if so, effect of non-service ?
OPP 5.
Whether the plaintiff has locus standi to file this suit ?
OPP 6.
Whether the plaintiff is stopped by his act and conduct from filing this suit ?
OPD 7.
Whether the plaint is vague, incomplete and evasive, if so, its effect ?
OPD 8.
Relief.
The trial Court had decided issues No. 1, 2, 4 and 5 against the plaintiff and the suit was held to be bad on account of plaintiff's failing to serve notice under Section 79 of the Co-operative Societies Act.
Issues No. 3, 6 and 7 were decided against the defendant, with the result that the suit was dismissed.
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court, the plaintiff went up in appeal.
Findings in relation to all the issues except issues No. 2 and 4 were upheld.
However, in view of the fact that the findings on other issues were upheld, the appeal was dismissed.
6.
Still not satisfied, the appellant has come up in appeal in this Court.
7.
The short point, on which the interference is being sought for by the plaintiff-appellant is the effect of the fact that Shri Mahavir Singh, Branch Manager has been given the lesser punishment than the appellant as but for him no irregularity may have been attributed to the appellant.
I have carefully considered the arguments advanced by the counsel for the appellant.
8.
While there is no dispute that but for the lapse on the part of the Branch Manager, the default of the appellant may have remained unnoticed, yet the failure on his part to observe the normal precautions required of Accountant constitutes a lapse which ultimately lead to serious consequences.
An Accountant incharge of operating the Bank accounts is not supposed to be signing blank cheques to be used by his colleagues for making payment in his absence and but for this lapse the Manager may not even had the opportunity to hand over the cheques to the contractors.
No doubt, the punishment imposed upon the appellant may be harsh when compared to the one that was inflicted on the Manager but this variance by itself would not constitute a substantial question of law, which would entitle the appellant to an order that would impinge upon the undisputed discretion of the Management to impose whatever penalty it wants to inflict on an employee found guilty of misconduct during the departmental proceedings.
The appellant, who was working as an Accountant and, therefore, was admittedly responsible for operating the Bank accounts of the defendant-society, had left signed cheques in favour of the Contractors, which were handed over to them by the Branch Manager at a time when no payment was required to be made.
Such a conduct of a person responsible for operating the accounts constitutes a serious lapse which has rightly not been condoned.
The extent of penalty imposed upon the petitioner by the Disciplinary Authority cannot be made the subject matter of Judicial scrutiny.
Consequently, there is no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.