Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of promotion to the post of Laboratory Attendant from the date his juniors were promoted.
The petitioner served a legal notice upon the respondent on 25th March, 1999, Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, claiming the same relief.
This request of the petitioner was rejected by the respondent resulting in filing of the present writ petition.
2.
The request of the petitioner was declined on the ground that petitioner had not acquired the essential eligible qualification of Matric prescribed under the Rules and as respondent No. 4 acquired the said qualification prior to the petitioner, as such he was promoted earlier to the petitioner.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the controversy in the present case is squarely covered by a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in the case of Sakur Khan v. The State of Haryana and others being Civil Writ Petition No. 14693 of 1995, where the Division Bench of this Court in similar circumstances held as under :-  "As observed above, the petitioner was senior to Shri Idrish in the feeder cadre but Shri Idrish was promoted as Laboratory Attendant simply on the ground that he had obtained eligibility qualifications prior to the petitioner.
We are of the view that the stand of the respondents is not well based.
The petitioner had a right to be considered for promotion when Shri ldrish was promoted as he was senior to Shri Idrish and was duly qualified for the post of Laboratory Attendant.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to Laboratory Attendant with effect from the date Shri Idrish was promoted as such.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of three months of the receipt of a copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is promoted from the date with effect from when Shri Idrish was promoted as Laboratory Attendant, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits."
4.
We have no reason to take a view different than the one expressed by a Division Bench of this Court in the aforesaid case and, therefore, we dispose of this writ petition with the direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner in the light of the above judgment and pass appropriate order granting consequential benefits, notional or otherwise, to the petitioner from the date his juniors were promoted within a period of four months from the date the certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
Petition allowed.