SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the respondent-department on 1561987.
Next promotion is to the post of Senior Assistant.
The petitioner belongs to the reserve category of Scheduled Caste.
Mr. Sharma has vehemently argued that at that time no Scheduled Caste employee was eligible to be promoted on the post of Senior Assistant.
Therefore, on 3061992, one Rajinder Parshad belonging to the general category was promoted on the post of Senior Assistant.
However, a condition was made in his order of promotion that he shall have to make way for a qualified Scheduled Caste candidate as and when he becomes available.
The petitioner passed the Assistant Grade Examination on 6.6.1993.
He, therefore, made a representation to the respondents for promotion on the reserved post.
Consequently, the petitioner was promoted on 331994 and Rajinder Parshad was directed to be reverted to the original post.
These orders are attached with the writ petition as Annexures P-3 and P-4, both dated 331994.
Rajinder Parshad filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3335 of 1994 challenging the order of reversion.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 3, it was categorically stated that the petitioner therein had been promoted against a vacancy reserved for Scheduled Caste and, therefore, Rajinder Parshad had no claim to the post.
Consequently, the writ petition was dismissed.
2.
In the meantime, controversy with regard to the passing of the Assistant Grade Examination, which was pending, ultimately was settled by Supreme Court in 1999(4) SCT 80 (SC) : Civil Appeal No. 11660 of 1995, Saroj Rani and another v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 24.8.1999.
In accordance with the said decision, the vacancies were to be filled as per directions given which were as follows :-  "(1) All vacancies on the post of Assistants/Senior Assistants prior to 21st January, 1991 are to be filled up by those who qualified by passing the examination and exemptees would have no claim on such vacancies.
(2) All vacancies after 21st January, 1991 shall be filled in the ratio of 70 per cent and 30 per cent between exemptees and qualifiers in the examination, respectively, for each year in question till all the existing qualifiers are absorbed.
(3) All promotions or reversions made has to be readjusted within the aforesaid framework, irrespective of any interim orders then in force."
Written statement has been filed.
It has been stated that in view of the directions given by the Supreme Court, the post of the petitioner falls under 70% of exemptees.
The petitioner having joined on 1561987, he would not fulfil the criteria of requisite length of service of 18 years.
Consequently, the petitioner was reverted and respondent No. 5 has been promoted.
3.
In reply to para 16 of the writ petition, it has been categorically stated that while implementing the Supreme Court order, the reversions/promotions were made keeping in view the quota of reservation.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition which is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.