GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioners, who possess Post Graduate Degrees in Master of Business Economics (for short, `MBE'), are entitled to a declaration of having successfully passed National Education Test (for short, `NET') in the subject of `Management' conducted by University Grants Commission (for short `UGC') is the question which arises for determination in these petitions.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the afore-mentioned question, we may briefly notice the relevant facts.
Miss Shalu Kakkar (petitioner in C.W.P.
6620 of 2002) passed MBE from Guru Jambeshwar University, Hisar (respondent No. 2) in 1998 by securing 64% marks.
In pursuance of the notification issued by the UGC which was published in `Employment News' dated 18th to 24th September, 1999, she submitted an application for appearing in NET in the subject of Management.
On the basis of admission card Annnexure P.3 issued by Co- ordinator (NET), Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, she appeared in the test held on 26121999 and qualified the same.
However, the UGC refused to issue the certificate to this effect on the ground that she does not possess Post Graduate Degree in Management.
The petitioner has challenged the decision of the UGC by describing it as arbitrary and violative of her fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Miss Renu Bala and Shri Girdhar Gopal (petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 11113 of 2002) passed MBE from Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra by securing 662 and 729% marks respectively.
They applied for NET in the subject of Management in pursuance of notification dated 11/1732000 issued by the UGC for holding test for Junior Fellowship and eligibility for Lecturership.
They appeared in the test held on 272000 and qualified the same but were denied certificate by the UGC on the ground that they do not have Post Graduate Degree in the subject of Management.
They have challenged the decision of the University on grounds similar to those taken by Miss Shalu Kakkar.
4.
In the written statements filed on behalf of Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, it has been averred that the petitioners were not entitled to appear in NET in the subject of Management because they have passed post graduation in MBE.
It has been further averred that subject of Economics with Code No. 1 was separately advertised by the UGC and the petitioners could have applied for NET only in that subject and not in the subject of management.
5.
Respondent No. 1 has not filed reply in either of the petitions.
6.
Shri RS Longia invited our attention to the syllabi of the Post Graduate Course in MBE and letter dated 25111999 sent by the Co-ordinator, UGC (NET), Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra to the Joint Secretary, UGC to show that subject of Management is an allied subject to MBE and argued that the decision of the UGC not to issue the certificate tot the petitioners should be declared illegal and arbitrary and it may be directed to issue the required certificates.
In support of his argument, Shri Longia relied on the judgment of the Single Bench in C.W.P.
No. 17931 of 1999 - Manbir Singh Gill v. University Grants Commission and another, decided on 1682001.
7.
Shri SK Sharma, counsel for respondent No. 1 and Shri Samir Rathore, counsel for respondent No. 2 candidly and fairly admitted that the issue raised in these petitions is identical to the one raised in C.W.P.
No. 17913 of 1999 but argued that the UGC did not commit any illegality by refusing to issue certificate to the petitioners because they were not eligible to appear in NET in the subject of Management.
They further argued that the view taken by the learned Single Judge in the case of Manbir Singh Gill and others requires re-consideration.
Shri Sharma then pointed out that Economics is an independent subject notified by the UGC and the petitioners could have appeared in the test only in that subject and not in the subject of Management.
8.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
MBE course offered by Guru Jambeshwar University is divided into four semesters and consists of the following :  "Master In Business Economics (MBE) Semester I Semester II Code Course Nomenclature Code Course Nomenclature 101 Micro Economic Analysis 201 Macro Economics Analysis & Policy.
102 Business Statistics 202 Operation Research 103 Business Finance & Accounting 203 Marketing Management 104 Principles of Management & Organisation Behaviour 204 Business Environment 105 Data Processing & Computer Programming 205 Computer applications in Business 106 Viva Voce 206 Training Report & Viva Voce 107 Seminars 207 Seminars.
Semester III Semester IV Code Course Nomenclature Code Course Nomenclature 301 International Trade & Finance 401 Project Planning and Appraisal 302 Econometrics 303 Forecasting & Business Planning 402 Cost & Management Accounting  304 Viva Voce 403 Viva Voce 305 Seminars Specialisation Area : Group I : Marketing Business Finance (Any 3 of the following).
301 Marketing Planning & Strategy Management 404 Corporate Finance Decision Analysis.
312 Advertising & Sales Promotion  Group 2 : Human Resource Development and Management 405 Security Analysis  and Portfolio.
321 Labour Economics and Industrial Relations 406 Foreign Exchange Management 407 Indian Financial System 322 Personnel Management 408 Multinational Financial Management Group 3 : Agri.
Business 409 Project.
331 International Agri-Business Environment 332 Agri-Business in India Group 4 : General Business Area 341 Export Marketing 342 Economics of Human Resource Development 343 International Trade Procedures and Documentation."
Likewise, MBE course offered by Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra is also divided into four semesters, the details of which are given below :  "Master in Business Economics (MBE) Semester I Semester II Code Course Nomenclature Code Course Nomenclature 101 Micro Economic Analysis 201 Macro Economics Analysis & Policy.
102 Business Statistics 202 Operation Research 103 Business Finance & Accounting 203 Marketing Management 104 Principles of Management & Organisation Behaviour 204 Business Environment 105 Data Processing & Computer Programming 205 Computer applications in Business 106 Viva Voce 206 Training Report & Viva Voce 107 Seminars 207 Seminars.
Semester III Semester IV Code Course Nomenclature Code Course Nomenclature 301 International Trade & Finance 401 Project Planning and Appraisal 302 Econometrics 303 Forecasting & Business Planning 402 Cost & Management Accounting 304 Viva Voce 403 Viva Voce 305 Seminars Specialisation Area : Group 1 : Marketing Business Finance (Any 3 of the following).
301 Marketing Planning & Stratey Management 404 Corporate Finance Decision Analysis.
312 Advertising & Sales Promotion 405 Security Analysis and Portfolio.
Ground 2 : Human Resource Development and Management 321 Labour Economics and Industrial Relations 406 Foreign Exchange Management 407 Indian Financial System.
322 Personnel Management 408 Multinational Financial Management Group 3 : Agri Business 331 International Agri-Business Environment 332 Agri-Business in India  Group 4 : General Business Area 341 Export Marketing 342 Economics of Human Resource Development 343 International Trade Procedures and Documentation."
A cursory look at the contents of the MBE courses offered by the two Universities shows that principles of Management and Organisation Behaviour, Marketing Management, Marketing Planning and Strategic Management, Labour Economics and Industrial Relations, Foreign Exchange Management, Indian Financial System and Multinational Financial Management are integral part thereof.
Rather, they are core subjects of the course and this appears to be the reason why the petitioners were allowed to appear in NET in the subject of management in the backdrop of letter dated 25111999 written by Co-ordinator, UGC (NET) to the Joint Secretary, UGC.
9.
In Manbir Singh Gill's case (supra), the petitioners had averred that a number of candidates possessing Post Graduate Degree in MBE were allowed to appear in NET in the subject of Management.
This was sought to be explained by the UGC by being described as a case of mistake.
The learned Single Judge rejected the theory of mistake by observing that counsel appearing for the UGC could not offer any tangible explanation for the so-called mistake.
He further held that the so-called decision taken by the Expert Committee does not contain any discernible reason for not treating a candidate possessing Post Graduate Degree of MBE eligible for appearing in NET in the subject of Management.
Some of the observations recorded by the learned Single Judge, with whom we are inclined to agree, are extracted below :  "I am of the considered opinion that the perusal and comparison of the paper which has been defined as Subject Code 17-Management with the subjects which have been taught in MBE course brings them around in close proximity, whereas, Subject Code 01-Economics is nowhere near the subjects contained in MBE course.
Thus, UGC has very correctly granted permission to the candidates previously, whose names have been disclosed in para 14, for appearing in Subject Code-17-Management and not in Subject Code 01-Economics.
It cannot be accepted as justifiable mistake by the respondents.
Perhaps ambiguity did weigh in the minds of the respondents but UGC acted correctly by giving permission.
The correct approach is that the candidate who are situated like petitioners should be allowed to appear in Subject Code 17- Management and not Subject Code 01-Economics.
I have also perused the report submitted by the Committee.
It is strange that instead of comparing the ambit and scope of the papers offered in Management Course and MBE course, reliance has been placed upon the contents of the course and the committee has further opined in respect of the validity of the points raised by the petitioners, despite the fact that they are subjudice before this Court.
The report of the Committee is absolutely vague and that the purpose for which the indulgence was given by the admitting Bench, has not been explained at all, the Committee has not been able to examine the aspect as to how and why the earlier students with MBE course had been allowed to appear in Subject Code 17-Management, the report is not at all tenable and I am afraid, is of no help to this Court for opining the compatibility of the appears studied by the students in Code 17-Management and MBE course.
The perusal of the papers shows that except one paper, all other papers are common, whereas the papers spelt out in subject Code 01-Economics not even a single paper is common.
On the face of it, opinion of Expert Committee deserves to be ignored and rejected."
10.
It is true that the Court should give respect to the opinions expressed by the academicians and should not substitute its judgment for that of the academic bodies - University of Mysore v. Govinda Rao, AIR 1965 SC 491, but as observed in JP Kulshreshtha v. Allahabad University, AIR 1980 SC 2141, respect to an authority should not amount to worshipping it unquestioningly.
11.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the petitioners were entitled to appear in NET in the subject of Management and Co-ordinator (NET), Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra did not commit any illegality or mistake by allowing them to appear in the test.
We further hold that the decision of the UGC not to issue certificates to the petitioners is illegal and unjustified.
12.
Hence, the writ petitions are allowed.
It is declared that the petitioners have qualified NET in the subject of Management held in 2000-2001.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to issue the required certificate to the petitioners within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Petitions allowed.