Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of CWP No. 9390 of 2001 (Sant Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others) and CWP No. 491 of 2002 (Ex. Constable Jaibir Singh v. State of Haryana and others), as common question of facts and law are involved therein.
For the sake of convenience, facts are taken from CWP No. 9390 of 2001.
2.
Petitioners have approached this Court through a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the recruitment of Constables in District Bhiwani namely private respondents No. 5 to 10 and also for quashing the orders passed by the Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar, which have been appended as Annexure P-12 with the petition and also for issuance of directions to the respondents to consider to appoint the petitioners who are put in a waiting list No. 3, 4 and 5, respectively as Constables.
The case of the petitioners is that in a recruitment process carried out for the recruitment of Constables in District Bhiwani, they had appeared before the Selection Board.
The private respondents No. 5 to 10 had also participated in the aforesaid selection process.
Whereas the petitioners were allotted the waiting list No. 3, 4 and 5, respectively, the aforesaid private respondents No. 5 to 10 were finally selected and were appointed as Constables.
The petitioners have averred in the petition that while applying for the aforesaid selection a candidate was required to fill up a form.
A sample of the aforesaid application form has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the petition.
As per the aforesaid form, in Column No. 9 a query was required to be answered as to whether the incumbent had never been arrested in any case and if yes, candidate was required to give full details of that.
Similarly, in column No. 13, an applicant was required to detail out whether he had ever been arrested and whether he had ever been prosecuted and whether any case was pending against him in a Court of law or with police at the time of filing of the attestation form.
If answer to any one of the aforesaid queries was in the affirmative then full particulars of the aforesaid query were required to be given.
3.
The petitioner has averred that all the selected candidates, namely respondents No. 5 to 10, had criminal cases pending against them.
The details of the aforesaid criminal cases have been tabulated and have been attached as Annexure P-5 with the petition.
On the strength of the aforesaid pendency of the criminal cases against the aforesaid respondents, petitioners have specifically averred that none of the aforesaid respondents had ever disclosed the pendency of the aforesaid criminal case against them and, therefore, in terms of Clauses No. 4 and 8 of the advertisement, if any information which was furnished by the candidate was found to be incorrect, then his candidature was liable to be cancelled.
The petitioners have averred that since the private respondents had furnished incorrect details, therefore, their candidature itself was liable to be cancelled and in any case the selection of the aforesaid candidates was totally unsustainable and was rather liable to be quashed.
4.
A notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondents have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents No. 1 to 4.
With regard to the averments made in the writ petition with regard to the pendency of the criminal cases against the candidates who had been selected, it has been averred that the mere registration of criminal case against a selected person was not a sufficient ground prescribed under any rule or instructions for denying him an appointment.
While regard to respondent No. 10 it has been stated that he had since been acquitted even before joining pursuant to his selection.
However, the respondents are silent with regard to the averment made by the petitioners regarding the non-disclosure of the material facts in the application form.
5.
We have heard Sh. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners and Sh. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana and with their assistance have also gone through the record.
6.
Sh. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the respondents have not at all adverted to the plea of non-disclosure of essential facts by the respondents which have been specifically averred by the petitioners in the writ petition.
It has further been submitted that in fact there is no denial by the respondents with regard to the pendency of the criminal cases against the private respondents No. 5 to 10, which have been detailed out by the petitioners in Annexure P-5.
Shri Balhara has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP 2421 of 2001, decided on July 8, 2002 (Sandeep Kumar v. State of Haryana and others) to support his contention that since respondents No. 5 to 10 had violated the mandatory Clause 8 of the general instructions with regard to the selection process and the filling up of the application form by the candidates, therefore, the candidature of the aforesaid respondents was liable to be cancelled.
Under these circumstances, there was no question of selecting the aforesaid candidates at all.
7.
On the other hand, Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana submits that the mere pendency of a criminal case could not be treated to be any dis-qualification for the selection.
It has further been pointed out that respondent No. 10 has since been acquitted by the criminal Court even prior to his joining in pursuance of the selection process.
8.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and find ourselves in agreement to the contention raised by Shri IS Balhara, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners.
It is not a question as to whether the aforesaid private respondents No. 6 to 10 were actually under any disqualification because of the pendency of the criminal cases against them, but the real question is as to whether the aforesaid respondents had furnished the correct information as required to be given by them in Columns No. 9 and 13, respectively of the application forms.
The averments made by the petitioners with regard to the pendency of the criminal cases and the non-disclosure of the aforesaid fact by the aforesaid respondents have not been denied by the respondents at all.
In this view of the matter, the controversy in question stands fully concluded by the judgment of the Division Bench in Sandeep Kumar's case (supra).
In Sandeep Kumar's case (supra), the Division Bench had noticed clause 4 and clause 8, respectively, of the aforesaid advertisement with regard to Constables in Haryana Police.
For the sake of convenience, we may notice the aforesaid two clauses in the present order as well :-  "(4) The application may be got typed in the prescribed proforma and filled up by the candidate in capital letters.
Incomplete and unsigned forms will be rejected.
(8) If any, information furnished by the candidate is found to be incorrect at any state, his candidate is liable to be cancelled."
9.
Since the private respondents while filling the application form submitted by them had violated the clause 8 of the general instructions, therefore, their candidature was clearly liable to be cancelled.
The plea that mere pendency of the criminal cases would not result into any disqualification or that subsequent acquittal of respondent No. 10 could not be advanced as a justification to furnish incorrect information at the time of filling up of the proforma.
10.
Under these circumstances, we have no hesitation in quashing selection of respondents No. 5 to 10 and issuing the directions that the petitioners would be recruited against the aforesaid posts, having become so available, subject to their fulfilling all other conditions, suitability and physical fitness.
This exercise be completed within a period of two months from the date of the receipt of a certified copy of the order.
There shall be no order, as to costs.