Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has filed this petition with the prayer that the order dated July 11, 1996 by which she was informed regarding the termination of her services as a Junior Scale Stenographer be quashed.
The petitioner alleges that she had been appointed on April 24, 1995 for a period of 89 days.
On May 13, 1996 she had given birth to a baby.
She had applied for maternity leave.
Instead of granting leave, the respondents had terminated her services.
She alleges that an application for the grant of maternity leave was submitted by her on July 26, 1996.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been initially appointed in the District Consumer Forum at Ropar on ad hoc basic.
Her services were terminated on February 29, 1996.
She had joined in the District Forum at Fatehgarh Sahib on April 16, 1996.
At that time the petitioner was pregnant for 6 months.
In accordance with the Government instructions, she could not have been appointed.
In any event, at the expiry of the period of 89 days no extension in service was given to her.
There was, thus, no illegality.
The action was in strict conformity with the terms of appointment.
3.
It has been further averred that the petitioner was not qualified for appointment to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer as she was not a Graduate.
The qualifications had been laid down by the State Commission by the Instructions issued on January 24, 1996.
Since the petitioner was not qualified for appointment and she had not passed the test in shorthand, she had no right to the post.
Still further, the respondents have pointed out that the petitioner had filed a Civil Suit No. 230 of 1999 in the Court of Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Ropar.
She had claimed her salary for the period from March 1, 1996 to April 15, 1996.
This suit had been filed in April 1999.
At that time, the petitioner was aware of the order dated July 11, 1996 by which her services had been terminated.
The cause of action, if any, had accrued to her at that time.
She had not challenged the order of termination.
Thus, by invoking the provisions of Order 2, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the respondents maintain that the petition is not maintainable.
Besides all this, it has also been pointed out that the order of termination was passed on July 11, 1996.
The petitioner had submitted a representation in September 1996.
This representation was rejected by the State Commission and the decision was conveyed to her vide letter dated May 2, 1997.
The writ petition has been filed by the petitioner after a long delay in May 1999.
On this basis, the respondents maintain that the writ petition is wholly incompetent and should be dismissed.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Mr. Duggal, appearing for the petitioner, contends that the action of the respondents in not sanctioning the maternity leave was arbitrary and illegal.
Thus, even the order of termination cannot be sustained.
The claim as made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
Admittedly the petitioner had been appointed for a period of 89 days only.
This appointment was not made through any process of selection.
No applications are shown to have been invited.
There is nothing to indicate that the petitioner's name had even been sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
In any event, the appointment being for 89 days only the petitioner had no right to continue beyond that period.
Thus, no fault can be found with the action of the respondents in not extending the petitioner's services after the expiry of 89 days.
Thus, even if the technical objections as raised on behalf of the respondents are ignored, it is clear that the petitioner has no legitimate cause for grievance which may be remediable through the present petition.
7.
In view of the above, it is really not necessary for us to consider the other aspects of the matter.
However, it deserves to be pointed out that the petitioner is not qualified for the post of Junior Scale Stenographer.
It has been pointed out by the respondents that the State Commission has prescribed the qualifications for the post of Junior Scale Stenographer.
The incumbent has to be a Graduate.
The person should be able to take dictation in shorthand at a speed of 80 words per minute with not more than 8% mistakes while transcribing the script.
The petitioner has not even averred that she fulfils this qualification or that she had appeared in any test.
Still further, the petitioner had filed a suit in April 1999.
A copy of the plaint has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
At the time of filing of this suit the petitioner could have challenged the order regarding the termination of her services.
She did not.
Why ?
There is no explanation.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the impugned order of termination had been conveyed to the petitioner in July 1996.
Her representation had been rejected and the decision had been communicated to her in May 1997.
Despite that, she waited till May 1999 for filing the present petition.
There is an inordinately long delay in approaching the Court.
8.
Mr. Duggal contends that the petitioner was unable to file the writ petition on account of the fact that her relations with her husband were not cordial.
9.
The contention appears to be wholly false.
Admittedly, the petitioner was staying with her husband in the year 1995-96 when she was pregnant.
Thereafter, nothing has been placed on record to show that she was staying away from her husband.
There is no evidence which may even remotely indicate that she had any problem.
In fact, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had filed a civil suit in April 1999.
It was about a month later that she filed the present writ petition.
Still more, the petitioner did not even disclose the fact of her having filed the civil suit in the writ petition.
10.
Taking all the factors into consideration, it is clear that there is no illegality in the impugned order which may warrant interference by this Court.
The petitioner was not qualified for appointment to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer.
She had withheld relevant information from the Court.
The petition is highly belated.
On all these grounds, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
In the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.