Bhawani Singh, CJ.
(Oral) - This writ petition is directed against order of Central Administrative Tribunal, Jabalpur Bench dated September 7, 2000 passed in OA No. 177 of 2000.
2.
Petitioner is son of late Naib Subedar D Thomas Raj who was with respondent Army Corps of EME and died on 20101992 in Command Hospital, Southern Command, Pune due to chronic renal failure with severe anemia at the age of 41, completing service of 22 years.
The deceased left behind wife, applicant and parents dependent on him.
3.
The petitioner alleges that he is qualified to be appointed against Group-D post with the respondents.
As such, he applied for appointment on compassionate ground in 1992, his father having died while in service.
All necessary requirements in support of the claim were furnished to the competent authority.
Surprisingly, after lapse of seven years, respondent did not allow the claim, expressing inability to give him appointment.
4.
Case of respondents is that case of petitioner was considered by the authorities at all levels on the basis of existing policy on the subject.
However, his case could not find place in the merit list within the prescribed quota.
5.
The Tribunal did not consider the claim of petitioner for compassionate appointment, rather it proceeded to hold that deceased left only the applicant, his mother and the parents.
They could depend on the terminal benefits to the tune of Rs. 17,98400, Army Group Insurance Fund of Rs. 22,84600 and mother of applicant was receiving family pension with dearness allowance.
Petitioner feels aggrieved by this order, therefore, it has been challenged through this writ petition.
6.
Shri KS Thakur, learned Counsel for petitioner and Shri RS Patel, learned Senior Standing Counsel for Central Government were heard.
Record perused.
Shri KS Thakur submitted that the petitioner is qualified to be appointed against Group-D post under the respondents as per policy which existed at the time when he became entitled to apply for appointment on compassionate ground.
Learned counsel refers to policy of June 13, 1987 and contends that under this policy, 20% group-D posts can be filled on compassionate ground.
Learned Counsel seeks assistance from Supreme Court decision reported in Smt. Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1989 SC 1976, paragraph 9 of which holds that :  "9.
We consider that it must be stated unequivocally that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such case pending for years.
If there is no suitable post for appointment supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant."
In this case, the petitioner had given application for appointment on the post of L.D.C.
on compassionate ground in November, 1982.
She had then a right to have her case considered for appointment on compassionate ground under the existing Government memorandum.
In January 1983, she passed trade test conducted by DGBR, though there was no reason to make her wait till 1985 when ban on compassionate ground of ladies was imposed.
The plea so raised was rejected and Apex Court issued mandatory direction to the respondents to appoint the petitioner in the post to which she had already qualified.
The Apex Court further directed to appoint her in an appropriate place in Delhi itself within a period of three weeks from the date of order.
7.
Shri RS Patel, learned Counsel for respondents contends that the case of petitioner was considered in the light of policy dated October 9, 1998 under which only 5% vacancies are available for compassionate appointment to Group-D posts.
Since posts were not available, the petitioner could not be appointed.
The question which falls for consideration is whether the case of petitioner should be considered on the basis of policy dated June 13, 1987 or policy issued on October 9, 1998.
8.
Giving consideration to the matter, we are of considered opinion that case of the petitioner should have been considered under the policy of June 13, 1987.
Father of petitioner died on October 29, 1992.
Same year, the petitioner applied for appointment on compassionate ground against class IV post.
There is no dispute that he was eligible at that time.
He and his mother furnished material sought by the respondents in support of the claim.
Therefore, the respondents should not have delayed consideration of the claim for seven years.
The fault was on the part of respondents and not of the petitioner.
The case of petitioner should have been considered on the basis of requirements under policy dated June 13, 1987 and not on the basis of later policy of October 9, 1998 and the decision so arrived is liable to be set aside.
9.
Learned counsel for respondents brought decisions in the cases of State of Haryana v. Rani Devi, 1996(4) SCT 63 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2445, Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd v. Smt. A Radhika Thirumalai, 1997(1) SCT 329 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 123, Life Insurance Corporation v. Asha Ramchandra Ambekar, 1995(4) SCT 298 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 2148 and Himachal Road Transport Corporation v. Dinesh Kumar, 1996(4) SCT 389 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2226 to our notice.
Perusal of these decisions shows that none of them runs contrary to the submissions advanced by the petitioner.
The Apex Court has in some cases issued mandatory directions for appointment, one such case is Smt. Sushma Gosain (supra).
We hold that the petitioner is entitled to be considered and appointed on compassionate ground for reasons stated in the preceding part of this judgment.
Having said so, the respondents have to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment against Group-D post to which he was eligible on the basis of policy dated June 13, 1987.
10.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and order of Central Administrative Tribunal dated September 7, 2000 is set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground against Group-D post within a period of two months.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Writ Petition allowed.