TS Doabia, J - How should the competitive examination be devised ?
This question was posed and answered in case Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan and others, AIR 1981 SC 1777.
What was said by the Kothari Committee on Recruitment Policy and Selection Methods in the report was quoted.
This is being quoted again :  "A system of recruitment almost totally dependent on assessment of a person's academic knowledge and skills, as distinct from ability to deal with pressing problems of economic and social development with people, and with novel situations can not reserve the need of today, much less of tomorrow..... We venture to suggest that our recruitment procedures should be such that we can select candidates who can not only assimilate knowledge and sift material to understand the ramifications of a situation or a problem but have the potential to develop an original or innovative approach to the solution of problems."
It is now well recognised that while a written examination assesses a candidate's knowledge and intellectual ability, an interview test is valuable to assess a candidate's overall intellectual and personal qualities.
While a written examination has certain distinct advantages over the interview test there are yet no written tests which can evaluate a candidate's initiative, alterness, resourcefulness, dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for clear and logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead intellectual and moral integrity.
Some of these qualities may be evaluated, perhaps with some degree of error, by an interview test, much depending on the constitution of the interview Board.
O Glenn Stahl in his Public Personnel Administration points out :-  "Any form of written test possesses certain administrative advantages over the oral and performance types.
The written form is much easier and cheaper to administer.
It can be given to a large number of individuals at the same time, thus conserving the time of the examiners.
As a general rule it is easier to evaluate objectively, and the technical proficiency demanded in rating is usually, although not always, less -  The oral test has long served as a basic selection tool in private employment but has been more slowly accepted in the public field.
The conservatism arises out of three considerations : (1) the difficulty of developing valid and reliable oral tests; (2) the difficulty of securing a reviewable record of an oral test; and (3) public suspicion of the oral as a channel for the exertion of political influence through the destruction of anonymity.
Despite these acknowledged disadvantages, however, orals have been used increasingly in public personnel testing and have become important instruments wherever tests of personal attributes are considered essential.
As we have noted no satisfactorily written tests have yet been devised for measuring such personal characteristics as initiative, ingenuity and ability to elicit cooperation, many of which are of prime importance.
When properly employed, the oral test today deserves a place in the battery used by the technical examiner....
The general principle is that resort should never be had to an oral if the relevant factors to be tested can be measured at some other point in the examining process.
The reason is that the reliability of the oral, even under the best of conditions, tends to be lower than that of the well designed written test.
The oral test should be confined, then to the evaluation of relevant traits which cannot be measured in any other way."
In the United Nations Hand Book on Civil Services Laws and Practice it is said :  "...........the written papers permit an assessment of culture and intellectual competence.
The interview permits an assessment of qualities of character which written papers ignore; it attempts to assess the man himself and not his intellectual abilities."
2.
The relevancy of the written examination and the interview were commended upon.
It was observed that the written examination assesses the man's intellect and the interview test the man himself and `the twain shall meet' for a proper selection.
What was said by Prof. O Glenn Stahl in his Public Personnel Administration, was also taken note of for coming to the above conclusion.
3.
In the present case the issue is slightly different but above observations are not alien to the issue.
Under Rule 13(ii) of the J&K Subordinate Services Recruitment Rules, 1992, a system of short listing has been provided.
These Rules authorises the Board to restrict the number of applicants to be admitted to oral or written test to a maximum of five times the number of vacancies after doing the preliminary screening on the basis of marks obtained in the qualifying examination and such other criteria as the Board deem fit.
Candidates possessing degree of graduation with 73-90% and above, the graduate candidates with LLB/Post Graduation with 6676% marks passed graduation and post graduation degree with LL.B.
with 5961% marks and above have been called upon to appear in the interview.
Their intellect having already been assessed in the written examination referred to above, they are now to exhibit the "man" within as pointed out by the Supreme Court in Lila Dhar's case (supra).
The interview test is valuable to assess a candidate's overall intellectual and personal qualities.
It is this short listing which is subject-matter of challenge in this petition and other petitions enumerated in the schedule appended to this order.
4.
The facts in brief be noticed.
In pursuance to the notification issued vide No. 3 of 1997 dated 2941997, 51 posts of Inspector Excise and Sales Tax were notified.
The basic qualification required was graduation.
It was further provided that the selected candidates shall have to qualify the departmental examination of the standard of Inspectors through Public Service Commission, during the period of probation.
They have been short listed as per the criteria indicated above.
It is this criteria which is subject-matter of challenge in this petition.
6.
If a large number of applicants apply for a job then it is permissible for the selecting authority to screen the candidates at the very threshold of the process of selection by prescribing higher eligibility qualification to narrow down the field of selection.
The precise question stands answered by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar Potdar, 1995(1) SCT 50.
It was observed that the sole purpose of holding interview is to search and select the best among the applicants.
It would be impossible to carry out a satisfactory viva-voce test if large number of candidates are interviewed.
A paragraph from the book of Harman Finer, "Theory and Practice of Modern Government" was quoted in the case of Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission (supra).
This is being quoted again :  6.
"Herman Finer in his book, "Theory and Practice of Modern Government" at page 779 says :-  "If we really care about the efficiency of the civil service as an instrument of Government, rather than as heaven sent opportunity to find careers for our brilliant students, these principles should be adopted.
The interview should last at least half an hour on each of two separate occasions.
It should be almost entirely devoted to a discussion ranging over the academic interests of the candidate as shown in his examination syllabus and a short verbal report could be required on such subject, the scope of which would be announced at the interview."
Kothari Committee's report was also referred to.
The relevant extract which deals with the precise problem is quoted and is being quoted again :  "The number of candidates to be called for interview, in order of the total marks in written papers, should not exceed, we think, twice the number of vacancies to be filled.........." 7.
In the above background it was observed that if some system for short listing is adopted then this process shall not amount to altering or substituting the eligibility criteria given in the statutory rules or prospectus.
It was observed that this process of short-listing is part of process of selection.
8.
This question was again considered in case Union of India v. T Sundaram, 1997(2) SCT 810.
The view expressed in the Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission's case (supra) was noticed and relied upon.
The earlier decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Govt. of Andhra Pradesh v. P Dalip Kumar and another, 1993(2) SCT 432 was also noticed.
In the above case what the Supreme Court observed was that it was open to the recruiting agency to screen candidates due for consideration as the threshold of the process of selection by prescribing higher eligibility qualification and if this is done then this would not be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
In the face of the afore-mentioned judicial pronouncements it cannot be said that the method adopted by the respondent-Board is in any way violative of Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
This criteria has been adopted universally.
Only candidates possessing particular percentage of marks are to be called for interview.
This calculation has been done on mathematical basis.
There is no possibility of pick and choose.
The criteria adopted is in accordance with law.
The challenge to the criteria is thus found to be without any basis.
10.
So far as the question vis-a-vis not making any provision for handicapped persons is concerned, this aspect of the matter has been considered in detail in OWP No. 1129 of 1998 decided on 1151999.
In the afore-mentioned writ petition it has been observed that in view of the statutory requirement contained in the State Act reservations have to be made for handicapped persons.
Whatever has been said in the afore-mentioned writ petition would be taken note of by the Board.
A post would be reserved accordingly.
Otherwise there is no merit in this writ petition.
This writ petition and the connected writ petitions enumerated to the schedule appended are accordingly dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.