MM Kumar, J - This case presents a classical illustration as to how the persons belonging to creamy layer of the backward classes could defeat the rights of those who in fact belong to that class.
The controversy raised in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is whether the petitioner could be considered to be adopted son of his father's brother on the basis of adoption deed dated 2411999 (Annexure P.9) which is registered with the registering authority on 12102000 (Annexure P.5).
2.
Claiming that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for admission to MBBS Course for the session 2001 on the basis of income of his adopted father, it has been averred that the income of his adopted father is less than Rs. 32,000/- per year as per the certificate issued by the Tehsildar on 1372001.
It is further asserted that Tehsildar is the designated authority for the purposes of issuing such a certificate and that adoption was effected on 2411999 at Gurdawara Singh Sabha, Golden Avenue, Jalandhar.
A certificate dated 8102001 (Annexure P.10) issued by Gurdawara Singh Sabha, Golden Avenue, Jalandhar is relied upon for this purpose.
The adoption was registered on 12102000.
The admissions to the MBBS Course for the session 2001 was to be made in July/August, 2001.
The candidature of the petitioner was rejected by respondent No. 4 on account of discrepancies noticed in the certificate with regard to father's name and also on the ground that (of) the adoption has been resorted to in order to gain eligibility because the income of the natural father of the petitioner is more than Rs. 1 lac and that brother of the father of the petitioner is Rs. 32,000/- who is the adoptive father.
It is pertinent to mention that the father of the petitioner has been working on the post of Master in the school cadre of the respondent-State.
3.
The case set up by the respondents in their written statement is that a doubt has arisen about the eligibility of the petitioner and the genuineness of the adoption deed under the category of backward class candidate.
According to respondent No. 4, adoption deed in fact was prepared in October 2001 with the object of gaining eligibility as the income of the natural father of the petitioner was over Rs. 1 lac.
It is admitted case of the parties had the petitioner continued to use the name of his natural father after 2411999 and that he would have been ineligible to be considered under the category of backward class candidate had he not been adopted.
It is further admitted that the natural father of the petitioner has been working on the post of Master and his income is more than Rs. 1 lac per year.
However, the assertion of the respondents is that in order to circumvent the criteria of admission and to gain eligibility, the story of adoption has been concocted by the petitioner.
4.
Ms. Anu Chatrath, Advocate for the petitioner has made two fold submissions.
According to her the date of registration of the deed is not decisive because it would take effect from the date of execution and not from the date it is registered.
For this proposition, the learned Counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case Gurbax Singh v. Kartar Singh and others, 2002(3) R.C.R.
(Civil) 202 : 2002(2) SCC 611.
Her other submission is that income of the adopted father has to be reckoned for the purposes of determination of his eligibility in the backward class category.
She has further argued that the Counselling Committee has no jurisdiction whatsoever to doubt about the genuineness of the certificate Annexure P6 issued by the Tehsildar.
5.
Shri Atul Nehra, Advocate, appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 4 has pointed out that if an attempt like the one made by the petitioner is allowed to succeed then the genuine backward class candidates would suffer a severe blow and the purpose of reservation would be defeated because the person whose income is more than rupees one lac would be replaced by a person who has income less than rupees one lac like the petitioner merely because they could circumvent the criteria by concocting the story of adoption.
According to the learned Counsel such an attempt should be discouraged.
Pointing out that there are material contradictions in the adoption deed as well as in the certificate Annexure P2, the learned Counsel has argued that the registration was effected only when it was realised that the admission has to be made in the course nine months later.
Therefore, the learned Counsel has submitted that the suspicion of the respondent is well founded and the petition deserves to dismissed.
6.
I have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the parties and am of the view that the petitioner who has enjoyed all the benefits of affluence under the natural father has adopted a novel method of circumventing the criteria laid down in the prospectus in order to become eligible under the category of backward class candidates.
The certificate Annexure P6 issued by the Tehsildar proceeds on the assumption of the income of the adopted father.
A tehsildar is not competent to go into the question whether the adoption was valid or not and he has certified only on the basis of the facts presented to him and verified by him.
The adoption deed dated 2411999 and the letter issued by the Gurdawara Singh Sabha on 28102001 also would not inspire confidence because the letter issued by the Gurdawara Singh Sabha has been issued at the time when the adoption deed was to be registered.
Moreover, the certificate issued by the Central Board of Secondary Education on 761999 would reveal that the name of the father of the petitioner-Sandeep Singh is recorded as Kulwant Singh i.e. the natural father.
If the adoption deed has been executed on 2411999 then there was no reason for the Central Board of Secondary Education to record the name of the natural father.
It would have certainly recorded the name of his adopted father i.e. Gurmej Singh in the certificate issued on 761999.
Therefore, the documents dated 2411999 (Annexure P.9) showing the execution of adoption deed and certificate issued by Gurdawara Singh Sabha, Golden Avenue, Jalandhar on 8102001 certifying the adoption deed dated 2411999 are self-serving documents and can be prepared by anyone.
Therefore, these documents cannot be relied upon the other documents, namely, the adoption deed has been registered on 12102000 which could also not be much help to the petitioner because the basis of this document is the adoption deed dated 2411999.
7.
Moreover, the date of birth of the petitioner as recorded in Annexure P.1 is 1791984.
Under Section 10 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (for brevity, `the Act') a child more than 15 years of age cannot be taken in adoption.
Section 10 of the Act reads as under :-  "Persons who may be adopted.
-  No person shall be capable of being taken in adoption unless the following conditions are fulfilled, namely :- (i) he or she is a Hindu; (ii) he or he has not already been adopted; (iii) he or she has not been married, unless there is a custom or usage applicable to the parties which permits persons who are married being taken in adoption; (iv) he or she has not completed the age of fifteen years unless there is a custom or usage applicable to the parties which permits persons who have completed the age of fifteen years being taken in adoption."
Although, the petitioner had not attained the age of fifteen years on 2411999 surrounding documents do not lead to the conclusion that the adoption in fact was made on 2411999.
It appears that the adoption was made after the age of fifteen years ie why on 761999 the Central Board has recorded the name of the natural father instead of adopted father.
8.
Even otherwise, using the crutches of the religion with the object of defeating legitimate rights of others can hardly be given judicial approval.
In cases where a Hindu husband has embraced Islam to enter a bigamous marriage without having his first marriage dissolved under law has been dis-approved by the Supreme Court.
In Sarla Mudgal (Smt.), President, Kalyani and others v. Union of India and others, 1995(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 518 : 1995(3) SCC 635 their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "The problem with which these appeals are concerned is that many Hindus have changed their religion and have become convert to Islam only for purposes of escaping the consequences of bigamy.
For instance, Jitendra Mathur was married to Meena Mathur.
He and another Hindu girl embraced Islam, obviously because Muslim law permits more than one wife and to the extent of four.
But no religion permits deliberate distortions.
Much misapprehension prevails about bigamy in Islam.
To check the misuse many Islamic countries have codified the personal law, "wherein the practice of polygamy has been either totally prohibited or severely restricted.
(Syria, Tunisia, Morocco, Pakistan, Iran, the Islamic Republics of the Soviet Union are some of the Muslim countries to be remembered in this context").
But ours is a Secular Democratic Republic.
Freedom of religion is the core of our culture.
Even the slightest deviation shakes the social fibre.
"But religious practices violative of human rights and dignity and sacerdotal suffocation of essentially civil and material freedoms, are not autonomy but oppression."
9.
Approving the view taken in Sarla Mudgal's case (supra) and condemning the exploitation of the religion their Lordships have made similar observations in Lily Thomas and others v. Union of India and others, 2000(3) R.C.R.
(Civil) 252 : 2000(6) SCC 224.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :-  "Religion is a matter of faith stemming from the depth of the heart and mind.
Religion is a belief which binds the spiritual nature of man to a supernatural being; it is an object of conscientious devotion, faith and pietism.
Devotion in its fullest sense is a consecration and denotes an act of worship.
Faith in the strict sense constitutes firm reliance on the truth of religious doctrines in every system of religion.
Religion, faith or devotion are not easily interchangeable.
If the person feigns to have adopted another religion just for some worldly gain or benefit, it would be religions bigotry.
Looked at from this angle, a person who mockingly adopts another religion where plurality of marriage is permitted so as to renounce the previous marriage and desert the wife, cannot be permitted to take advantage of his exploitation as religion is not a commodity to be exploited.
The institution of marriage under every personal law is a sacred institution.
Under Hindu law, marriage is a sacrament.
Both have to be preserved."
If the principles enunciated in the above mentioned judgments are applied to the facts of the present case it becomes evident that the while object of adoption is to seek eligibility and not to satisfy the wish of a Hindu male to adopt the petitioner as his adopted child.
The process adopted for adoption appears to be farcical.
In the absence of deed dated 2411999 which is not authenticated, there is no document issued by any official body showing the adoption was in fact made on that date.
It appears that the crutches of Section 11 of the Act are being used by the petitioner for gaining undue advantage at the cost of a person who has not enjoyed the affluence of his father till his 10+1 examination.
The whole object of making reservation in favour of less privileged would be frustrated if the measures aimed at advancing and uplifting socially backward, is allowed to be circumvented in this manner.
The less privileged is not required to stand in queue with those who have affluence and facility.
Such an attempt deserves to be defeated.
Therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
10.
The argument of the learned Counsel for the petitioner based on two Supreme Court judgments do not require serious consideration because in none of the two judgments, the adoption was doubted.
The document will certainly take effect from the date it is executed rather than the date of its registration.
There can hardly be any doubt about the legal proposition in the cases of State of Karnataka and another v. KB Urushabendra Kumar and others, AIR 1994 SC 1528 and Gurbax Singh's case (supra).
KB Urushabendra Kumar's case (supra) is a case where a dispute was about the income of the father viz., whether the income of the adopted father was to be considered or income of the natural father was to be considered.
In that case, the adoption has taken place ten years prior to the controversy has arisen.
No controversy with regard to adoption has been raised.
Therefore, the income of the adopted father has to be taken into consideration.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.