Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were appointed as Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police by direct recruitment in the year 1990.
They were confirmed with effect from July 1, 1999.
The petitioners complain that various other persons who had been allocated to the Ferozepur and border Ranges had been confirmed with effect from the year 1993.
Thus, the action of the respondents in confirming them from a later date, is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Still further, the petitioners allege that the maximum period of probation is three years.
Thus, they should be deemed to have been confirmed with effect from the year 1993.
On this basis, the petitioners pray that the order by which they have been confirmed with effect from July 1, 1999, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition, be quashed and that the respondents be directed to confirm them with effect from the year 1993.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter-alia averred that according to the terms of appointment, the petitioners were not entitled to confirmation merely by the completion of the period of probation.
In fact, the petitioners were confirmed with effect from July 1, 1999 on the availability of permanent posts.
The claim of the petitioners that they were entitled to confirmation w.e.f.
April 1, 1993 has been controverted on the ground that "there were no permanent vacancies of Assistant Sub Inspectors during that period."
3.
The petitioners have filed a replication reiterating their stand.
They have also produced a copy of the instructions issued vide letter dated April 8, 1991.
Relying upon the instructions issued by the State Government, the petitioners claim that they have a right to be confirmed w.e.f.
April 1, 1993.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Mr. RR Dhawan, counsel for the petitioners submits that the existence of a permanent vacancy is not essential for the confirmation of an employee.
He is entitled to be confirmed the moment he completes the period of probation.
Reliance has been placed on the instructions issued by letter dated April 8, 1991.
Counsel has also referred to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in ASI Sarbit Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 15685 of 1999 decided on May 29, 2002.
The claim as made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
The concept of confirmation is Service Jurisprudence is absolutely clear.
A person can be appointed permanently to a permanent post alone.
No body can hold a temporary post on permanent basis.
It may be possible for the State to make a temporary appointment to a permanent post.
However, a permanent appointment can't be made against a temporary post.
Confirmation gives the right and security of tenure to an employee.
If the post is temporary, there cannot be a security of tenure or a right to continue.
The contention that the existence of a permanent post is not essential for appointment on permanent basis is wholly misconceived.
7.
Mr. Dhawan refers to the instructions dated April 8, 1991.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure P.11 with the replication.
Learned counsel has referred to the following extract.
It may be usefully noticed :-  "Confirmation i) confirmation will be made only once in the service of an official which will be in the entry grade.
ii) confirmation is delinked from the availability of permanent vacancy in the grade.
In other words, an officer who has successfully completed the probation may be considered for confirmation.
iii) the appointee should satisfactorily complete the probation.
iv) a specific order of confirmation will be issued when the case is cleared from all angles."
8.
A perusal of these instructions shows that these related to the simplification of the confirmation procedure.
Primarily, the State was intending to provide that an employee should be confirmed "only once in the service of his entry".
There should be no need nor is there any particular justification for confirming him in different categories of services/posts during his subsequent career.
It was with this object in view that instructions relating to confirmation etc. were issued.
9.
A perusal of the above extract shows that confirmation has to be ordered once in the service.
The initial confirmation having been made, for subsequent stages, it is de-linked from the availability of a vacancy in the grade.
Still further, doubt, if any, has been clarified by the words that "an officer who has successfully completed the probation may be considered for confirmation".
The instructions do not lay down that he shall be deemed to have been automatically confirmed.
The instruction only embodies an enabling provision.
It authorises the authority to consider.
Nor can we read the words - "confirmation is de-linked from the availability of permanent vacancy" to mean that the existence of a permanent post is not essential for confirmation.
In our view, no permanent appointment can be made against a temporary post.
10.
The matter is not res integra.
The question had arisen before their Lordships of the Supreme Court in The State of Punjab v. Jagdip Singh and others, AIR 1964 SC 521.
In this case, the Pepsu Government had ordered the confirmation of certain Tehsildars.
On merger with Punjab, the orders of confirmation were reviewed.
Their Lordships while dealing with the matter were pleased to hold that confirmation without the existence of permanent post was a nullity.
The following observations are relevant :-  "In the circumstances, therefore, only one conclusion must follow and that is that the order of the Financial Commissioner had no legal foundation, there being no vacancies in which the confirmations could take place.
The order of the Financial Commissioner dated October 23, 1956 confirming the respondents as permanent Tehsildars must, therefore, be held to be wholly void."
In view of the above, the contention as raised by the learned counsel cannot be sustained.
11.
Mr. Dhawan has referred to the decision in Sarbjit Singh's case (supra).
In this case, the officials had continued in service for about 10 years.
The Bench took the view that it was "not believable that no permanent vacancy had arisen for the post of Assistant Sub Inspector since the year 1992."
It was further observed that the petitioners having completed the maximum period of probation, they will be deemed to have been confirmed.
On this basis, the claim of the petitioners was accepted.
However, the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jagdip Singh's case (supra) were not brought to the notice of the Bench.
In view of the decision of the Supreme Court, the contention raised by the counsel cannot be accepted.
12.
Mr. Dhawan submits that various persons who had been recruited along with them but were allocated to Ferozepur and border Ranges were confirmed.
Thus, even the petitioners should be deemed to have been confirmed with effect from the year 1993.
13.
Counsel does not dispute that each range constitutes a separate section of the police force.
It is under the control of a separate Deputy Inspector General.
Each range has its own cadre strength.
The mere fact that certain officials were confirmed in one range, cannot mean that permanent posts were available in the other ranges also.
Resultantly, the claim based on the confirmation of certain persons in one range cannot constitute the basis for a plea of discrimination or arbitrariness unless it is shown that permanent posts were available.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.