MM Kumar, J - This revision petition filed under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity, the Code) challenges order dated 8.3.1999 passed by the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Ambala dismissing the application of the decree holder-petitioner.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the decree holder-petitioner (for brevity, DH-petitioner) filed a suit for declaration with a prayer that he was entitled to fixation of his seniority in accordance with Rule 138 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for brevity, the Rule) by treating the date of his passing the Lower School course as 2081960 and not from 2251962.
The later date was the date when list `C' was communicated to him.
His suit was decreed vide judgment and decree dated 11101983.
The decree is claimed to have been upheld upto the Supreme Court.
The operative part of the judgment and decree reads as under :  "In the light of the analysis and findings under above issues, the suit of the plaintiff succeeds to the effect that he is entitled to reassessment of his seniority in accordance with law and rules service condition and accordingly a decree for declaration is hereby passed that the plaintiff is entitled to get his seniority fixed from the Department in accordance with law and rules governing the service conditions of the plaintiff and the department concerned is lawfully duty bound to fix the seniority of the plaintiff in accordance with rule 138, considering the date of passing of the Lower School Examination by the plaintiff as 2081960 and not the date of communication of Ex. D1 i.e. 2251962 and to grant the plaintiff all lawful benefits to which plaintiff would be entitled on fixation of his seniority in accordance with law and rules governing the service conditions of the plaintiff."
3.
The JD-respondent complied with the judgment and decree by assigning seniority to the DH-petitioner below Shri Jai Ram, Sub Inspector who had also passed Lower School Course in the month ending August 1960.
However the DH- petitioner claiming that he was entitled to be placed senior to one Kartar Singh Dahiya filed an execution application which has been dismissed by the Civil Judge.
The operative part of the impugned order reads as under :  "Perusal of service book of Kartar Singh reveals that Kartar Singh was deputed to Lower School Course in March 1960 and had qualified thee examinatiton.
A noting to this effect was made in his service book on 1531960.
The service book further reveals that name of Kartar Singh was brought on promotion list `C' w.e.f.
23121960 vide office order No. 1352/60.
Learned counsel for the decree holder has argued that decree holder is entitled to steal a march over and above Kartar Singh because he had qualified Lower School Examination in the course ending August 1960 much prior to the date on which Kartar Singh was brought on promotion list `C'.
The argument is not sustainable in view of Rule 138 of Punjab Police Rule 1934 which reads as under :- 1) In each district a list shall be maintained in Card Index form (form 138(1)) of all constables who passed the Lower School Course at Phillaur and are considered eligible for promotion to Head Constable.
A card shall be prepared for each constable admitted to the list and shall contain his marking under Sub rule 138(2) and notes by the Superintendent himself or under whom the constable has worked on his qualifications and character.
The list shall be kept confidentially by the Superintendent and shall be scrutinized and approved by the Deputy Inspector General of Police at his annual inspection.
2) Promotion to head constable shall be made in accordance with the principle described in sub-rules 131 (1) and (2).
The date of admission to List C shall not be material.
But the order of merit in which examinations have been passed, shall be taken into considerations in comparing qualifications.
In cases where other qualifications are equal, seniority in the police force shall be the deciding factor.
Selection grade constables who have not passed the Lower School Course at the Police Training School but are otherwise considered suitable may, with the approval of the Deputy Inspector General, be promoted to head constable upto a maximum of ten percent of vacancies."
I have heard Shri Rameshwar Sharma, learned counsel for the DH-petitioner who has argued that once the direction has been issued by the Civil Judge in his decree dated 11101983 directing that the date of passing Lower School Course by the DH-petitioner shall be considered as 2081960 then any person who has been given promotion after 2081960 should be considered junior to the DH- petitioner.
According to the learned counsel, Kartar Singh has passed the Lower School Course in March 1960 and he was brought on promotion List `C' with effect from 2031960.
Since the date of entry of the name of Kartar Singh in promotion List `C' is 2031960, the name of the DH-petitioner is entitled to be considered as his date of passing the Lower School Course is 2081960.
Shri Naresh K Joshi, learned State counsel has pointed out that according to sub-rule (3) Rule 138 it is the order of merit assigned in the examination whcih constitute the basis for promotion rather than the date of examination.
According to the sub-rule (3) the date of examination loses its significance.
He has further pointed out the Civil Judge has issued a categorical direction that the department is duty bound to fix the seniority of the DH-petitioner in accordance with Rule 138 by taking the date of passing the Lower School Course as 2081960.
Therefore, it has been contended that the decree stands completely satisfied and there is no error in the impugned order.
4.
I have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and am of the view that the terms of the decree are absolutely clear.
It was directed that seniority of the DH-petitioner was to be determined in accordance with Rule 138 by assuming the date of passing the Lower School course by the DH-petitioner on 2081960.
On that basis, the DH-petitioner has been given seniority below Jai Ram, Sub Inspector who too had passed Lower School Course in the month ending August 1960.
There is no legal flaw in the impugned order warranting interference of this Court under Section 115 of the Code.
The revision petition being devoid of merit is, thus, liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, this revision petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Revision dismissed.