Amar Dutt, J - Gurinder Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the letter dated 2922000, Annexure P4, by which his application for appointment on compassionate grounds on the death of his father was rejected by Air Officer Incharge Personnel-respondent No. 3.
2.
In brief, the facts relevant for resolving the controversy are that Joint warrant Officer Hardam Singh died on 21101997 after having put in service in the Indian Air Force from 3181974 to 21101997.
He was survived by his wife, daughter and son.
Immediately after the death of Hardam Singh, the petitioner applied for employment assistance and the application was forwarded by the Air Force Record Office vide RO/3120/6/P&WW(Wel) dated 10121998, Annexure P2 to the Air Head-quarter (ADPC), Vayu Bhawan, New Delhi.
The Air Head-quarter considered the case and asked the petitioner to submit no objection certificate from his sister.
The needful was done and thereafter the petitioner through letter dated 2922000, Annexure P4 was informed that his request for appointment on compassionate ground having been considered for a third and final time could not be acceded to on account of limited number of vacancies available.
Gurinder Singh moved another representation to the Chief of the Air Staff and other authorities for reconsidering the case but as no reply was received, he was forced to file this petition.
3.
In the written statement, a plea was taken that Hardam Singh was not on duty when he died and, therefore, the death is not attributable to the service conditions.
It was also submitted that the compassionate appointments are made in terms of the instructions issued by Department of Personnel and Training, according to which, upto a maximum of 5% of the vacancies falling under direct recruitment quota in Group `C' or `D' posts can be utilised for such appointments.
Keeping in view this quota, only a limited number of vacancies are available to be filled in group `C' posts in a year against a large number of requests received by the Air Head-quarter.
In view of this, while considering the applications, a candidate is being considered thrice in three consecutive quarters and the selection is made on the basis of the lowest per capita income of the family of the deceased.
Request of the petitioner has been considered thrice during the quarters ending March, June and September, 1999.
He could not be selected because the per capita income of the family of late JWO Hardam Singh was higher than that of the members of the family of other candidates as is evident from the chart, which is as under :-  Quarter Ending Name of the dependents of Service Personnel selected for appointments Per Capita Income Mar 99 1.
Smt. Shobha Ragupathy 1336.34 2.
Shri Mankesh Walia 152746 Jun.
99 1.
Smt. Shobha Naula 703.19 2.
Km Rajasree 73181 3.
Smt. Sunita Devi 831.28 4.
Smt. Anjana Devi 83840 Sep 99 1.
Smt. Shma Nazia 1379.33 2.
Shri Mukesh Kumar 179615 3.
Shri Sanjoy Kumar 1818.11 4.
Shri Inderjit Singh 187405 5.
Shri MD Mujib 189707 6.
Smt. Ava Rani 2127.47 7.
Smt. Pushpa Devi 2145.49 8.
Smt. Palvinder Kaur 220446 9.
Shri Manish Kumar 224601 10.
Shri Nozee Rajappan 2263.70 11.
Shri Sukhjeet Singh 251179 12.
Smt. Jolly Bhattacharjee 269861 Shri Gurinder Singh 438475 In view of this, the respondents submit that the grievance of the petitioner is unjustified and does not call for any interference by this Court.
4.
In the replication, which has been placed on record, the correctness of the chart showing the comparative hardship of various applicants was not disputed but it was submitted that the reduction of seats from 37% in group `C' and 27% in group `D' to 5% as indicated in Annexure R1, was unjustified and had caused grave hardship.
The petitioner, however, has not denied that the policy is framed by the Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Government of India and till date has not taken any steps for challenging the validity of the reduction after joining the aforesaid Ministry as a party.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records of the case.
5.
The present writ petition basically seeks to enforce the principle of incorporating a departure from the normal rule that appointment in public services should be made on merits after inviting applications from all eligible candidates.
These are exceptions, which have been carved out by the Judicial precedent, which has been crystalised in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) S.L.R.
677 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC), wherein it has been held as under :-  The question relates to the considerations which should guide giving appointment in public services on compassionate ground.
It appears that there has been a good deal of obfuscation on the issue.
As a rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
Neither the Governments nor the public authorities are at liberty to follow any other procedure or relax the qualifications laid down by the rules for the post.
However, to this general rule which is to be followed strictly in every case, there are some exceptions carved out in the interests of justice and to meet certain contingencies.
One such exception is in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
In such cases, out of pure humanitarian consideration taking into consideration the fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a provision is made in the rules to provide gainful employment to one of the dependents of the deceased who may be eligible for such employment.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Class-III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such lowest posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is not discriminatory.
The favourable treatment given to such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz., relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected or required to be given by the public authorities for the purpose.
It must be remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
The exception to the rule make in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment which are suddenly upturned."
6.
It is this principle, which not only the petitioner seeks to enforce but the respondents also rely upon while rejecting his claim.
It is not disputed before me that according to the instant instructions issued by the Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India a person is to be considered thrice for compassionate appointment.
It is also not disputed that the respondents while implementing those instructions look to the comparative needs of various candidates to determine as to which individual requires more immediately the assistance sought for.
The petitioner was considered thrice against the vacancies available and on all the three occasions the per capita income of the petitioner and the other candidates when calculated as per the formula, which has been produced in Court, works out much higher than the other persons seeking compassionate appointment.
Since in a case where the number of persons who need support, are more than the number of vacancies available, it in but natural that some persons will have to be denied the relief sought for.
This may be unfortunate, yet until the attention of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, is drawn again to the problems faced by the dependents of persons dying in harness so as to persuade them to increase the quota earmarked for such appointments, this Court is unable to find any ground to grant the relief to the petitioner.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is dismissed with the observations that the Air Head-quarter should, if finds necessary to seek an increase of the quota of vacancies kept aside for giving relief to the families of the service personnel, who face adversity on account of the untimely death of the bread earner of the family, take up the matter with the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for increasing the quota of vacancies reserved for the purpose.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.