Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the respondent-authorities in granting higher scale of pay to Teachers with higher qualification violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
The petitioners were recruited as JBT Teachers.
They complain that certain persons who had been recruited either along with them or after them in the cadre of JBT Teachers were granted higher scales of pay.
This, according to the petitioners violates the principle of equal pay for equal work.
Thus, the action of the respondents is discriminatory.
The petitioners' representations having been rejected by the Director of Public Instructions vide order dated 18, 2000, they have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioners pray that the order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition, be quashed.
They also pray that the respondents be directed to grant them the same scales of pay as have been given to the persons with higher qualifications.
Mr. Roshan Lal Batta states that the petitioners possess the qualification of Matric J.B.T.
only.
They have not improved their qualifications after recruitment to the service.
Yet, the counsel contends that the petitioners are entitled to the same scale of pay which has been given to persons with higher qualifications.
Admittedly, a circular was issued vide letter dated July 23, 1957 by the State of Punjab.
The Teachers were categorised on the basis of academic qualifications.
Persons possessing higher qualifications were granted additional benefits.
Certain persons had claimed benefit on the basis of this Circular.
The matter was judicially considered.
The first case was of Kirpal Singh and others v. Union of India and others, 1970 Current Law Journal 811.
This decision was affirmed by a Division Bench and L.P.A. No. 714 of 1970 was dismissed on March 10, 1972.
Thereafter, the issue was again considered in Nirmaljeet Kaur and others v. The Union of India through the Secretary, Integration, India, New Delhi and others, (sic) S.L.R.
809.
It was inter-alia held that the Circulars issued by the State Government vide letters dated July 23, 1957 and November 7, 1958 were supplemental to the statutory rules viz.
The Punjab Educational Service Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955.
The pay- scales as envisaged in these Circulars have to be given to the teachers on the basis of their educational qualifications.
The view taken by this Court was affirmed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab and others v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others, 1975(2) S.L.R.
621.
Thereafter, a large number of petitions were decided by different Benches of this court.
Teachers were granted higher scales of pay or other benefits in pursuance to the Circular dated July 23, 1957.
Mr. Batta contends that JBT Teachers possessing higher qualifications are a part of the cadre.
Thus, all members of the cadre have a right to be treated at par.
The contention is misconceived.
Differential treatment on the basis of educational qualifications is not impermissible.
If the competent authority feels that persons possessing higher qualifications would teach better, it cannot be said to have acted arbitrarily or irrationally.
It is precisely on this basis that Teachers were classified.
This classification has been accepted by the department as well as the Teachers.
It has been recognised and enforced by the Courts.
It does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.