JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner at the relevant time was a student of the Mohta Institute of Management, Faridabad.
In the aforesaid Institute he was admitted to a course which would lead to the award of a degree of Master of Business Administration.
On 1752000, the petitioner was appearing for the paper of Legal and Social Environment at the DAV Centenary College, Faridabad during the course of the 2nd semester examinations.
The said paper was of a duration of three hours.
Having commenced at 900 am, the examination would conclude at 1200 noon.
During the course of the aforesaid paper a member of the flying squad came to the room where the petitioner was answering his question paper at 1145 am and required all the candidates to tie-up their answer sheets.
Admittedly, the petitioner was in the process of answering his question paper and, thus, did not tie up his answer sheets despite being called upon to do so by the member of the flying squad.
Five minutes later, the said member of the flying squad again asked all candidates to tie up the answer sheets.
Despite the second call, the petitioner again did not tie up his answer sheets.
The member of the flying squad then came up to the petitioner and asked him why he had not obeyed his directions (to tie up the answer sheets).
The petitioner according to the averments made in paragraph 3 of the writ petition informed him (member of the flying squad) that he had nothing with him by which he could pierce a hole through his answer sheets; and as soon as he gets something to make a hole in his answer sheets, he would tie up the same.
The explanation tendered by the petitioner was not palatable to the member of the flying squad.
He became furious.
This all culminated in recording a case of unfair means against the petitioner on the duly prescribed form.
On the said form, it was mentioned that the petitioner had misbehaved with the member of the flying squad at 1155 am The Centre Superintendent forwarded the case to the relevant quarters, whereupon, a charge sheet was prepared and served upon the petitioner vide memo dated 2062000.
As per the said memo, the action initiated against the petitioner was on account of his misbehaviour with the member of the flying squad during the course of the examination of the paper of Legal and Social Environment on 1752000.
The petitioner was afforded an opportunity to tender his explanation.
After tendering his explanation, the petitioner was also personally heard.
Eventually, the Standing Committee on unfair means awarded the punishment of cancellation of the entire 2nd semester MBA examination, it also debarred the petitioner from appearing in any university examination for a period of three years (upto and including the examination of May, 2003).
2.
The petitioner in paragraph 3 of the writ petition expressly stated that the Superintendent at the examination hall, namely, Sh. C.B.
Thukral and the Lane Professor Shri SP Singh, were witnesses to the entire occurrence of 1752002, referred to above.
Both these witnesses deposed before the Standing Committee on unfair means that there was no fault of the petitioner and that he never used unfair means.
The aforesaid factual position has not been disputed in the pleadings before this court.
3.
Dissatisfied with the punishment inflicted upon him, the petitioner made a representation to the Vice Chancellor dated 1182000 with a request to the Vice Chancellor to reconsider the punishment inflicted upon the petitioner.
Through a communication dated 592000, the petitioner was asked to appear before the Standing Committee on unfair means to again explain his position.
On 892000, the petitioner was required to appear before the said Standing Committee.
The member of the flying squad who had reported against the petitioner was also required to appear before the Standing Committee.
After re-examining the claim of the petitioner, the punishment inflicted upon the petitioner was reduced.
On review, the Standing Committee decided to inflict only the punishment of cancellation of entire 2nd semester MBA examination upon the petitioner.
In other words, the petitioner was no longer debarred from appearing in any university examination.
This order passed against the petitioner, whereby his entire 2nd semester MBA examination has been cancelled, has been impugned by him before this court through the instant petition.
4.
It is not a matter of dispute that the petitioner has been permitted to participate in the next academic semesters by this Court.
In this behalf, the petitioner participated in the 3rd and 4th semester MBA courses and also appeared in the respective examinations conducted therefor.
Despite being allowed to participate in the succeeding examinations, the result of the petitioner for the 2nd, 3rd and 4th semester has been withheld.
5.
The question to be considered in the instant petition is whether the petitioner could have been punished for the aforesaid act of omission/commission.
Attention of this Court has been invited to the ordinance in respect of the punishment for use of unfair means contained in Volume II of the Maharishi Dayanand University Calender.
Clause 4 of the aforesaid ordinance defines unfair means as under :-  a) Having in his possession or accessible to him during examination hours any papers, books or notes, written or printed, or any kind of material including body, clothing, etc.  b) Writing during the examination hours or any material (including the question paper or blotting paper) other than the answer-book.
c) Talking to another candidate or to any person other than the members of the supervisory staff in or outside the Examination Hall during the examination hours.
d) Consulting notes/books in or outside the Examination Hall during examination hours.
e) Attempting to take or taking help from any notes or hints written on any part of the body or on the clothes worn by the candidate or on the furniture being used by the candidate.
f) Receiving help from another candidate with or without his consent or giving help to another candidate or receiving help from any person during examination hours.
g) Disclosing his identity deliberately or making any distinctive marks in his answer book for that purpose or making an appeal to the examiner through the answer-book or using abusive or obscene language in the answer-book.
h) Presenting to the examiner a practical or class-work-note-book which does not belong him.
i) Communicating or attempting to communicate, directly or through another person with an examiner or with an official of the University with the object of influencing him in the award of marks or making any approach or manipulation for that purpose.
j) Swallowing/destroying any note, paper etc. found with him during the examination hours.
k) Making deliberate arrangement to cheat in the examination, such as :  i) Smuggling of an answer-book/continuation sheet in or outside the examination hall or insertion in the answer-book of any sheet(s) written outside the examination hall.
ii) Substitutions, wholly or partly, of an answer-book/continuation sheet by another answer-book/continuation-sheet during or after the examination hours.
iii) Impersonation.
iv) Obtaining admission to the examination on a false representation.
v) Forging another person's signature.
vi) Failing to deliver his answer-book to the person Incharge before leaving the Examination Hall.
vii) Tempering with the particulars (including Roll Number) written on another candidate's answer-book and/or writing wrong particulars (including Roll Number) on one's own answer-book.
l) Refusing to obey the Centre Superintendent or any other member of the supervisory staff/inspecting staff or creating disturbance of any kind during the examination or otherwise misbehaving in or around the examination hall or threatening or assaulting any official connected with the examination, any time during before or after the examination.
m) Any other act of unfair-means/misconduct not covered in these provisions."
Does the action of the petitioner referred to above amount to use of unfair means, as defined in the ordinance extracted above ?
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, Clause (1) would clearly bring the action of the petitioner within the scope of unfair means.
According to the learned counsel for the respondent, the petitioner had refused to obey the directions of the invigalating staff i.e. a member of the flying squad and, thereby, must be deemed to have misbehaved with him for which in terms of Clause 8 of the ordinance, he could have been inflicted the punishment of cancellation of the entire examination in which he was participating and in addition thereto he could have been debarred from appearing in any university examination for upto three years.
6.
The aforesaid submission of the learned counsel for the respondents has been strongly refuted by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, Clause (1) of the ordinance must be interpreted with special reference to "unfair means".
If the act or omission at the hands of the petitioner is referable to unfair means, the petitioner could well be punished under Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 4 of the ordinance extracted above.
It is the case of the learned counsel for the petitioner that two members of the invigilating staff, namely S/Shri C.B.
Thukral and SP Singh had made statements before the Standing Committee on unfair means that the petitioner did not ever use any unfair means.
If the behaviour of the petitioner is not attributable to the use of unfair means or is not attributable to creating disturbance of any kind during the course of examination, he could certainly not be blame-worthy for punishment under the ordinance extracted above.
7.
I have considered the rival contentions of the parties (as have been noticed in extenso hereinabove).
In my view, a trivial issue has been blown out of proportion by the member of the flying squad.
It is common that candidates appearing in examinations are hard-pressed for time.
Undoubtedly, all the examines have to tie up their answer sheets, but dereliction to tie-up the answer sheets 15 minutes before the culmination of the examination cannot be considered to be an act for which a candidate can be punished for the use of unfair means.
Undoubtedly, some other candidates were also found remiss in the same examination centre.
In so far as the petitioner is concerned, all the statements recorded before the Standing Committee on unfair means clearly exonerate the petitioner in so far as the use of unfair means is concerned.
Learned counsel for the respondents acknowledges the fact that the petitioner did not use unfair means.
The reason for inflicting the punishment is his misbehaviour with the member of the flying squad.
The said misbehaviour is limited to not tying up his answer sheets 15 minutes before the culmination of the examination.
In my view, the ordinance for punishment for use of unfair means has been misused to punish the petitioner.
No one can be punished without any justification.
Really, it seems that the ego of the member of the flying squad was deeply hurt and it is, therefore, that the petitioner had to go through substantial turmoil.
The act/omission alleged against the petitioner i.e. that he failed to tie up his answer sheets despite a call given by the member of the flying squad cannot be described as an act of unfair means during the course of his examination on 1752000.
The same can also not be described as an act of disobedience nor of misbehaviour.
The act/omission attributed to the petitioner has no nexus whatsoever to unfair means.
I am, therefore, satisfied that the petitioner is not guilty of any of the unfair means enumerated in Clause 4 of the ordinance, extracted above.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant petition is allowed.
The natural consequence thereof is that the result of the petitioner for 2nd semester of the MBA course and all subsequent semesters of the said course (in which he appeared), would be declared without any delay.
Petition allowed.