Anjani Kumar, J - Heard Sri Ch.
NA Khan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and learned standing counsel representing the respondents 1 and 2 as well as Sri ND Rai, learned counsel for the respondent No. 3.
2.
By means of the present writ petition, the petitioner who is a widow of an employee of the State Government, has claimed for the following reliefs  "A. issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated 30-7-2001 passed by Basic Shiksha Adhikari, Ghazipur (Annexure No. 6 to the writ petition).
B. issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding the Respondent to pay the family pension to the petitioner.
C. issue any other writ, order or direction which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the present case.
D. Award the costs of petition in favour of the petitioner."
3.
The order impugned in the present writ petition dated 30-7-2001 has been passed in pursuance of the direction issued by this Court in civil misc.
Writ Petition No. 2923 of 2001, Mussammat Sajida Begum v. State of UP and another, decided on 25-1-2001, whereby this Court has issued certain directions, which run as under :  "Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel representing the respondents and taking into consideration the entire facts and circumstances of the case in the interest of justice, the respondent No. 1 is directed to pass appropriate orders in accordance with law on the afore mentioned representation/application of the petitioner expeditiously preferably within a period of two months from the date a certified copy of this order along with true copy of the said representation is filed before him.
With the aforesaid observations, the writ petition is I finally disposed of.
Dated : 2512001  Sd/-  R.K. Agarwal, J 4.
The order impuaned herein purported to reject, the claim of the petitioner for family pension on the ground that the petitioner's husband has retired on 30-11-1972 and he was paid his pension through his life time.
It has further stated in the order that petitioner's husband had died on 12-1-1994 whereas the petitioner, according to the records available in the office of the Finance and Accounts Officer, Basic Shiksha Adhikari, Ghazipur, has been paid pension for her husband up to April, 1994 and the excess amount that has been transferred in the account of the petitioner's husband towards pension amount has not yet been returned back by the petitioner.
Petitioner has further prayed for the payment of family pension to her.
The respondents have refused to pay the family pension to the petitioner on the ground that family pension is made payable by the GO dated 31-3-1982 and it is payable to family of such employees w.e.f.
1-10-1981 and the said scheme of family pension is made applicable to the teachers of the institution run and managed by the Basic Shiksha parishad like that of one where the petitioner's husband was working has been made applicable w.e.f.
8-3-1978, therefore since the husband of the petitioner has already retired on 30-11-1972, the petitioner is not entitled for the family pension.
5.
So far as the first objection with regard to the excess payment of the family pension of the petitioner is concerned, which is for the months of January, 1994 to April, 1994, it has been stated that the same has been transferred in the account of petitioner's husband, whereas according to the order impugned herein petitioner's husband has died on 12-1-1994.
The tenure of the order goes to say that as if the petitioner has realised the said amount without recording the finding as to whether petitioner has in fact withdrawn that amount from the Bank or not, is not tenable.
6.
In any view of the matter, it is only the matter of accounting.
If the petitioner has realised this amount, the same may be adjusted in view of my findings, which are going to be recorded with regard to the eligibility of the family pension from the family pension payable to the petitioner.
7.
So far as the refusal of the family pension of the petitioner only on the ground that since the petitioner's husband has retired on 30-11-1972 and the scheme has been made applicable w.e.f.
8-3-1978, when the petitioner's husband has already retired, is not, tenable.
Admittedly, the family pension is payable to the family members of the deceased employee and that occasion will arise only after the death of the said employee.
Whether he retired before the issuing of the GO with regard to family pension or thereafter, the classification of the family members of deceased employee in the matter of the payment of pension only on the ground of the cut-off date of the issuance of the GO amounts to carving out a class from amongst the homogeneous class of the family pension holders, which is not permissible and is per se, arbitrary and discriminatory as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of DS Nakara v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1983 SC 130.
8.
In view of what has been stated above, the denial of the family pension to the petitioner is per se, arbitrary and discriminatory.
The impugned order dated 30-7-2001 passed by respondent No. 3.
Annexure 5 to the writ petition, deserves to be quashed and is hereby quashed.
The respondents are hereby directed to pay the family pension to the petitioner as is being paid to other family members of the decease employee in terms of the GO in question.
9.
With the aforementioned observations, the writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.