Pranab Kumar Chattopadhyaya, J - The petitioner was removed from service by the Disciplinary Authority viz. District Judge, Midanapore on the charge of remaining absent from duty without submitting any application for granting leave before the competent authority for the said period.
2.
The departmental enquiry was conducted against the petitioner on the basis of the article of charges mentioned in the chargesheet issued to the petitioner by the disciplinary authority viz.
The District Judge, Midnapore.
The Enquiry Officer after conducting the enquiry submitted his enquiry report wherein the said Enquiry Officer specifically held that the charge against the petitioner has been proved.
The Enquiry Officer found the petitioner guilty and ultimately passed an order of removal from service against the petitioner.
The petitioner challenged the validity and/or legality of the said order on various grounds.
3.
Admittedly, the petitioner remained absent from duty without obtaining prior permission from the authorities concerned.
The Enquiry Officer after holding the enquiry found the petitioner guilty of the charges.
I do not find any illegality and/or irregularity in the matter of conducting the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner herein.
But in respect of the punishment of removal, I am of the view that the same is too harsh since it has never been alleged by the respondent authorities that the petitioner is a habitual absentee and remained absent from duty without intimation frequently.
It has also never been alleged that the petitioner absented himself from duty without any intimation or without submitting any application for grant of leave on any earlier occasion excepting the period in question as mentioned herein.
Admittedly, no other allegation involving moral turpitude has been made by the respondent herein against the petitioner.
4.
In the aforesaid circumstances, I am of the view that the punishment awarded to the petitioner is too harsh and disproportionate to the gravity of the charge.
In the result, the writ petition succeeds.
The order of removal passed by the disciplinary authority stands quashed.
But, since I have already held that there is no illegality and/or irregularity in conducting the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner and the charge has been duly established in the said disciplinary proceeding, the petitioner cannot escape punishment.
In the aforesaid circumstances, the punishment already inflicted upon the petitioner should be modified by a lesser punishment instead of removal from service as I have already held that the said punishment of removal passed by the disciplinary authority is not only harash but also disproportionate.
5.
This writ petition is pending before this Court since 1992.
The petitioner is out of service w.e.f.
1101991 in view of the aforesaid order of removal passed by the disciplinary authority and thus he suffered immensely for more than 11 years.
Though I have already quashed the order of removal passed by the disciplinary authority but at the same time I have also held that the petitioner cannot escape punishment in the present case.
Accordingly, the earlier order of punishment should be modified by a suitable lesser punishment.
Following the decisions of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1994 SC 215 (Union of India & Ors. v. Giriraj Sharma) and 1996(1) SCT 617 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 484 (BC Chaturvedi v Union of India & Ors.), I am of the view that the impugned order, of punishment passed earlier by the disciplinary authority should be modified by this Court instead of directing the disciplinary authority for modification of the same in order to ensure substantial justice in the present case and also to shorten the litigation.
Thus, I direct the respondent authorities to re-instate the petitioner in service without making any payment of back wages and furthermore, the respondent authorities will also withhold the benefit of one increment at the time of fixing the petitioner in the appropriate pay-scale on the basis of the existing ROPA Rules.
6.
Since the order of removal has been quashed, the continuity of the service in respect of the petitioner should not be disturbed but at the same time the petitioner will not be entitled to claim any service benefit in respect of the period when the petitioner had to remain out of service in view of the said order of removal passed by the disciplinary authority.
Only for the purpose of terminal benefit the petitioner should be treated as in service during the aforesaid period without making any payment therefore.
7.
The respondent authority will allow the petitioner to resume his duties without any further delay but positively within a period of seven days from the date of communication of this order.
Since the District of Midnapore has been divided into two districts, the District Judge, Midnapore West shall take necessary steps for implementation of this order passed by this Court regarding reinstatement of the service of the petitioner.
8.
This writ petition is, thus, disposed of.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
9.
Let urgent xerox certified copy of this order be given to the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
Petition allowed.