Ashim Kumar Banerjee, J - Writ petitioners are the employees of Indian Airlines Limited.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 are association of the employees of Indian Airlines Limited, the Respondent No. 1 above named.
Writ petitioners are the members of the, said associations.
Indian Airlines Limited (hereinafter referred to as the company) introduced a self contributory superannuation pension scheme.
The said scheme has been annexed to the writ petitioner and appearing at pages 88 to 104 thereof.
2.
On 19th February, 1998 a Memorandum of Understanding was arrived at between the company and the said associations whereby the said proposed scheme was agreed to be implemented to cover all the employees of the said company retiring from service with effect from 1st April, 1994.
Clause 2 of the said Memorandum of Understanding is set out hereinbelow:  "It has been agreed by the parties that all whole time permanent employees of the Company represented by the said Union, in the regular and Indian scales of pay on the effective date of the scheme i.e. 1st April, 1994 shall become a member of this scheme.
All future permanent employees of the company represented by the said Union shall automatically be admitted to the Scheme from the month in which they join the regular scale of pay."
3.
The said Memorandum of Understanding has been annexed to the writ petition and is appearing at pages 105 to 109 thereof.
It appears that the said Memorandum of Understanding was duly signed by the Company and the employees through their associations.
Execution of the said Memorandum of Understanding and the signatures appearing thereof are not under challenge.
4.
The said scheme was subject to the approval of the Central Government.
The said company duly applied for permission of the Central Government and the concerned authority being the Department of Public Enterprises approved the said scheme with certain modification.
The said approval has been annexed to the Affidavit in Opposition filed by the company appearing at page Nos. 90-91 thereof.
In accordance with Clause 3 of the said approval the said scheme was approved subject to the sanction being obtained from the Ministry of Labour as per the section 39 of the Employees Pension Scheme 1995.
5.
It was provided in Clause 4(iii) of the said approval that the members of the scheme would make contribution out of their salary and no diversion of funds, loans etc. would be extended by the company.
6.
In clause 4(iv), the said scheme had been made optional for the employees of the company.
7.
The said approval was duly notified to the company by the Central Government by its letter dated 29th May, 1997 appearing at page 89 of the Affidavit in Opposition.
8.
In this backdrop the present writ petition has been filed by some of the employees of the company inter alia challenging the authority and propriety of the company to deduct any sum from the respective salaries of the said employees on account of the said scheme.
9.
The contentions raised by the writ petitioners are inter alia are as follows :  (i) The said scheme is not beneficial to the concerned employees being the writ petitioners and they want to remain with the existing scheme prevailing at the relevant point of time.
(ii) The said scheme has been approved by the Central Government by making it optional to the employees and as such until and unless the concerned employee exercise option in accordance with prescribed format the authority is not entitled to deduct any contribution from the respective salaries of the employees :  (iii) The scheme is subject to the approval of the Labour Directorate.
No such approval has yet being obtained by the company or the concerned Civil Aviation Department and as such the said scheme cannot made be applicable and consequently the deductions made prior to the approval of the Labour Directorate are without any validity of law and the amount so deducted are liable to be refunded.
10.
Mr. Sadananda Ganguly, Learned counsel for the writ petitioners submitted that the concerned scheme is not binding upon the employees as those are not beneficial to the interest of the concerned employees.
In support of such contention Mr. Ganguly cited two Apex Court decision reported in AIR 1997 SC 322 : 1997 Cri LJ 362 and AIR (sic) SC 2334.
(sic)  11.
Mr. Ganguly further contended that assuming the said scheme is binding upon the writ petitioners the same cannot be made applicable unless and until the approval of the Labour Directorate is obtained.
Lastly he contended that the Department of Public Enterprises categorically pointed out that no diversion of funds can be made.
Hence the terms of the scheme that the trustees would be entitled to have overdraft facilities and other investments, are contrary to such direction of the Department of Public Enterprises.
12.
Mr. RN Majumder, Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the writ petitioners are the members of the respective associations who had signed the Memorandum of Understanding to make the said scheme effective.
Hence, the writ petitioners are not entitled to challenge the implementation of the said scheme.
13.
On the question of approval of the Labour Directorate Mr. Majumder could not impress upon this Court as to whether any such approval in fact had been obtained by the company or the Department of Civil Aviation to make the said scheme effective.
Mr. Majumder however submitted that the approval given by the Department of Public Enterprises did not make such condition as mandatory.
Hence, it is within the discretion of the company or the Civil Aviation Department to have the approval of the Labour Directorate and for that implementation of the said scheme cannot be withheld in absence of any approval from the Labour Directorate.
14.
This writ petition was initially heard on 14th September, 2001 when I categorically asked Mr. Ganguly as to whether the writ petitioners are still interested to remain as members of the respective associations.
Several adjournments have been granted to the writ petitioners to take a decision on this score.
Ultimately on the date of final hearing Mr. Ganguly submitted that the writ petitioners are inclined to remain as members of the association.
15.
With regard to the first point, in my vie the writ petitioners are not entitled to take such plea so long they remain with the respective associations who are parties to the Memorandum of Understanding.
The basic fundamental principle in labour jurisprudence is that the employees are entitled to be represented by various associations so that a bipartite or tripartite discussions are held and decisions are taken for the welfare of the entire workforce.
This is to obviate unnecessary and cumbersome process of obtaining approval of each and every workmen on a particular issue.
In the present case the company has thousands of employees.
The scheme had been proposed.
It was placed to the respective recognized associations.
After considering the scheme, they thought it fit to have implementation thereof and the Memorandum of Understanding had been signed.
It is thus presumed that the said associations had obtained consent from each and every of their members.
If the scheme is not beneficial to any particular employee or any group of employees they are at liberty to throw a challenge to the same.
However, so long they continue to be members of that particular association and continue to repose their trust and confidence on the said associations being their authorised representatives the said group of employees are not entitled to challenge the in-action and/or non-action on the part of their associations.
Power of giving approval to the said scheme by each and every workmen had been delegated to their respective associations, so long such power is not revoked and so long the concerned employees continue to repose trust and confidence on the said delegatee action of the delegatee cannot be challenged by them.
Both the Apex Court decisions cited by Mr. Ganguly are based upon the above principles as discussed by me hereinbefore.
I, however, feel it necessary to quote a passage from one of the said Apex Court decisions in the case of Herbertsons Ltd v. The Workmen of Herbertsons Ltd reported in AIR 1977 SC 322 (supra) paragraph 18 of the said judgment is quoted below :-  "When a recognized union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture.
It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognized union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour.
This would be the normal rule.
We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other inducements.
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd respondent in this case.
That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration."
16.
Hence, the first contention of Mr. Ganguly does not hold good.
I gave opportunity to Mr. Ganguly to sever relationship with the respective associations.
The writ petitioners have chosen to remain with them.
Hence, I cannot allow the writ petitioners to urge this point and the same is accordingly rejected  17.
I, therefore, hold that the said scheme appearing at page 88 of the writ petition is valid and binding upon the writ petitioners on the basis of the memorandum of Understanding executed by the said company and the respective employees' associations.
18.
Mr. Ganguly further contended that there are forms to be filled in to exercise the option.
Hence, assuming the said scheme is binding upon the writ petitioners so long the forms are not filled in, the writ petitioners are not obliged to be covered under the said scheme.
In view of my finding hereinbefore I hold that filling up of the said forms and formalities to be performed by the concerned employees to get benefit under the said scheme are mere formality.
The option had already been exercised by the concerned writ petitioners through their associations as I have held hereinbefore.
Hence, they are obliged to fill in the said forms and complete the formalities and they are not entitled to refuse filling up of the said forms on the plea as taken in the writ petition or otherwise.
19-20.
On the question of approval of the Labour Directorate I find substance in the contention of Mr. Ganguly.
I am unable to agree with Mr. Majumder that the tenor of the approval of the Department of Public Enterprises gave discretion on the company or the Civil Aviation Department to have the approval of the Labour Directorate.
It is necessary to quote the relevant clause of the said approval.
Clause 3 of the said approval is quoted below :-  "However, before the above scheme is introduced in Indian Airlines, it would be appropriate if the exemption as per Section 39 of the Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 may also be obtained by the Deptt.
of Civil Aviation from the Ministry of Labour for not operating the 'Pension Scheme' as introduced by them w.e.f.
16-11-95".
21.
On a plain reading of the said clause it is apparent that the said department felt it appropriate to have approval of the Labour Directorate and there is no reason why the Civil Aviation Department would not obtain such approval.
In any event, Mr. Majumder was not sure whether such approval was applied for or obtained.
He was not in a position to satisfy me as to why such discretion, if any, had not been exercised by the Civil Aviation Department.
In absence of the same I hold that the approval of the Labour Directorate as contained in Clause 3 of the approval given by the Department of Public Enterprises has to be obtained in making the said scheme effective.
22.
In the result the writ petition succeeds in part.
The Indian Airlines Limited, the respondent No. 1 above named is directed to comply with the requirement of Clause 3 of the approval given by the Department of Public Enterprises through the Department of Civil Aviation in case appropriate approval has not yet been obtained by the Department of Civil Aviation or the said Airlines as the case may be.
23.
In case such approval is refused by the Labour Directorate the Indian Airlines Limited would not be entitled to deduct any sum from the respective salaries of the writ petitioners and the writ petitioners would be entitled to have refund of the sums so deducted along with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the respective dates of deduction until payment.
24.
In case the approval is given by the Labour Directorate the Indian Airlines Limited would be entitled to implement the said scheme and the writ petitioners would be obliged to comply with all formalities including filling up of option forms.
After approval being obtained from the Ministry of Labour the Indian Airlines Limited and/or Trustees under the said scheme are directed to implement the said scheme strictly in accordance with the approval given by the department of Public Enterprises appearing at pages 90-91 of the Affidavit in Opposition and no diversion of funds or loan etc. could be made contrary to clause 4(iii) of the said approval.
25.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
26.
There would be no order as to costs.
27.
Urgent certified copy be given to the parties as and when applied for.
Order accordingly.