RL Anand, J - Mrs Nirmal Kaur petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by the petitioner that the inquiry report dated 10.3.1999 Annexure P-8 and the consequent order of dismissal dated 841999 Annexure P-11, being wholly illegal, unconstitutional and in violation of the principles of natural justice, be quashed.
It has also been prayed by the petitioner that directions should be issued to the respondents to reinstate her into service with all consequential benefits.
2.
It is pleaded by the petitioner that she was appointed as Clerk in the Office of District Red Cross Society, Muktsar on 2021996 for a period of 2 months.
She was given due extension and she continued on the post of Clerk- Cum-Typist till January, 1997.
Her services were regularised in the cadre of Clerk vide Office Memo No. 1908 dated 411997.
It is the case of the petitioner that she always did her duties in an honest manner.
The family condition of the petitioner was bad.
Resultantly, the petitioner made several requests to the then Deputy Commissioner to allot her a shop in Fire Brigade Complex.
The then Deputy Commissioner, Muktsar, considered the case of the petitioner sympathetically and allotted the small shop in her favour in Fire Brigade Complex on a monthly instalment of Rs. 1,000/-.
However, when respondent No. 3 became the Deputy Commissioner, Muktsar and took the charge of District Red Cross Society, as its President, summoned the petitioner to his office on 16.7.1998 and she was made to sign on an already typed sheet under the threat of throwing her out of the job.
Under the threat of respondent No. 3, she signed the papers but later on she came to know that an affidavit has been fabricated.
Subsequently, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet on 29101998.
The petitioner made a request through letters that she may be allowed to examine the record to enable her to properly defend her case but to no effect.
Since the petitioner did not have the access to the record she gave the reply dated 18111998 based on her memory and her personal knowledge.
The reply of the petitioner was not considered but inquiry was initiated against her and in the inquiry also, the petitioner was not shown the relevant record.
So much so, during the course of inquiry, the petitioner was not even allowed to cross-examine Shri Madhu Sudan Sharma, the witness produced by the department.
Inquiry report was submitted by the Inquiry Officer on the basis of which a show cause notice was issued on 1831999.
The petitioner gave the reply to the show cause notice.
With the malafide intention of respondent No. 3 a very harsh punishment order was passed and the petitioner was dismissed from service.
The petitioner has given the challenge to the inquiry report as well as the order of dismissal mainly on the ground that she was deprived of the right of examining the documents before submitting the reply and that she was not afforded the opportunity to cross-examine the witness of the department and thirdly the order of punishment dismissing the service of the petitioner is disproportionate to the allegations/charges.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It was contested by respondent No. 2 on behalf of others also, and it was pleaded that the petitioner during her tenure in the District Red Cross Society, Muktsar, misconducted herself in the following manner :-  "Firstly, she did not inform Kishan Singla, the orders of the President over his application, dated 1571998, that his leave was rejected.
Rather she sat over the said application and it was not put up before any Senior Officer.
Secondly, she got one shop allotted without participating in the open auction in connivance with the Secretary Shri Ranbir Singh, Red Cross Society, Muktsar.
In the agreement, column No. 2 was left blank deliberately, whereas, the rent for the said shop in the advertisement has been shown as Rs. 2,000/- per month.
The petitioner got the same shop without any rate to be charged from her.
Thirdly, she got the name of Shri KAP Sinha, mentioned against entry Nos. 3, 4 to 9 and put the Secretary, Red Cross there at.
In this way, the Chairman of the Selection Committee for selecting the requisite staff in the Read Cross Society was changed.
Fourthly, she left two numbers blank in the despatch register on 2821998 against some reference Nos. 1113, 1114 and 1115.
This was done by the petitioner to accommodate the third appointment."
4.
Preliminary investigations were conducted and carried out and thereafter a charge-sheet dated 29101998 was served.
The petitioner gave the reply to the charge-sheet which was not found satisfactory.
Inquiry Officer was appointed who gave report.
The inquiry report dated 10.3.1999 was supplied to the petitioner who submitted her reply which was also not found satisfactory.
Resultantly, a show cause notice dated 1831999 was issued and in the reply to the said show cause notice, the petitioner admitted her misdeeds of change of selection committee Chairman.
She also admitted that the change was done by her at the behest of the Secretary Red Cross Society, Muktsar.
She also admitted the other charges contained in the charge-sheet.
The petitioner was heard personally on 741999 and she was given full opportunity to explain her point of view but she could not give any solid reasons in her defence as the nature of the charges was such that it could not have happened on account of ignorance but it was a deliberate attempt on the part of the petitioner who violated the rules and regulations and indiscipline and had tried to misuse her official position in the Red Cross Society.
After considering all aspects of the case, the dismissal order was passed on 841999.
She did all these misdeeds in connivance with the Secretary, Red Cross Society, Muktsar Shri RS Kingra and the Project Officer Kishan Singla.
Against these two officers, criminal proceedings are going on.
With this defence, the respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
While examining the departmental proceedings and while exercising the powers of judicial review, this Court is not sitting as a Court of appeal.
The power of judicial review in such like matters, has been clarified in 1999(1) SCT 303 (SC) : 1999(2) Supreme Court Cases 10, Kuldeep Singh v. Commissioner of Police and others, wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to observe that in the departmental inquiry the power of judicial review is not totally barred.
The finding of guilty although would not be normally interfered with but the same can be interfered only if same is based on no evidence or is such as could not be reached by an ordinary prudent man or is perverse or is made at the dictates of superior authority.
7.
Now let us examine whether the petitioner has any case to say.
Annexure R2/1 is the affidavit of Smt. Nirmal Kaur and it has been stated by her that on 2741998, when she was performing the duties of a Clerk-cum-Typist, in addition to other routine duties.
Secretary Mr. Kingra and Project Officer Mr. Singla, came to her in a hurry and asked her as to how many despatch numbers were left blank in the end of the month of February.
She checked the despatch register and told them that two numbers were left blank.
These numbers were usually left blank and used afterwards when need be.
On this, the Secretary and Project Officer asked her to put the appointment order of three employees against the despatch numbers left blank in the month of February.
They further told her that appointment orders had been signed by the former President on their request.
She told them that it was not proper to do so and instead of doing that, they should get the orders signed from the President.
On her saying so they got angry and threatened her that if she does not comply with their wishes, her position would be jeopardised because she had taken the Red Cross shop on less rent as compared to the others and that she had not paid the amount in cash.
It was told to her that they would inform this matter to the President (Deputy Commissioner) who can cancel the allotment of the shop.
Since she was a widow, therefore, in order to save herself from any trouble she put the appointment order against the despatch numbers left blank in the despatch register against Sr. Nos. 1113, 1114 and 1115 by cutting it because these numbers already been assigned in the despatch register.
After getting the appointment orders, the three clerks namely Smt. Balbir Sharma, Ms. Maninder Pal Kaur and Ms. Baljinder Pal Kaur did not give her the joining report etc.
Thus, the reading of the affidavit of Smt. Nirmal Kaur would show that she was a party to the conspiracy with Mr. Kingra and Project Officer Mr. Singla.
She fabricated the official record for the convenience of the three candidates.
8.
Now, let us see whether the petitioner was deprived of the opportunity to defend herself in the departmental proceedings.
These facts which were discussed above have been relied upon by the inquiry officer who conducted the fact finding inquiry.
The scrutiny of the record of the Red Cross Society, Muktsar, was done and it was found that the appointment letters of Ms. Maninder Pal Kaur and Smt. Balbir Singh had been entered at serial Nos. 1113 and 1114, while that of Ms Baljinder Pal Kaur has been entered at serial No. 1115 which was done by cutting because this number had already been issued to Training and Production Centres.
In fact at serial Nos. 1115 to 1118, four letters to the Production Centres at Muktsar, Giddarbaha and Lambhi had been issued.
When an employee fabricates the official record for giving advantage to a particular institution or persons this is a serious misconduct on the part of such public servant.
This lady also obliged to the three candidates when she did not submit the fitness certificate/character certificate etc. to the authorities.
No joining report was given by these candidates.
The Inquiry Officer took into consideration this aspect of the case and came to the following conclusion :-  "The noting was seemingly drafted in a back date with the only purpose to benefit Smt. Balbir Sharma, Miss Maninder Pal Kaur and Miss Baljinder Pal Kaur, all centre incharges of training-cum-production centres.
This is made clear by the non-issuance of any order to Sh. Madhu Sudan Sharma, Rent Collector, Smt. Nirmal Kaur, Clerk and Sh. Jasbir Singh clerk of their fresh designations as Asstt/Asstt Acctt, Steno and Rent Collector respectively.
That the noting was drafted in a back date is made clear by the pay rolls for the month of March 1998 which was prepared in the month of April and duly signed by the President on 1041998.
There is no mention of Smt. Balbir Sharma, Miss Baljinder Pal Kaur and Miss Maninder Pal Kaur in these bills.
Their names figure in the pay bills for the month of April, 1998 as the same were prepared by the Acctt.
on 451998.
The pay bills for the month of March and April 1998 are attached as Annex.
"E" and "E2".
This gives credence to the allegations made by Smt. Nirmal Kaur in her affidavit that the appointment order of Smt. Balbir Sharma, Miss Maninder Pal Kaur and Miss Baljinder Pal Kaur were back-dated and that she received the same on 2741998.
They were back-dated with a view to benefit the said three employees is proved by the fact the said three employees in the appointment order allegedly issued on 2821998 were given new grades i.e. 3120-100-3220- 5160.
Whereas the proposal to give new grades to the employees of the Red Cross was put forward by the Secretary Red Cross on 331998 and approved/accepted by the President on the same date.
Relevant noting in this respect is attached as Annexure "F".
How come the new grades were given to the three incumbents on 2821998 when the decision to implement the new grades was taken on 331998.
This again explains the fallacy of back-dating the orders and the intention of giving the said three fresh appointees the benefit by bringing them on the pay rolls of the Red Cross Society, Muktsar".
9.
During the course of proceedings, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has shown me the original inquiry proceedings.
The petitioner made an application dated 17111998 before the punishing authority that she may be allowed to examine the record as she wants to give the reply.
There is an order that the record be shown to the petitioner immediately.
Meaning thereby that the petitioner got the access to the record and then gave the reply to the summary of allegations.
The department examined Shri Madhu Sudan Sharma as PW-1.
Opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross- examine this witness.
She did not cross-examine the witness.
The proceedings dated 1511999 were conducted in the presence of the petitioner.
On 21.1.1999, the petitioner gave her own statement.
She admits in her statement that she made the cuttings but at the instance of Ranbir Singh Kingra Secretary.
She also admits the allegations with regard to entry at serial Nos. 1113, 1114 and 1115.
In such a situation, when the petitioner herself admits the allegations of forgery and interpolation of the official record, how she can now say that she was not properly heard in the departmental proceedings.
The case of the department was based on documentary evidence.
The Inquiry Officer gave a detailed finding with respect to each charge.
10.
Under item No. 1 it was observed by the Inquiry Officer as follows :-  "So it is held that since there was no specific mention over any of the leave applications that the same order rejecting the leave is to be intimated, the statement of Smt. Nirmal Kaur bears force in it.
But when she had received the application as it is evident from the receipt No. mentioned over it, it was her bounden duty to put it up before the higher authorities for getting the clear cut orders over it but she sat over that.
So her this plea that the applications were put up before Sh. Gurcharan Singh does not appear to be believable.
Hence, the charge No. 1 that she did not inform Sh. Krishan Singla regarding rejection of his leave applied is not proved otherwise her negligence to not to put up the applications for getting clear cut orders over those applications are proved".
11.
With regard to charge No. 2 it was observed by the Inquiry Officer as under :-  "This fact of all the documents, recommendations and orders being undated and leaving the rent column in the agreement deed blank and handing it over to Smt. Nirmal Kaur, the beneficiary clearly proves the inherent collusion between the then Secretary who has put his signatures over the agreement deed and this clerk Smt. Nirmal Kaur with the malafide intention to extend undue benefits to her.
Because she is ready to pay the rent at the prescribed rate now then, if at all she had nothing malafide in her mind then she would have pointed this out at the time of receiving the agreement deed.
Failure to this, on her part proves this charge."
12.
With regard to charge No. 3, the finding of the Inquiry Officer was as follows :-  "With regard to third charge, Sh. Madhu Sharma has produced the despatch register during the course of enquiry which clearly shows the cutting over the Chairman appointed for the election committee.
In fact, in this episode already matter has been enquired and it has been held in the enquiry conducted by SDM Muktsar, that the same tampering was done later on to change the Chairman of the Selection Committee.
Since Smt. Nirmal Kaur was then working as dispatch clerk she cannot be absolved of her responsibilities.
Had this been done by somebody else she could have at least reported to higher authorities, so this charge too is proved."
13.
With regard to charge No. 4, the findings of the Inquiry Officer run as follows :-  "The contents of charge No. 4 has already been enquired in detail by the IO-cum-DRO Muktsar and in his report he has clearly held that there has been tampering over the dispatch Nos. so as to accommodate the issuance of three appointment letters back-dated so I too agree with the same report and hence this charge is proved against Smt. Nirmal Kaur who was working as dispatch clerk at that time".
In the light of the above findings it is crystal clear that the said clerk in the office of District Red Cross Society has misused her position so as either to extend wrongful benefits to others or for her private interest.
So in view of the such serious charges, she deserves suitable major penalty.
Secondly she should be ordered to pay the market rent against the shop in her possession with retrospective effect.
Therefore, it is recommended accordingly".
14.
Thus, the discussion of the Inquiry Officer cannot be said that it is based on "no evidence"  Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.