SS Sudhalkar, J - Common question of law arises in these seven writ petitions, - Civil Writ Petition Nos. 16364 of 1999, 4919 of 2000, 8592 of 2000, 16379 of 2000, 8011 of 2001, 11325 of 2001 and 11188 of 2001 and, therefore, they were heard together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
Often it happens that pay scales are changed from the retrospective effect or the pay scales are ordered to be given to the employees by the Court with retrospective effect.
Some times, higher pay scales are granted on the basis of acquiring higher qualifications and they are also granted from retrospective effect.
This necessitates the change of date of option for opting for the revised pay scales with effect from a particular date.
The necessity is found by the employees, who think that in view of the change of pay scale, the date of option should be changed forgetting the best monetary benefits.
3.
In these cases, the pay -scales have been given from retrospective dates to the petitioners.
Their prayer for change of option has not been accepted by the Government and hence they have filed these writ petitions.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners are relying on the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 17996 of 1997, Des Raj and others v. State of Haryana and others, dated March 12, 1998.
The Division Bench, in which one of us (SS Sudhalkar, J) was a member, observed in the said case as under :  "The main stand of the respondent is that once the options were exercised, the petitioners cannot be allowed to change their options.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that once by a subsequent order passed by the Government itself or on the basis of a judgment of a competent court, the pay scales of a particular individual is revised, the earlier options which might have been given by particular individual would lose its significance and such an incumbent would be entitled to give fresh option by which he can get the maximum advantage.
As observed above, the petitioners had given their options for the revised pay scales much prior to the filing of the writ petitions and it was only on the writ petitions having been allowed and they having been fixed in the higher pay scale that they got another right to give their options for the revision of the pay scales."
5.
In view of the aforesaid judgment, we allow these writ petitions and permit the petitioners to give fresh options within one month from today for the revision of their pay scales and if they give fresh option, their pay scales be accordingly revised.
The arrears that will have to be paid to the petitioners shall, of course, be limited to three years and two months prior to the date of filing of the writ petitions by the petitioners.
If fresh options are given by the petitioners, the respondents shall consider their case for revision of pay accordingly within a period of six months from the date of receipt of such option.
Ordered accordingly.