RL Anand, J - Shri Kanshi Ram Sharma has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by him that the order dated 3171999, Annexure P-1 and the orders dated 19.11.1999, Annexure P-5, vide which he has been prematurely retired on medical grounds and his representation has been rejected, be quashed and directions be given to the respondents to allow him to continue on his post as Senior Tanker Truck Driver till the date of retirement i.e. 3062002 and further directions be given to the respondents to pay him all the benefits.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner:-  The petitioner was examined by the Medical Board comprising of Dr. Vijay Sharma, Chairman, Dr. Sunita Nanda, Member and Dr. Onkar Sharma, Member in the presence of the daughter of the petitioner.
The medical examination took place on 27.5.1999.
After thorough medical check up of the petitioner, the Board came to the conclusion that the petitioner was suffering from Coronary Artery disease, severe hypertension/CVA, residual hemiparesis and slurring of the speech with right carotid endateritis.
It was unanimously concluded by the Medical Board that the petitioner was not medically fit to perform the duties of Senior Tanker Truck Driver which was his assignment.
By invoking the provisions of Clause 4.1(vi) of the IOC Premature Retirement Scheme, the competent authority approved the proposal of the Medical Board and retired the petitioner prematurely on medical ground on the condition that all the retiral benefits permissible under the Scheme shall be granted to him.
A sum of Rs. 3,48,878/- was also given to the petitioner.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
4.
The impugned order Annexure P-1, which runs as follows, was passed by the competent authority in the light of the above said provisions :-  "Consequent upon unanimous conclusion of the Medical Board and subsequent approval of the Competent Authority for grant of premature retirement on medical grounds under Indian Oil Corporation Ltd Premature Retirement Scheme on Medical Grounds.
You stand relieved from the services of the Corporation from the afternoon of 31799.
On this occasion, on my own behalf and on behalf of the Corporation, I take this opportunity of wishing you all the happiness in the next phase of your life.
Even though you have separated from us and retired from the services of this Corporation, I and my other colleagues would be very happy if you would continue to maintain your association with us and a member of Indian Oil Family.
With best wishes."
5.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner ought to have been granted a lower post with less encumbersome duty and that the petitioner was not given one month salary before passing the impugned order.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on Narendra Kumar Chandla v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) SCT 571 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 519.
6.
Before I deal with the contentions raised by the learned counsel of the petitioner on merits, first of all I may make a mention that the judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not applicable to the facts in hand.
Every case has to be governed by the services rules and regulations which are applicable to the employee.
There is no mandate under the regulations of the Corporation that the petitioner must be offered a job of the lower category.
It is the right of the employer to retire prematurely an employee on medical grounds.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the opinion of the Medical Board is mala fide one or that he has not been examined by the Medical Board.
This Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal over the opinion of the medical authorities.
So long the management is exercising its right under the scheme, the petitioner has no cause of action.
7.
With regard to the salary of one month, at the most the petitioner can always claim by way of separate remedy.
The fact is that the petitioner has not vacated the official accommodation which had been allotted to him and perhaps for this reason the pay of one month has been retained by the employer.
8.
Resultantly, this writ petition is hereby dismissed with the observations that it will be open to the petitioner to recover one month salary in lieu of notice according to law.
I reject the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that one month salary had to be paid in advance before passing the impugned order.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.