SS Sudhalkar, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ petitions No. 3591 of 2001, 4752 of 2001 and 4783 of 2001.
The petitioners in these writ petitions were working on the posts of Vice Principal in their own pay scale of Language Teachers/Instructors.
By the impugned order dated 532001, they were ordered to be relieved and were directed to work on their respective original posts.
The petitioners are challenging the said order.
2.
The contention of the petitioners in the writ petitions is that when they were working as Vice Principals, they could not have been sent back to their original posts.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have relied on the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in the case of Shinghara Chand and others v. Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board and others, 2000(2) SCT 195 (P&H)(DB) : CWP No. 16543 of 1998, decided on 222000.
The question before the DB of this Court was - Whether a public authority can adopt the policy of pick and choose while giving the current duty charge of the post of Sub Divisional Engineer to a Junior Engineer ?
The Division Bench observed that giving of current duty charge for a long period cannot be justified by treating it as something like giving additional charge of the higher post and in the garb of giving current duty charge, a senior person cannot be denied his legitimate right to hold the higher post.
It, therefore, found that there was no valid ground to sustain the action of the official respondents to deprive the petitioners, of that case, of their legitimate right or atleast legitimate expectation of holding the higher post of Sub Divisional Engineers.
The DB allowed the writ petition by directing the official respondents to pass an order for giving current duty charge to the petitioners of that case, observing also that the official respondents may withdraw the current duty charge from the non- official respondents if it becomes necessary to do so.
4.
The question in these writ petitions is whether a person enjoying the current duty charge has a vested right to continue as such or not ?
5.
The above judgment of Division Bench does not directly cover this question.
However, in the case of Ramakant Shripad Sinai Advalpalkar v. Union of India and others, reported as AIR 1991 SC 1145 : 1993(3) SCT 586 (SC) it has been held that if an officer holding a lower post is asked to discharge the duties of a higher post, it is not promotion.
It is also held that "In-charge arrangement" is not a recognition or is necessarily based on seniority and no rights, equities or expectations could be built upon it.
The Supreme Court in this case, has observed as under : -  "6.
The third contention is that appellant's `in charge' arrangements in the higher post had continued for so long a period that a determination of equivalence on the basis of his lower substantive post would become arbitrary.
This contention ignores the fact that an `in charge' arrangement is not a recognition of or is necessarily based on seniority and that, therefore, no rights, equities or expectations could be built upon it.
The third contention is also unmeritorious."
In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court, giving of current duty charge (CDC) cannot be said to give any vested right to a person holding charge and therefore, the petitioners cannot be said to have legal right to contend that the current duty charge cannot be withdrawn from them.
The petitioners were working in their own pay and therefore, were holding the charge of the post of Vice Principal as a current duty charge.
As a result, these petitions are without merit and are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.