Amar Bir Singh Gill, J - The petitioners assail the admissions to Diploma in Education/Diploma in Education (Urdu) for 2000-2002 course on the basis of entrance test held on 31122000 and seek the quashing of the admissions being unfair and also seek issuance of directions for fresh entrance test.
2.
The case of the petitioners is that the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana-respondent No. 2 issued advertisement for admission to Diploma in Education/Diploma in Education (Urdu) 1999-2001 course.
Applications for the entrance test were to be received by 26101999 and the entrance test was to be conducted on 12121999 at 1130 am The candidates having passed 10+2 examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana or its equivalent examination with atleast 50% aggregate marks were eligible for seeking admission as per instructions in the prospectus.
It was specifically mentioned that erasing and change of answer was not allowed.
The entrances test was held as scheduled.
However, the result was cancelled by the State Government by order dated 2542000 as per information of the petitioners.
After the cancellation of the aforesaid entrance test, the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana published prospectus for admission in Diploma in Education/Diploma in Education (Urdu) 2000-2002.
Application forms were to reach the Director, SCERT, Haryana, Gurgaon by 15122000 upto 5 pm Written test was to be held on 17122000 from 1130 am to 1.30 p.m.
It was also mentioned that those candidates who had earlier applied for admission to the said courses for the year 1999 need to apply again and they will be supplied prospectus-cum-application form free of cost for which they were to contact the District Education Officer of the District they belong.
3.
The petitioners, in response to the above admission notice, submitted their applications.
The scheduled date for entrance test i.e. 17122000 was changed on account of some administrative reasons and the same was conducted on 31122000.
The new prospectus, however, did not contain the condition "erasing and change of answers is not allowed".
It was done without the approval of the government.
There were numerous irregularities committed in holding the test such as : (a) The candidates belonging to Rewari District were allotted various centres at Gurgaon and the candidates were issued admit cards by respondent No. 3 but as many as 1500 candidates belonging to Rewari District were issued two different admit cards; one for appearing at Gurgaon and other for appearing at Ballabgarh, (b) Various candidates from Rewari when came for entrance test at various allotted centres at Gurgaon on 31122000, their roll numbers did not appear in the list with the respective centre Superintendent.
They were allowed to choose centres in the proceeds and as such they took the entrance test subsequently, (c) Spare question papers were collected from various centres and thereafter were distributed to the students for examination at 2 pm on the same day instead of 1130 am, and (d) It came in the newspaper that the question paper was leaked.
4.
The candidates from Rewari filed a representation to respondent No. 3 highlighting the irregularities on 15.1.2001 but despite this, the respondent-authorities did not cancel the examination.
The petitioners, thus, assail the admission mainly on the ground that condition of `erasing and change of answer is not allowed' was intentionally omitted on account of political interference.
The candidates who were issued duplicate roll numbers of different centres were made to take the test subsequently.
There was leakage of question papers and it came in the newspapers as well.
On these grounds, the petitioners seek the cancellation of the admissions.
5.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, all the material allegations of the petitioners have bee refuted.
Preliminary objection has been taken that the impugned entrance test held on 31122000 was conducted in most fair manner.
The fact that the roll numbers were issued for two different centres on the same day for the same candidate was due to un- avoidable circumstances and solely on account of negligence and carelessness of the petitioners.
Due to inadvertance, two roll numbers and two different centres were issued to the petitioners but for such like mistakes, a specific notice dated 23122000, copy Annexure R-1, was issued informing all the concerned that in case there was any dispute or ambiguity, the candidates must appears before the Director, SCERT before the date to settle their grievances.
It was obligatory on the part of the petitioners, after receiving two roll numbers in different districts, to approach the Director, SCERT, but none made any effort to get the correct roll numbers as well as the centre.
Even the prospectus contained the condition that if the candidates do no receive the admit card, they should contact the Director.
On the date of entrance test when the Superintendent of the examination centre noticed the absence of the roll numbers of the petitioners in the centre, immediate arrangement was made and all the petitioners were made to appears in the examination.
If the petitioners had informed the Director, SCERT in accordance with the notice published in the newspapers, such situation was not to arise.
More than 188 lacs candidates had appeared in the entrance test and those candidates who were not issued admit cards and had contacted the Director, necessary corrections were made in their cases.
The examination of the petitioners were conducted at Gurgaon itself and there was no question of any leakage of paper because the examination of the petitioners also started with in the scheduled time.
They were provided full time to take the test.
It is further the case of the respondents that there was no two month's time in between the entrance test and the declaration of the result and if the petitioners had any genuine grievance, they had sufficient time to seek legal remedy but they did not make any such grievance anywhere and it was only after the declaration of the result that the petitioners have approached this Court.
The entrance test which they have taken without any objection can not be assailed by the petitioners now then the result of the same is not favourable to them.
6.
It is also stated on merits that the omission of condition regarding erasing and change of answers was done with prior permission of the government/department.
It was made to give chance to the students to correct their mistakes during the examination.
Even in the PMT/CET examinations, there is always a choice of erasing.
The respondents deny that it was on any political consideration.
It is claimed that although the examination started late at 7 centres at Gurgaon but the same was conducted in one sitting.
No candidates was allowed to leave the centre once he had entered the centre.
All the question booklets were in a sealed cover of fifty each, booklets were also stapled and were further sealed in packets.
No one was allowed to open the seal and even the supervisory staff was not allowed to remove the seal.
Only the Superintendent of the centre was allowed to remove the seal and that too 20 minutes prior to start of the examination.
The leakage of stapled question booklets in sealed packets in such short span in the presence of flying squad did not arise.
The news items appeared in Dainik Bhaskar and Tribune, copies Annexures P-1 and P-2, are based on hearsay and presumptions were published after 4 days of the conduct of the examination.
The same very newspaper cuttings were attached with CWP No. 2294 of 2001, this Court has disposed of the said writ petition while giving directions to decide the representation of the petitioners therein.
The inquiry conducted through the DEOs by the SCERT reveals that there have been no adverse remarks about the conduct of the examination and the leakage of papers.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
The main grievance of the petitioners is in respect of holding of their entrances test somewhat late than the other candidates because of issuance of two roll numbers for two different centres of the same candidate.
The petition reveals that some candidates were allotted two roll numbers for appearing at Gurgaon as well as at Ballabgarh ie at two centres and the petitioners when appeared in the centres at Gurgaon they came to know that their roll numbers were not in the list of the examinees of that centre.
It is not disputed that the examination staff immediately came into action and procured surplus sealed test papers of the same entrance test and the petitioners took the test but the same was started late than the scheduled time.
The petitioners do not dispute that they had taken the test.
The petitioners attributed their failure in the entrance test to their taking the test late than the scheduled time and because of absence of the condition of dis-allowed erasing and change of answers which, according to the petitioners, were there in the prospectus in the earlier entrance test which was cancelled.
Be that as it may, this benefit of omission of such condition was equally available to the petitioners like other candidates and the respondents, in their written statement, have specifically stated that such condition was omitted with prior permission of the State Government as well as in the interest of students besides such facility of erasing and change of answers is available in the PMT and CET examinations i.e. the common entrances test for professional studies like medical and engineering courses.
Admittedly, the SCERT has been established and entrusted with the task of taking such like admission tests.
A specific notice was published in the newspapers, copy Annexure R-1, in respect of the entrances test to be conducted on 31122000 informing the candidates that in case they do not receive their roll numbers by 26122000 or if there is any discrepancy, they should visit the Council on 27122000 or 28122000 with their two passport size photographs.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not avail the benefit of this notice to clarify if they were to appear at Gurgaon or at Ballabgarh.
It is very much mentioned that those candidates who had approached the Council in time, discrepancies in their roll numbers as well as centres were removed.
It is not disputed that at one item about 188 lacs candidates had appeared.
The clerical or typographical mistakes or by the computer are likely to be there when such huge number of application forms are to be dealt with.
It was incumbent upon the petitioners to approach the Council in accordance with the aforesaid notice, Annexure R-1, to remove the doubts about their roll numbers as well as centres of examination.
The petitioners do not say any where if such notice was not issued in advance by the SCERT.
It is also to be noticed that the petitioners, after taking the examination, also did not have recourse to any legal remedy.
They reclaimed to have filed a representation.
However, the respondents deny if they have received any such representation.
They have approached this Court only when they did not find their roll numbers in the result list.
8.
In the circumstances, the petitioners appear to have raised grievance to assail the result of the entrance test only when they did not find the result favourable to them.
It is well settled that a candidate who has submitted to the selection process and has participated and was considered can not challenge the same if subsequently the result of the selection is not favourable to him.
It has been so held in the decision of Supreme Court in Madan Lal and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others, AIR 1995.
SC 1088 : 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC) and Mohan Lal Aggarwal and others v. Bhubaneswari Prasad Mishra and others, JT 2001(9) SC 21.
9.
In the light of what has been stated above, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.