SJ Mukhopadhaya, J - This application has been preferred by the petitioner against the order dated 23rd March, 2001, communicated vide Memo No. 732 dated 12th April, 2001, whereby and whereunder the respondents decided to recover a sum of Rs. 60,373 from the Gratuity and leave salary of the petitioner.
2.
As the case can be disposed of on short point, it is not necessary to discuss all the facts, except the relevant one.
3.
The petitioner was a Forest Guard under the respondents and was made to superannuate w.e.f.
31st January, 1997 by an order dated 7th March, 1998.
Against the order of superannuation the petitioner moved this Court in CWJC No. 1009/98(R) and raised dispute relating to date of birth, as recorded in the Service Book.
4.
The respondents, on appearance took place that it was within the knowledge of petitioner that the date of birth in the Service Book was changed from 16th January, 1944 to 16th January, 1939, still suppressing the fact he continued to work beyond the period of superannuation upto 7th March, 1998 when the order was issued.
5.
A Bench of this Court, vide order dated 13th October, 1998 while observing that the responsibility remained on both the sides, held that the respondents having taken work from the petitioner, cannot deny his salary.
The Court further observed that if the petitioner made any concealment knowingly, it was within the ambit of the employer to proceed against the petitioner under Section 43(b) of the Bihar Pension Rules, 1950.
The matter was remanded to the respondents to proceed, in accordance with law, in the light of the observations made by this Court.
6.
The Respondent Conservator of Forests thereafter having issued impugned order, as contained in Memo No. 721 dated 22nd March, 2001, the petitioner has challenged the order, as also the jurisdiction of the officer who passed such order.
7.
According to the respondents, a proceeding under Rule 43(b) was initiated of which sanction was given vide Memo No. 4078 dated 26th October, 1999 (Annexure-B).
After enquiry, report was submitted by Enquiry Officer-cum-DFO, Chatra, South Forest Division, vide Annexure-D The petitioner having found guilty of suppression of reality and having held to have obtained salary and bonus illegally, the impugned order was passed.
8.
Admittedly, the petitioner superannuated/made to superannuate prior to 8th March, 1998.
No departmental proceeding was initiated against him, nor any departmental enquiry or criminal proceeding was pending at the time of retirement.
9.
In the aforesaid background, it cannot be held that any proceeding was deemed to be pending on the date of retirement under Rule 43(b) of the Bihar Pension Rules, 1950, which reads as follows :  "43(b) The State Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period, and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government if the pensioner is found in departmental or judicial proceeding have been guilty of grave misconduct; or to have caused pecuniary loss to Government by misconduct or negligence, during his service including service rendered on re-employment after retirement :- Provided that - (a) such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the Government servant was on duty either before retirement or during re- employment; (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the State Government (ii) shall be in respect of an event which took place not more than four years before the institution of such proceeding; and (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and at such place or places as the State Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to proceedings on which an order of dismissal from service may be made; (b) judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the Government servant was on duty either before retirement or during re-employment, shall have been instituted in accordance with sub-clause (ii) of clause (a); and (c) the Bihar Public Service Commission shall be constituted before final orders are passed.
10.
Under the proviso to Rule 43(b), departmental proceedings having not instituted, while the petitioner was in the service, could not have been instituted save with the sanction of the State Government.
11.
Though the respondents have relied on a Letter No. 4078 dated 26th October, 1998, the same having issued by Additional Secretary and not by the order of the Governor, cannot be said to be an order of sanction of the State Government.
In the said letter, it has not been stated that the State Government has sanctioned to initiate departmental proceeding.
The word `NIRDESH-ANUSAR' (as directed), merely stipulated the direction of the Head of the Department and not of the Stale Government.
12.
Sub-rule A(2) to proviso to Rule 43(b), stipulates that the enquiry is to be conducted by such authority at such place as the 'State Government' may direct.
13.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that the State Government directed or appointed the DFO, South Forest Division, Chatra to enquire into the matter under Rule 43(b).
Thus the finding given by the so called Enquiry Officer as contained in Annexure-D cannot be construed to be an Enquiry Report under Rule 43(b) of the Bihar Pension Rules, 1950.
14.
It is not in dispute that the date of birth of petitioner was recorded as 16th January, 1944.
It was changed to 16th January, 1939 by the authorities.
As such, it cannot be presumed that the petitioner made such change to his disadvantage.
15.
Under Rule 43(b), it is the State Government which has right to withhold or withdraw pension or any part of it, permanently or for a specified period.
No power vested therein to withhold or curtail any amount from the leave encashment.
16.
From the impugned order dated 22nd March, 2001, it will be evident that it has not been issued by the State Government.
The amount has also been curtailed from the leave encashment which is not permissible under Rule 43(b).
17.
Further, under Rule 43(b), the right of order for recovery from pension only arises it there is any pecuniary loss caused to the Government and if the pensioner is found in departmental or judicial proceeding to have been guilty of grave misconduct or to have caused pecuniary loss to the Government by grave misconduct.
18.
From the so-called enquiry report dated 25th January, 2001 enclosed as Annexure-D, it will be evident that no such finding given against the petitioner that he committed grave misconduct or there is a loss of State exchequer because of such grave misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
19.
For the reasons aforesaid as the Conservator of Forests, Hazaribagh Circle, Hazaribagh had no authority to pass any order under previous to Rule 43(b) of Bihar Pension Rules, 1950, the said order dated 22nd March, 2000 is set aside.
20.
The respondents are directed to pay the petitioner the retiral benefits, including full Pension; full Gratuity; GPF; Leave Encashment amount; Group Insurance etc if not yet paid, but not later than a period of two months from the date of receipt/production of a copy of this order.
21.
On failure, the respondents will be liable to pay interest of @ 5% to be calculated from the date of filing of' the writ petition 4th June, 2001).
22.
The writ petition is allowed with the aforesaid observations and directions.
Petition allowed.