Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Issue notice to show cause why petition be not admitted.
2.
Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, accepts notice.
3.
Vide impugned order dated 2932001, Annexure P/5, the request of the petitioner for grant of relief in terms of the policy of the Government dated 24.10.1990 for achievements in sports was denied to the petitioner, because his performance in sports related to the period prior to the date of notification.
4.
This very contention of the State was rejected by the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Om Parkash v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 902 of 1994, decided on 2971994, where the Division Bench held as under :-  "...What the respondent-Government of Haryana has done is to incorporate these instructions in its circular letter dated 24.10.1990.
The policy of the Government is to give encouragement to their Government servants, who excel in the sports activities.
This being the objective, it is not possible to accept the submission of the learned Deputy Advocate General that the benefit of these instructions will not be available to those who have performed well in the sports activities prior to 24.10.1990.
The purpose of incorporating the clause that "the order will come into effect from the date of issue of these instructions" is only to give actual benefit of increments from the date of issue of the instructions.
It is neither intended to restrict the benefit to those who may achieve excellence in future nor such restriction can be considered to be rational.
If we were to interpret Annexure P-4 as limited to the cases in which employees achieve excellence after 24.10.1990 only, it will result clearly within discrimination.
A more rational and constitutional interpretation of these instructions is to allow benefits of incentives to those, who have excelled in the sports activities though such benefits are to be given w.e.f.
24.10.1990.
Therefore, it must be held that rejection of the claim of the petitioner vide annexure P/5 is arbitrary and is liable to be quashed."
5.
We are of the view that the District Education Officer, Sirsa was obliged to consider the Division Bench judgment in its correct perspective and not pass order in apparent contradiction.
We express our regret as well as displeasure to the manner adopted by the concerned officer for overlooking the judgment of this court.
We expect the officer of the State to act in conformity with the settled cannons of law and in accordance with rules.
Compelling the person to approach the court again, where relief could easily be granted by the department itself is not a practice which is indicative of healthy administrative norms in the affairs of the State.
However, we will leave the matter at that.
6.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this writ petition.
The order dated 2932001, copy of which is appended with the petition as Annexure P/5 is set aside and the respondents are directed to pass an appropriate order in accordance with law within six months from the date a certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
Petition allowed.