Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - The principal contention raised on behalf of the petitioner in this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is that the respondents themselves granted fresh opportunity to Shri Birkha Ram and others in furtherance to the judgment passed by a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1770 of 1997 (Birkha Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others) decided on August 13, 1997, a copy of which is annexed with this petition as Annexure P-4 and as such, the action of the respondents is arbitrary and apparently infringes the Constitutional protection granted to the petitioner.
2.
The order dated July 30, 1993, Annexure P-3, has been passed, as a matter of fact, in favour of Shri Birkha Ram and others in furtherance to the judgment pased by a Division Bench of this Court in the aforestated writ petition where these persons were granted right to exercise their option afresh in the year 1998 for the relevant periods from April 1, 1979 to February 29, 1980 and January 1, 1986 to December 31, 1987.
Even otherwise, the case of the petitioner would be squarely covered by the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Bimla Devi v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(2) RSJ 157 : 2000(3) SCT 407 (P&H)(DB).
3.
We see no reason as to why the petitioner should be denied the relief which has been granted to Shri Birkha Ram and others similarly situated like the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the State has argued that the present writ petition suffers from the plea of delay and laches and the petitioner would be disentitled to claim any relief in equity on that score alone.
Certainly, the present petition has been filed after a considerable delay, but that itself would not be sufficient to deny the relief to the petitioner as all persons similarly situated like the petitioner have been granted similar reliefs.
The petitioner had requested the respondent to grant him relief in terms of order dated July 30, 1998.
Annexure P-3, but of no consequence.
The equities between the parties can squarely be adjusted.
I deny to the petitioner arrears of salary payable for a period in excess to the date of institution of the present petition.
It is for the reason that nothing prevented the petitioner from approaching the Court on earlier occasion or raising his claim in that behalf.
5.
In the circumstances aforestated, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to pass appropriate orders in the light of the aforestated judgment within a period of three months from today.
The petitioner, however, will not be entitled to any arrears in excess of salary or other benefits in excess to the date of institution of this writ petition, i.e. May 9, 2000.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.