Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the award passed by the learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Panipat, dated 16.3.1999.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner primarily raised two contentions.
Firstly, that the inquiry conducted by the management was not fair and he was not permitted to summon witnesses for which he had submitted two applications, Annexures P/3 and P/4 to this Writ Petition.
Secondly, it is contended that the learned Presiding Officer, could not have decided the matter on preliminary issue.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
4.
We are of the considered view that both these contentions are without any merit.
In fact, the workman himself admitted the case of the management in regard to inquiry being conducted in a fair and judicious manner.
In this regard we may refer to the observations made by the Presiding Officer in the impugned award, which reads as under :-  "......In cross-examination he admitted that he and Ram Dia received similar charge-sheets and he submitted his reply and also appeared before the Enquiry Officer.
He admitted that the Enquiry was held in his presence.
In another breath he stated that enquiry proceedings dated 1861992 did not take place in his presence but in next breath he admitted that such proceedings have been signed by him and in fact he had signed each and every page of the enquiry proceedings.
If at all the enquiry proceedings had not taken place in his presence on 1861992 he was not to sign the enquiry proceedings and if at all his signatures had been obtained by exercising third degree method then he must have raised an objection through registered post at least.
He admitted that enquiry proceedings on other dates took place in his presence.
He admitted having cross-examined Pankaj Arora but added that he had been asked to ask question simply for the sake of formality.
He also admitted to have made statement in the enquiry proceedings."
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx  This document clearly shows that not only the workman participated in enquiry proceedings but also he was given full opportunity not only to cross examine the witnesses of the management but to lead evidence in his defence.
It is another thing that he did not like to examined any other person as his witness except making his own statement.
The enquiry Officer found the petitioner guilty of the charges of violence, riotous and disorderly behaviour, abusing the superior officer, leaving station or assigned place of duty without permission, insubordination or disobedience as detailed in charge sheet dated 23/2751992."
5.
In view of the above recorded findings, which are primarily findings of fact, this court would not interfere in such findings in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
6.
It is clear that the inquiry was conducted in a fair and proper manner and the workman was given sufficient opportunities to put forward his case.
In regard to first contention, it would be noticed that the statement of claim filed by the workman before the Labour Court is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/12.
In the entire statement of claim, no reference has been made of the two letters allegedly written by the workman for production of his witnesses.
It is also not stated in this statement of claim that the workman had not received the copy of the inquiry report and the order of dismissal was vitiated.
In view of the nature of mis-conduct of the workman, which relates to beating of the Manager in the industrial premises as well as finding of facts holding that the domestic inquiry was fair and proper, we see no reason to interfere in the impugned award.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.