Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - CM No. 2595 of 2002.
1.
Application is allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Exemption as prayed for is granted.
CM stands disposed of.
CM No. 2594 of 2002.
2.
The present application for amendment has been filed in furtherance to the order of the Court dated 13122001.
As no notice was issued in the main petition, we allow the amendment ex-parte.
The amended petition is permitted to be taken on record.
C.W.P.
No. 19476 of 2001.
3.
We heard counsel for the petitioner at some length.
4.
The services of petitioner were terminated after holding a departmental enquiry and following the prescribed procedure.
The learned Labour Court while deciding reference under Section 10(i)(C) of the Industrial Disputes Act gave findings that enquiry had been held in accordance with law and was not vitiated on any other ground.
The findings recorded by the Labour Court are as under :-  "Therefore, the Enquiry Officer submitted a detailed and well reasoned enquiry report Ex. M-17, upholding the charges levelled against the petitioner.
The documents on record fully proved the case of the management that the enquiry conducted by Lajpat Rai was fair and proper and that full opportunity was offered to the petitioner to defend himself in the case.
The allegation against the petitioner regarding mis-appropriation of Govt. amount of Rs. 161/- was established.
The petitioner never bothered to produce anyone from the public to counter the allegations of the management.
The petitioner had not issued tickets to some of the passengers and thereby mis-appropriated a sum of Rs. 161/- for his illegal gain.
The petitioner also quarrelled with the checking staff and instigated the ITI students to gherao the jeep of the checking staff.
The petitioner also did not allow the bus driver to take the bus to the police station as desired by the checking staff.
In view of this, the management has rightly issued a show-cause notice dated 23.5.1992 (Ex.M-6) to the petitioner.
Petitioner's reply dated 6.6.1992 (Ex. M-8) was considered by the management.
Thereafter, the management gave personal hearing vide letter dated 961992 (Ex. M-9).
The petitioner was directed to appear before General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon for personal hearing before any action could be taken against him.
This letter was received by the petitioner as is apparent from a copy of receipt Ex. M-10.
Another letter was sent on 971992 (Ex. M-11) for personal hearing by General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon to the petitioner for appearance on 13.7.1992.
After perusing the enquiry report and hearing the petitioner and by keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case including evidence on record.
The General manager, Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon, passed a detailed speaking order on 781992 (Ex.M-12) whereby the services of the petitioner were terminated.
Appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed by the Appellate Authority on 1051994 vide Ex.M-13.
From all this, it is quite apparent that the orders passed by the authorities, in the present case, are quite legal and proper.
There is no illegality/infirmity in the orders passed.
5.
These findings of fact were recorded upon proper appreciation of evidence and witnesses were examined before the Labour Court to show that the enquiry was not vitiated.
keeping in mind the seriousness of the charges, we see no reason to interfere.
6.
This writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.