Swatanter Kumar, J - The name of the petitioner was recommended by the Employment Exchange, Zila Sainik Board, and upon interview he was appointed as Chowkidar-cum-Mali vide letter dated 191992.
The petitioner joined his duties on 1191992.
The petitioner was initially appointed in the Maintenance Cell on daily wages as a Mali on a fixed salary.
However, on 27.10.1994, the petitioner submitted a fresh application and he was appointed under the World Bank Project by the Director, Technical Education, Haryana, subject to the conditions stated in the said letter.
This appointment was in the regular pay scale with other benefits and one of the conditions was that the petitioner will not claim any other benefit.
These conditions were accepted by the petitioner without protest and he joined his new assignment in the regular pay scale.
2.
According to the petitioner, an order of termination of his services was passed by the respondents on 1651995 against which he served notice of demand and the matter was referred to Industrial-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, who rejected the claim of the petitioner vide its award dated 26.3.2001 annexed to the petition as Annexure P/10.
3.
Challenge in this petition is to the award of Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak dated 26.3.2001.
The Labour Court recorded the following findings, which are relevant for decision of this Case :-  "Moreover, in this case it makes no difference if the workman had completed 240 days of service or not because appointment of the workman on the post of chowkidar-cum-peon is fresh from 27.10.1994 and this appointment of the workman was subject to the certain terms and conditions.
The workman accepted his appointment admitting the terms and conditions of the appointment letter Ex.M-2.
In the appointment letter it is mentioned that appointment is subject to approval and sanction of the post under the World Bank Scheme by the Director of Technical Education, Haryana.
Letter Ex.M-3 dated 29111994 shows that a letter was written to the Director of Technical Education, Haryana, for sanction and approval of the post on which the workman was working and regarding few other such type of appointments.
Letter Ex.M-4 shows that Director of Technical Education, Haryana did not sanction and declined approval of the appointment.
On the basis of the letter Ex.M-4 dated 2931995 the service of the workman was terminated vide order dated 1651995 Ex.M-5.
In my view the service of the workman was rightly terminated by the management as post was not sanctioned and appointment was not approved by the Director of Technical Education, Haryana.
The workman cannot blame the management in this connection because in the appointment letter it was made clear that the appointment of the workman is subject to sanction of the post and approval of the appointment by Director of Technical Education, Haryana.
In these circumstances the case in hand, cannot be considered as the case of retrenchment."
4.
The above findings are based upon proper appreciation of evidence and are not erroneous in law.
The workman was granted tenure appointment subject to the sanction being granted by the Director, which was declined as is apparent from Ex.M-3 and Ex.M-4.
We see no reason to interfere in the impugned award in exercise of powers of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.