Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - The services of the respondent were terminated on June 1, 1986.
He raised an industrial dispute, which was referred to the Labour Court vide notification dated 10th October, 1995.
The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur, vide award dated January 18, 2001, answered the reference in favour of the workman and ordered reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
While challenging the said award, it is contended on behalf of the State that there was inordinate delay in approaching the labour for reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Dispute Act.
The delay is stated to be of 8 years.
The question of delay has been considered by the Labour Court and has been answered in favour of the workman keeping in view the principle enunciated in the case Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum- Processing Service Society Ltd & Anr., 1999(2) SCT 667 (SC) : JT 1999(3) SC 38.
3.
We do not see any reason to interfere with the impugned award on this ground alone, as the management has no case on merit whatsoever.
4.
To grant full back wages was fully justified in the present case as witness of the management MW1 particularly not only admitted the claim of the workman but also prima facie established on record that the termination of workman was in violation of the principles of natural justice and statutory provisions of the Act.
We may refer to the relevant part of the impugned award, which reads as under :-  "........The entire case of the workman that he worked from 1st December, 1982 to 27th June, 1986 as Sweeper stands admitted/proved from the admission of MW-1 when he states in the cross-examination that the workman was working as Sweeper from 1st December, 1982 to 27th June, 1987.
He has further admitted in the cross-examination that no notice, notice pay and retrenchment compensation was paid to the workman before terminating his services.
He has further admitted in the cross-examination that no seniority list of daily wages employees was maintained and he does not know if Mohan Lal Junior to him is still working with the respondent and he also does not know if fresh hands were also recruited after termination of services of the workman and he also does not know if any enquiry or charge-sheet was served upon the workman."
5.
For reasons afore-stated, we see no ground to interfere with the award.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.