RL Anand, J - RK Salwan, petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and he has sought a direction against the respondents to release a sum of Rs. 41750/- along with interest at the rate of 18%, incurred by the petitioner for his treatment.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was working in the Electricity Department of Municipal Corporation, Amritsar which was taken over by Punjab Electricity Board and in this manner the petitioner is serving with the Board as Superintending Engineer.
In the month of October, 1990, the petitioner felt suffocation and pain in the chest in Delhi and was taken to Escort Hospital.
The petitioner underwent angiography test on 3.10.1990 and he spent a sum of Rs. 10750/-.
On 4101990 he was discharged.
On 12101990, the petitioner again felt pain in the chest and was taken to Guru Nanak Dev Hospital.
Amritsar and he was advised to undergo angiography which was undertaken by the petitioner in Escort Hospital Delhi where he remained admitted for a few days.
Thereafter, by-pass surgery was conducted upon the petitioner and he was discharged from the Escort Hospital, Delhi in the month of November, 1990.
While he was undertaking the medical treatment he incurred a sum of Rs. 81750/- out of which he was paid Rs. 40,000/- only leaving the balance of Rs. 41750/- which the petitioner is now claiming from the respondents.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and according to the respondents the petitioner is not entitled to full reimbursement.
Rather he is entitled to the reimbursement on the rates applicable to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi or such rates which are approved by Director Health Services.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has relied upon a judgment of DB of this Court reported in KL Kohli v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(4) SCT 280 (P&H)(DB) : 1995(3) PLR 88, wherein it was observed that if a public servant had taken the treatment in Escort, Hospital New Delhi in emergent circumstances and the institution was duly recognised for treatment, in such a situation the petitioner is entitled to get medical reimbursement if ex post facto permission has been granted for the treatment.
The judgment is not helpful to the petitioner as it is not laid down in this judgment whether the petitioner will be entitled to full reimbursement.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court reported in 1998(1) SCT 717, State of Punjab v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down that if a State Government has framed medical policy to undertake treatment in private hospital of their choice anywhere in country, the State Government is supposed to reimburse the medical expenses at the rates fixed by the Director, Health and Family Planning.
It was further held in the cited judgment that the public servant is not entitled to full medical reimbursement as per the policy and decision of the Government and such policy if framed by the Government is not hit by Articles 21 and 47 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Thus, relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, I am of the considered view that this writ petition is totally devoid of any merit.
Resultantly, the present petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.