RL Anand, J - Mrs Shobha Chaudhary has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against respondent No. 1 directing it to comply with the resolution of the Executive Council i.e.
Resolution No. 18 passed in meeting No. 49 held on 3042001.
She has further prayed that directions be also issued to the University to allow her to join as Lecturer in Economics forthwith.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she was appointed as Lecturer in the Department of Economics initially against a leave vacancy on 23.1.1992.
She submitted her joining report on 1131992.
On 2531992 she submitted an application that her services may be regularised.
On 27.3.1992 she was informed that her appointment was approved by the Executive Council vide resolution No. 28 dated 27111991.
She was further informed to continue as Lecturer against any leave vacancy as approved by the Vice Chancellor.
so much so, on 28.8.1992, the head of Department of Economics recommended the case of the petitioner for regularisation.
On 16121992, the University informed the Head of Department of Economics that the petitioner has been allowed to continue against a leave vacancy.
The case of the petitioner further is that throughout (though ?)
the minutes of the meeting dated 3042001 were approved but inspite of that her services are going to be removed by the University which has no jurisdiction to do so and the action is being taken by the University at the behest of some executive authorities who are out and out to harm her interest.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
A preliminary objection was taken that the writ of mandamus is not legally maintainable as there is no legal right vested in the petitioner compelling the respondents to act in a particular manner.
The case of the respondents is that the petitioner was earlier working as a Research Assistant in the Department of Mathematics since 2311985 in the pay scale of Rs. 1640-2900/-.
Three posts of Lecturers including one leave vacancy were advertised by the Department of Statistics of the respondent- University.
The petitioner was one of the candidates.
The Selection Committee after interviewing the candidates in its meeting held on 16111991 recommended the names of certain persons.
The name of the petitioner was at Sr. No. 4 in order of merit.
The first two candidates namely Shri Suresh Chander and Ms. Shashi Behl were issued the appointment letters on regular basis and the third candidate Ms. Ratna Raj Laxmi was issued the appointment letter against leave vacancy on 16111991.
The name of the petitioner was on the waiting list at Sr. No. 4 of the panel.
Dr. Rajinder Chaudhary, Lecturer in the Department of Economics, applied for duty leave to work for total literacy campaign in Haryana.
Against that vacancy the Vice Chancellor passed the order for appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in the Department of Economics against the leave vacancy of Dr. Rajinder Chaudhary on the basis of her name being on the waiting list of panel for appointment to the posts of Lecturers in Statistics.
Her appointment was for a period of six months.
However, she continued as Lecturer in the Department of Economics on temporary basis against the leave vacancy till 28.2.1996.
When there was no vacancy in the Department of Economics the petitioner was directed to join her substantive post in the Department of Mathematics.
But she filed a civil suit against her relieving from the Department of Economics.
Her suit was dismissed.
Then she filed an appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Rohtak, which was also dismissed.
In this view of the matter, it is not open to the petitioner to agitate the same issue in the present writ petition.
Subsequently some more facts came to the notice of the University.
The Executive Council in its meeting held on 2282001 did not confirm its decision taken under Resolution No. 18 and the case was summoned by the State Government for examination.
The new facts which came to the notice of the Executive Council were that the Department of Economics did not have adequate workload even for the existing strength of teachers.
The next post of Lecturer whenever filled was to go to a Scheduled Caste candidate and that the petitioner never faced the Selection Committee for recruitment to the post of Lecturer in Economics as per requirement of Statute 12(c) and 22.
The petitioner was initially appointed against a leave vacancy then available for teaching a paper relating to statistics to avoid calling fresh applications and holding fresh interview because she possessed the required qualifications and was next on the panel.
A person selected against a leave vacancy for a specific period of time could not have any right to demand regulatisation against the same or any other vacancy subsequently if and when the post falls vacant permanently.
The resolution dated 3042001 has not been implemented and the action of the University in not implementing the resolution is perfectly legal, fair and sustainable in the eyes of law.
In view of the provisions under Statute 11-A of the Maharshi Dayanand University Act, 1975 the earlier resolution has not been rightly confirmed by the Executive Council.
In short the defence of the respondents is that the petitioner has no right to the post as her civil suit has already been dismissed on the same lines.
4.
During the course of submissions the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed on record the rejoinder to the written statement filed by the petitioner which is taken on record in the interest of justice.
5.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. RS Tacoria, Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
We are of the considered opinion that this writ petition is totally devoid of any merit as the petitioner had no subsisting right to call upon the respondents to comply Resolution No. 18 dated 3042001 of the Executive Council.
She was on the waiting list.
Subsequently she was given appointment on gratuitous post for a limited period.
She earlier filed a civil suit which was dismissed by the competent court of jurisdiction and the observations of the civil court will be binding to the petitioner and in the light of the findings given by the civil court the present writ petition is liable to be dismissed on this short ground.
The resolution vide which the petitioner was adjusted has never seen the approval of the State Government which is financing and funding authority of the University.
If the Executive Council does anything in an illegal manner that does not bind the University itself.
7.
Resultantly, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and thereby dismiss the same.
Petition which is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.