Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Vide order dated September 9, 1999 the petitioner was compulsorily retired from service while granting him three months' notice under Rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1, Part 1, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The petitioner impugns this order in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The only contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is that the adverse entries recorded for the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 were not communicated within the stipulated time under the instructions within a year of their recording, but they were communicated to the petitioner on May 7, 1999.
The petitioner had submitted his representations for expungment of the remarks.
As the representations were pending, the petitioner could not have been prematurely retired while passing the impugned order dated September 9, 1999.
3.
Upon notice, written statement has been filed on behalf of the State wherein it is stated that the petitioner does not have 70% good reports for the last 10 years and as such, he could not be permitted to continue in service and has rightly been retired compulsorily from government job.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
5.
The decision with regard to continuation in service or otherwise of a government servant squarely falls in the domain of the competent authorities.
The authorities are required to examine the entire service record of the person before passing an order of compulsory retirement against the employee.
It is subjective satisfaction of the authorities concerned.
To arrive at objectively, the authorities must keep in mind the basic principle of excellence being retained in service while dead-wood is removed from the service cadre.
Certainly the authorities have to competitively examine the service record of the employee in face of the parameters controlling such administrative matters.
Consideration of the entire service record objectively is the bounden duty of the authorities concerned before passing such an order.
Reference in this regard can be made to the judgment of this Court in the case of Angrez Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(4) All Instant Judgments 91.
In the present case, the petitioner had three adverse entries relating to the years 1991-92 to 1993-94, which were not communicated to the petitioner timely.
Petitioner contended that non-comunicated entries could not be taken into consideration by the authorities while passing such an order.
6.
The mere fact that the adverse entries recorded in the Annual Confidential Reports of the government servant are communicated belatedly, would not have the effect of wiping out the entries from the service record of the employee.
In the case of Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, AIR 1992 SC 1020 : 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has enunciated the principle that even uncommunicated adverse entries can be taken into consideration while passing the order of compulsory retirement.
No mala fides have been pleaded against any authority.
In the absence of such pleadings, the Court must presume that the things have been done validly in the normal course of business of the department.
The cumulative effect of the service record of the petitioner does not indicate that the decision of the government while passing the impugned order dated September 9, 1999 was either arbitrary or with an ulterior motive.
7.
The petitioner has claimed interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the payment of his benefits like gratuity and leave encashment etc.
The amount was paid within two months after the retirement of the petitioner.
Furthermore, there are no pleadings in the writ petition as to for what period the interest is claimed and for what period the benefits were not released in terms of the instructions issued by the government.
It is the case of vague pleadings which itself would disentitle the petitioner from claiming the interest.
We decline the interest and dismiss the writ petition, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.