SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner joined Army service on 1871963.
He was released on 17.6.1979 on compassionate grounds.
Emergency was declared on 26101962 and continued upto 1011968.
Petitioner joined civil service with respondent No. 2. on 21.7.1981.
2.
Petitioner is seeking benefit of Army service as per Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (for short "the Rules").
Rule 4 of the said rules, is regarding increments, seniority and pension.
The same reads as under :-  "4.
Increments, seniority and pension - Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under :- i) Increments :- The period spent, by a person on military service, after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in rules 39, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
ii) Seniority :- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
iii) Pension :- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent service or post under the Government subject to the following conditions :- 1) The person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question.
2) Any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government.
3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Government shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in occupational [sic] cases under the orders of the Government."
3.
The respondents are relying on proviso to rule 4, which has been added subsequently.
It is as under :-  "Provided that a person who has been released from the Military service on compassionate grounds shall not be entitled to any concession under this rule."
The amendment was brought into effect by incorporating the proviso on 5111976.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that this amendment brought in by the proviso to rule 4 is violative of the provisions of the Constitution and, therefore, respondents cannot rely on the same.
He has relied on the judgment, in the case of Raj Pal Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and others, reported as AIR 1985 SC 1263.
In Paragraph 7 of the said judgment, their Lordships have observed as under :-  "Under this view of the legal position the petitioners herein are also entitled to the benefits of R 4 and the mere fact that they were released from military service on compassionate grounds cannot disentitle them as they satisfy the requirement of R 4 of the Punjab Rules as it originally stood.
The grounds on which they were released are not material.
If once they are held to be ex-military servicemen, they are entitled to the benefits of R 4".
5.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has argued that the judgment in the case of Raj Pal Sharma (supra) has been based on the earlier judgment in the case of KC Arora which is reported in 1984(2) SLR 97.
It is a case of Ex- Capt.
KC Arora v. State of Haryana.
Their Lordships in the case of Raj Pal Sharma (supra) and observed in subsequent paras No. 8 and 9 of the judgment, as under :-  "8.
The earlier two amendments, viz. the first and the second amendments brought in 1976 have already been held to bad and ultra vires the Constitution in KC Arora's case (1984 Lab IC 1015) (supra) and the principles laid down in that decision are equally applicable to the amendment whereby proviso to R 4 was added with retrospective effect.
The proviso to Rs. 4 in the view that we have taken cannot disentitle the petitioners to get the benefit of R 4.
9.
For the reasons given in KC Arora's case the writ petitions must succeed.
They are accordingly allowed and a writ in the nature of mandamus is issued directing the respondents 1 and 2 to confer the benefits of ex-military/air force service to the petitioners within a period of six months from the date of this judgment.
There is, however, no order as to costs."
6.
According to the learned counsel for respondent No. 2, the findings given in Raj Pal Sharma's case were based on the judgment in KC Arora's (supra) case and the question decided was whether the retrospective effect of amendment was valid or not ?
7.
No doubt, their Lordships relied on the judgment of KC Arora's case (supra), however, they have also laid down that the release from military service on compassionate grounds cannot dis-entitle persons from the benefit of rule 4 and the grounds on which they are released are not material and once they are held to be ex-military servicemen, they are entitled to the benefits of Rule 4.
The questions which were considered by the Supreme Court were :-  a) Whether the Government has the power to amend with retrospective effect the rules to their detriment so as to take away the benefits already conferred on the petitioners ?
b) Whether the amendment to these rules violates Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
8.
We are, at present, concerned with the second question, the first question is also decided by the Supreme Court in view of the judgment in KC Arora's case.
9.
In Paragraph 6 of the judgment, in the case of Raj Pal Sharma (supra), the Supreme Court has observed that  "....in order to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled (1) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differential which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group, and (2) that the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
In the instant cases the petitioners are all ex- military personnel.
They have also been released from military service.
All those persons released from military service constitute one class and it is not possible to single out certain persons of the same class for differential treatment.
There appears to be no reasonable classification between the persons who were released on compassionate grounds and those who were released on other grounds and in this respect the petitioners have been deprived of the equal opportunity.
The amendment, therefore, is violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution and, therefore, bad."
10.
The principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Raj Pal Sharma's case (supra), therefore, squarely cover the present case in favour of the petitioner.
11.
This writ petition is, therefore, allowed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to grant the benefit of military service from 1871963 upto 1011968 to the petitioner for the purpose of increments, seniority and promotion.
12.
Let the needful be done within 6 months from today.
Petition allowed.