SS Sudhalkar, J - Haryana Public Service Commission advertised four posts of Deputy Superintendent, Jail.
The petitioner applied for the post.
A screening test was carried out.
Thereafter the petitioner was called for interview.
On 1432000, the final result of the selection was declared and the petitioner was selected and was placed at serial No. 2 in the merit list.
2.
The petitioner contends that his father had contested an election for the Legislative Assembly from Charkhi Dadri on the ticket of Haryana Vikas Party.
The elections were held on 2222000.
It is further contended that because of the political rivalry with the father of the petitioner, an FIR No. 26 dated 2222000 was registered in the police station City Dadri against various persons and the name of the petitioner was also mentioned in the same.
It is contended that in the FIR, allegations were made that when some persons were coming back after casting their votes on the date of election, they were man- handled.
The challan of the case was presented i the Court of the Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Charkhi Dadri on 1982000.
The challen was for the offence under Sections 148, 149, 323, 506 and 188 of the Indian Penal Code.
In the challan the name of the petitioner was in column No. 2.
The accused, who had been tied for the above mentioned sections, were ultimately acquitted on 8112000.
The contention of the petitioner is that because of the political rivalry, he was falsely implicated in the criminal case and thereafter though he was selected after the interview, was not given appointment because of the criminal case.
He has prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to consider and appoint him as Deputy Superintendent Jail in pursuance to the selection.
3.
Respondent No. 5 has filed the written statement, in which it is inter alia contended that the police verification with regard to the petitioner was received in the office of respondent No. 5 from the Deputy Commissioner, Bhiwani.
The case was got verified from Local Police and the SHO had reported that FIR No. 26 dated 2222000 under Sections 148, 149, 188, 307 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against the petitioner and others and a detailed report was sent to the Deputy Commissioner, Bhiwani.
It is admitted that the case of the petitioner for fresh character verification was received in the office vide memo, dated 2092000 and after obtaining a fresh report from the local police, a detailed report was sent to the Deputy Commissioner.
It is contended that it was mentioned in the report that the petitioner was found innocent in the FIR.
It is admitted that all the accused in the case were acquitted.
4.
Respondent No. 4 has filed a separate written statement.
It has also mentioned the facts regarding the FIR.
It has been mentioned inter alia in the written statement that a fresh report of character verification was made and that as per the police report Annexure R2, the petitioner was taking part in party politics.
Annexure R2 with the said written statement is dated 2112000.
A text of the same is reproduced below :-  "The character and antecedents of Sh. Sunil Sangwan S/o Sh. Satpal Sangwan, r/o H. No. 235, Vikas Nagar, Bhiwani have been got verified by local police.
The name, father name and photo of the applicant affixed on form are found correct.
He is residing at Loharu Road, Dadri and it has come to the notice that his father Sh. Satpal Sangwan is active worker of Haryana Vikas Party and shri Sunil Sangwan also takes part in party politics (Politics).
The case No. 26, dated 2222000 under Sections 148/149/188/307/506 IPC was registered against him in PS City Dadri, wherein he has been got proved innocent by the investigating officer, while he is complainant for other side in the cross case.
This case is under consideration in the Hon'ble Court.
Any facts can come to the notice at the time of evidence.
It is proved from the above facts that he takes part in the party politics."
It is, therefore, not in dispute that after the selection of the petitioner the re-verification of the character antecedents was made.
In the re- verification, the adverse opinion is only because of the involvement of the name of the petitioner in the FIR.
Of course, it is not in dispute that the father of the petitioner is an active worker of the Haryana Vikas Party.
However, for the purpose of involving the petitioner in the allegation of the party politics, the basis is the FIR itself.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the name of the petitioner was involved in the FIR by mistake.
He has argued that the police found the petitioner to be innocent and did not place his name in the first column of the challan but his name was placed in the second column.
Even those, who had been challenged (challaned ?)
and charge-sheeted were acquitted of the charges.
He has further contended that in the challan the charge of offence under Section 307 was deleted.
6.
When the writ petition came up for hearing, order dated 30/3172001 was produced, vide which the respondents denied appointment to the petitioner.
The petitioner amended the writ petition for challenging that order also.
It is at Annexure P-7.
The appointment is declined because the petitioner is allegedly taking part in the politics.
7.
So far as involvement in party politics in concerned, the respondents are relying only on the allegations in the FIR.
Learned counsel for the petitioners had produced on record a copy of the affidavit of Kuldip Singh son of Mohinder Singh, who has stated that the FIR was got registered as per his statement and the name of the petitioner was got written in the FIR at the instance of some other persons.
He does not know the petitioner by face and his name was got written due to misunderstanding.
Counsel for the petitioner has argued that this affidavit was produced by the complainant of the FIR before the police.
So far as the last contention is concerned, there is no dispute from the other side.
8.
Therefore, what emerges is that the petitioner was selected for the post in question.
However, the appointment was not given because of the re- verification of his character antecedents, which were found adverse because of the involvement of his name in the FIR.
It is also evident that the complainant of the FIR had given an affidavit before the police absolving the petitioner on the reasons referred to above.
The name of the petitioner was in the second column of the challan.
Ultimately the case against the other accused has also ended in acquittal.
In view of these reasons, the findings of reverification of the character antecedents which are based on the filing of the FIR involving the name of the petitioner do not stand.
9.
Learned State counsel has relied on the case of Delhi Administration v. Sushil Kumar, reported in 1997(1) SCT 474 (SC) : 1996(4) RSJ 648.
In that case though the petitioner was found physically fit, on verification it was found that his antecedents were such that the appointment to the post of constable was not found desirable and hence his name was rejected.
The order was impugned before the CAT, which allowed the application on the ground that since the respondents had been discharge/acquitted of the offence punishable under Sections 304, 324 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, he cannot be denied the right of appointment for the post.
The Supreme Court held that the verification of the character and antecedents is one of the important criteria to test whether the selected candidate is suitable to a post under the State and though he was discharged/acquitted of the criminal offence, the same has nothing to do with the question and what would be relevant is the conduct and character of the candidate to be appointed to the service and not the actual result of the criminal case for the petitioner.
The learned counsel has cited a case of The State of Madhya Pradesh v. Ramashankar Raghuvashi and another, 1983(1) SLR 575.
That was a case of termination of service founded on the report of the police that the employee was not a fit person to be entertained in government service, as he had taken part in `RSS and Jan Sangh activities'.
It was observed by the Supreme Court that the termination cannot be made on the basis of past political activities.
10.
The present case is not a case of termination.
Also it is not a case where the petitioner was tried and acquitted/discharged.
In the FIR the name of the petitioner was included regarding an incident, which took place after the polling of votes.
However, the complainant of the FIR has in his affidavit submitted before the police completely cleared the petitioner of the allegations.
As a result, the petitioner was neither challaned nor charge- sheeted in the criminal case.
From the affidavit of the complainant, it appears that the naming of the petitioner was not at his instance and was due to misunderstanding.
Therefore, the re-verification and the order dated 30/3172001 passed on the basis of the FIR has to be quashed.
11.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and the order dated 30/3172001 is quashed and the respondents are directed to consider appointment of the petitioner to the post in question, ignoring the re- verification.
Petition allowed.