AK Yog, J - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Standing Counsel representing respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
2.
This writ petition is being heard finally and decided under the rules of the Court as also agreed by the counsel for the parties.
3.
Photo-copies of the certified copies of the papers relating to Original Suit No. 89 of 2000 (Smt. Kushum Devi v. Asrun Kumar Sen) under Section 13 of Hindu Marriage Act, show that the Petitioner, who is daughter of late Bhagawat Prasad, was married to one Arun Kumar Sen and the said marriage has been dissolved by a decree of divorce dated 17122000 under Section 13 of Hindu Marriage Act.
There is nothing on record to show that petitioner has remarried.
4.
Father of the petitioner Bhagawat Prasad, employed in the respondent's office at Jhansi, died on 11.11.1999 leaving behind hid widow who submitted an application on 1812001 for giving compassionate appointment of her daughter, the present petitioner (annexure 1 to the writ petition) to the Commissioner and Director UP Industry Department Kanpur, who forwarded the same to the General Manager for consideration under relevant Dying in Harness `rules' for appointment.
In the said application wife of the deceased employee, late Bhagawat Prasad aforementioned requested for giving appointment to her daughter (namely the petitioner).
The petitioner in a representation dated 16.4.2001 submitted that there was no other family member of Bhagawat Prasad except her mother, who was old and not able to take up the copy of the application is filed Annexure 4 to the writ petition.
5.
General Manager vide impugned order dated 952001 (Annexure 5 to the writ petition), rejected the petitioner's claim for compassionate appointment under The UP Recruitment Dependents of Government Servants (Dying in Harness) Rules 1974 (for short called `the rules') and held that under the said definition of the word `family' under the Rules only `wife' or `husband' sons or `unmarried daughters' widowed daughters are covered and since the petitioner was divorced daughter, her claim under the aforesaid Rules was not maintainable.
6.
Rule 2 shows that the definition of word family is inclusive and not exclusive.
7.
Rule 2(c) of the Rules, 1974 is quoted below :  (c) family shall include the following relations of the deceased Government servant : (i) Wife or husband (ii) Sons (iii) Unmarried and widowed daughters 8.
Petitioners counsel placed reliance upon the decision in the case of State of UP v. Rajendra Kumar, 1999(83) FLR 523 (DB), wherein this Court referring to various decisions held that the word `family' used in Rules 2(c) is not exhaustive and a `grandson' who is dependent upon a deceased employee will be covered under aforesaid `Rule' which is a piece of beneficial legislation and has to be liberally construed.
9.
Paras 5, 11 and 12 of the said judgment in the case of State of UP (supra) are quoted for ready reference:  "5.
The learned single Judge agreed with this submission and we also agree with the same.
The word `includes' connotes that the persons mentioned in Rule 2(c) are not exhaustive of the meaning of the word family but are only inclusive.
This implies that the word `family' is not limited to the persons mentioned in Rule 2(c) but more persons can be included in the definition of the word `family' in certain respects.
11.
It may also be mentioned that the modern method of interpretation, as pointed out by Lord Denning in his Book, `The Discipline of Law' is purposive and not literal.
The literal method of interpretation as pointed out by Lord Denning is out of vogue everywhere in the world and now the Courts see the intention and not the liberal meaning.
This view has also been accepted by our Supreme Court in several decisions e.g. in Hindustan Lever Limited v. Ashok Vishnu Kate and others.
In Administrator, Municipal Corporation v. Dattatray, the Supreme Court observed : The mechanical approach to construction is altogether out of step with the modern positive approach.
The modern positive approach is to have a purposeful construction that is to effectuate the object and purpose of the Act.
12.
In the present case the respondent was the dependent of his grandfather who died in harness.
In our opinion, therefore, the learned single Judge has rightly held that the respondent is entitled to the benefit of the Dying in Harness Rules.
The said Rules are a piece of beneficial legislation and have to be liberally construed.
10.
Rule 2(c) of the Rules is only descriptive so as to include `unmarried and widowed daughters' who may be eligible for seeking compassionate appointment provided they are dependents of the deceased employee.
11.
A divorced daughter, if dependent upon her father cannot be excluded and has to he included within the meaning of the word `family' since such a `Divorced daughter,' if dependent upon her father, has to be treated at par with an unmarried daughter or widowed daughter as all of them continue to be liability of their father as members of the family of their `father'.
12.
It is to be noted that a widowed daughter, normally continues to receive support and other benefits from the family of her husband.
Her relationship with the family of her husband does not automatically come to an end.
In contrast, a divorced daughter snaps all her relationship with her husband and his family and loses status of a married woman.
There is no logic to exclude a divorced daughter dependent upon her father from the definition of the word `family' under the Rules.
13.
The above view is fortified from the provision contained in Rule 6 of Order XXXIIA.
Code of Civil Procedure wherein expression `family' is as follows :-  6.
`Family' - Meaning of - For the purposes of this Order, each of the following shall be treated as constituting a family, namely : (a) (i) ...................... (ii) ......................... (iii) ......................... (b) ......................... (c) a woman not having a husband or not living together with her husband and child or children being issue of hers, and any child or children being maintained by her : 14.
In view of the above, the reason given in the impugned order dated 952000 is vitiated in law and cannot be allowed to stand.
15.
The impugned order is set aside.
The concerned authority namely General Manager (respondent No. 2) is directed to decide the claim of the petitioner for compassionate appointment in accordance with law and subject to the observations made above, i.e. in case the petitioner happens to be the dependent upon her deceased father at the time of death and continues to be so for the reason that she has neither remarried nor otherwise employed elsewhere, and family is in distress, her claim has to be considered as unmarried daughter subject however to the condition that she shall give an undertaking to support her widowed mother in case she is offered appointment under the aforesaid Rules, 1974.
16.
Subject to the above observations the petition stands allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.