Arun Kumar Goel, J - Facts on which parties are not at variance in this case are as under :  Petitioner was appointed vide Annexure "A" to the writ petition on 23rd October 89 as GDO GD-II (Dy.
Superintendent of Police/Company Commander) in the CRPF on temporary basis.
Amongst other conditions Clause 51 of this appointment order was in the following terms : "i) The condition that on your appointment as Medical Officer Gd-II, you will be required to serve the Force for a minimum period of three years of initial engagement.
The appointing authority may, during the period of initial appointment, permit you for good and sufficient reason, to resign from the Force with effect from such date as may be specified in the order accepting your resignation."
2.
Petitioner continued to work in the CRPF at different places.
On 22.8.1992 he was granted 15 days LKD (leave of the kind due).
Petitioner submitted a communication dated 30th August 92 (Annexure "D" to the writ petition) to respondent No. 2 on the subject `quitting service'.
Contents of this communication are as under :  "Dr. Arvind Kumar C/o.
Thiru K Bhaskaran 13 B-Srinivasa Street Naradhapuri, Chromepet Madras - 600064 To The Director General, CRPF C.G.O.
Complex, Lodhi road, New Delhi - 110003.
Through : (Proper Channel) Sub :- Quitting Service.
Sir, With dur regards I am submitting these few lines for your kind consideration, please.
I joined CRPF on 10th Nov 1989 with 21-BN.
CRPF and served it till 24th August, 92.
Due to compelling, personal and domestic circumstances I am not able to serve CRPF any more.
In view of the above I humbly request you to take further needful action please in this regard, so that I cease to be a member of CRPF from 09th Sept 1992.
I further request you to communicate your decision at the address given above and direct PAO-CRPF to release all my dues after final adjustment to my banker SBI Suratgarh at the earliest.
Thinking you, Yours faithfully, 30th August 92, (Dr. Arivind Kumar) GDO-II, 16-BN CRPF I.R.L.A.
No. 2862 (On EL)" 3.
Without awaiting for the outcome of Annexure "D" extracted herinabove petitioner joined Hindustan Zinc Limited.
He has received letter of appointment from this concern in May 92.
Neither he informed the respondents nor he had routed his application through proper channel.
4.
After the receipt of annexure "D", communications were address to the petitioner at the address as detailed in the said annexure.
It may be noted that address given is of Madras.
Record of the case shows that besides addressing communications at Madras address of the petitioner, those were addressed at his Delhi address also.
In any event those remained unserved.
Postal endorsements made were either of refusal on the part of petitioner or he intentionally avoided to take delivery or was not found despite numerous attempts having been made in that behalf.
Finally a special messenger was sent at his Madras address by the respondent authorities where K Bhaskaran, a friend of the petitioner reported that he is serving somewhere in Rajasthan.
It was thereafter learnt that he is serving in Hindustan Zinc Limited as a Medical Officer.
5.
Communications were addressed to the petitioner to tender his resignation in terms of Clause 51 of his appointment letter (Annexure "A" extracted hereinabove), but no avail.
Therefore following Articles of Charge were framed against him :  "Article - I Dr. Arvind Kumar, GDO Grade-II of 16 Bn.
CRPF is wilfully absent from duty with effect from 9.9.1992 without sufficient reasons and thereby, he has violated rule 3(i)(ii) of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964."
6.
This was accompanied with the Statement of Imputation of Misconduct as well as list of documents and witnesses.
Copy of the Memorandum issued by respondent No. 2 accompanied by Statement of Articles of Charge, Statement of Imputation of Misconduct as well as list of documents and witnesses is placed on the file as Annexure "E" to the writ petition.
This was served upon the petitioner on 22nd November 94 as admitted by him in his representation against final report of inquiry officer, Annexure "M" to the writ petition.
7.
On the date when Annexure "E" was served petitioner was admittedly in the service of Hindustan Zinc Limited, a Public Sector Undertaking and was well aware that his resignation tendered vide Annexure "D" (supra) has not been accepted.
Inquiry officer vide his report found that the petitioner violated the provisions of Rule 3(i) (ii) of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964 and as such has committed misconduct which stood proved beyond doubt.
8.
A copy of this inquiry report is placed on the file by the respondents alongwith Annexure "D" at pages 41 to 62.
In this context it may be noted that Annexure "D" from pages 29 to 40 consists of the submission of the petitioner regarding the final report of inquiry officer.
9.
After receipt of Annexure "D" i.e. the submissions of the petitioner, final order of dismissal dated 8th March, 2000 has been passed whereby penalty of dismissal of service has been imposed upon the petitioner.
This order was delivered on Ist April, 2000 to the petitioner as is evident from Annexure "N" attached with the writ petition.
10.
Petitioner had got issued a notice under Section 80 CPC served through his learned counsel.
This is dated 1131996 and its copy is Annexure "H" with the writ petition.
It was duly replied to on behalf of respondents on 3rd July, 1996 vide Annexure "J".
11.
It seems that after the receipt of Annexure "J" petitioner approached respondent No. 2 with the request to kindly intimate him about the location of Unit/Battalion where he has to joint his duties.
He was promptly asked to join at Jallandhar (Pb).
Communications in that behalf are Annexures "K" and "L" to the writ petition.
12.
From the narration of above facts it is obvious that after the sanction of 15 days leave vide Annexure "C" petitioner did not resume his duty nor he tendered his resignation in terms of Annexure "A".
13.
In this writ petition, petitioner has challenged his order of dismissal.
According to him he bonafide believed that with the submission of resignation, Annexure "D" the relation of master and servant came to an end.
As such subsequent action, if any, was unwarranted, therefore the impugned order of dismissal dated 8th March, 2000 is liable to be set aside.
It was further pointed out by his learned counsel Mrs. Surinder Kaur that for all purposes resignation is deemed to have been accepted, particularly when it was not rejected.
Alternatively she pointed out that vide Annexure "G" petitioner had submitted his resignation on 26.12.1994 by addressing it to the President of India (the competent authority) through respondent No. 2, as such continuance of the inquiry and its final outcome is completely meaningless and thus the order of dismissal cannot be sustained.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further urged that the inquiry purported to have been held against her client was in violation of Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 with special reference to Rule 14 thereof.
According to her no preliminary inquiry was conducted by the respondents so as to decide whether this is a case fit for holding regular inquiry or not.
Further argument addressed was that inquiry was completed on 191998 and impugned order has been passed on 832000.
Without admitting and/or conceding the claim of the respondents against her client an argument in the alternative was urged that even if everything is accepted against the petitioner, punishment of dismissal imposed is highly disproportionate to the alleged mis-conduct, as such the impugned order deserves to be set aside.
All these pleas have been repelled by Shri Subash Bhat, learned Senior Central Government Standing Counsel.
He pointed out that on the admitted facts unless resignation was accepted petitioner continued to be in the employment of respondents in the CRPF.
He cannot be allowed to plead ignorance as to what he was required to do before submitting his resignation.
According to him admittedly neither the resignation was addressed to the competent authority nor the amount of three months pay and allowances was refunded by the petitioner to the respondents.
15.
In this behalf grievance made by Mrs. Kaur, learned counsel on behalf of the petitioner may also be additionally noted.
According to her at no point of time till the service of charge sheet on 22nd November 94 at Rajpur Dariba his client was aware regarding his having been proceeded against and inquiry being in progress.
This plea is not open to the petitioner, reason is that from October 89 till August 92 petitioner was serving the respondents.
He was not aware as to what is the amount of pay and allowances received by him.
Before addressing his resignation to the President of India through respondent No. 2 vide Annexure "G" to the writ petition, petitioner vide communication dated Ist December' 94 asked Shri RC Tayal, IPS Assistant Director (Esstt-I), to intimate him the exact amount to be paid in lieu of specified advance notice period to be deposited with the PAO CRPF.
This seems to be nothing but a device coined by the petitioner to evade the issue.
Another reason not to accept either the resignation or this plea of the petitioner is that by this time he had already been charge-sheeted and therefore these documents do not improve the case of the petitioner.
16.
So far the question relating to resignation having been deemed to be accepted urged on behalf of the petitioner is concerned, it is also of no significance.
In this behalf it may be appropriate to observe that petitioner was appointed in terms of Annexure "A" and he was to submit his resignation in terms of said annexure.
Admittedly this was not done.
He was required to deposit the amount of salary etc. As per Annexure "D" he has asked the respondent authorities to communicate their decision at the address given in it as also has prayed for a direction to PAO CRPF to release all his dues after final adjustment to his banker SBI Suratgarh at the earliest.
At Madras address service could not be effected upon the petitioner.
Thereafter attempt was made to serve the petitioner at his Delhi address also but without any success.
In these circumstances a special messenger was sent to Madras where Shri K Bhaskaran, friend of the petitioner informed that petitioner is serving somewhere in Rajasthan.
Inquiry record was summoned which was produced by Shri Bhat.
It suggests that a communication dated 10th September 92 was addressed by petitioner to his friend regarding the former having joined Hindustan Zinc Limited Hospital as Medical Officer wherein two addresses of the petitioner were mentioned.
These find mention at page 4 of the inquiry report.
Thereafter Memorandum of Charges was served upon the petitioner through Managing Director of Hindustan Zinc Limited where he was serving.
Services of the petitioner were discharged by this Public Sector Undertaking.
It was only therafter he had got notice served under Section 80 CPC vide Annexure "H".
Even then he did nothing in that behalf.
In the circumstances of this case the plea urged regarding deemed acceptance of resignation has no merit and is hereby rejected.
Original letter supra is on enquiry file.
17.
Other pleas that inquiry being in violation of Rule 14 (supra) as well as no preliminary inquiry having been conducted are also devoid of any merit.
How and in what manner the provisions of Rule 14 were violated could not be pointed out by Mrs. Kaur by referring to either inquiry report or to the inquiry proceedings.
Even otherwise when a reference is made to the inquiry file it is evident that it meets the requirement of law in the matter of holding domestic inquiry.
Similarly it is not always and in every case necessary and/or is required to hold a preliminary inquiry as was claimed on behalf of the petitioner.
In addition to this, on the admitted facts this plea is without any merit.
Resignation was not tendered as required under law.
When an attempt was made to inform the petitioner to do the needful, communication could not be served at the address as was desired by the petitioner in terms of his resignation letter, Annexure "D" extracted hereinabove.
As such joining of service in Hindustan Zinc Limited by the petitioner clearly suggests that there was hardly any need to hold preliminary inquiry.
Petitioner in no case could have joined the service of Hindustan Zinc Limited till his resignation was either accepted or he was relieved in accordance with law by the respondents.
Admittedly this had not happened in this case.
So the plea urged on behalf of the petitioner is rejected.
18.
Mrs. Kaur, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner pointed out that inquiry took about four years and thereafter it took about 1-1/2 years for the competent authority to pass the impugned order of dismissal.
Reliance in this behalf was placed on Government of India, CS (Dept.
of Per.
), OM No : 39/43/70-Ests(A), dated 8th January, 1971 (Annexure "O" attached with the writ petition).
So far the plea of time being consumed in holding of inquiry is concerned, reason has been sufficiently explained.
What is stated in this behalf by the respondents is to the following effect :  "8.
That the contents of para No. 8 are wrong and misconceived.
It is submitted that the DE was initiated on 3091994 and Shri BS Yambem, Commandant was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
But since he was involved in a criminal case and was placed under suspension, Sh. MP Nathanial, Commandant who is senior to the petitioner was appointed as Inquiry Officer in his place.
As regards engagement of Sh. AK Sharma, Commandant as Defence Assistant, petitioner was asked to engage another defence assistant due to reasons mentioned in the order sheet dated 1891997.
Shri MP Nathanial, Commandant (E.P.) was changed on administrative ground as he proceeded on deputation to NSG and Sh. HB Singh, Commandant was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
the presenting Officer Sh. Mukh Ram had retired from service wef 311097 and therefore, Sh. Rajesh Vats, DC was appointed in his place.
Conducting of departmental enquiry against a GO is a time consuming process involving consultation at various levels such as MHA, UPSC etc.
Thus the time taken to finalise the DE is due to administrative reasons.
Further Sh. Arun Kumar Singh was permitted to act as his defence assistant as per his choice.
13.
That the contents of No. (sic)(d) are wrong and mis-conceived hence denied.
It is stated that the reason for time taken in completion of enquiry have already been explained in preceding paras.
Conducting of DE against of GO involves consultation at various levels and obtaining approval of MHA etc.
Moreover, due to scattered posting of Inquiry officer/presenting officer and witnesses etc. on law and order duties, it takes time to concentrate at one place for conducting the enquiry.
The time taken in completion of the DE is due to administrative reasons and there is no intentional delay in completion of the inquiry.
Therefore, no harassment has been meted out to the petitioner and the dismissal order has been issued as per law and principle of natural justice."
19.
This completely answers the objection of Mrs. Kaur.
In this case the matter was required to be finally dealt with in consultation with Union Public Service Commission.
Communication was addressed by the respondents to the Union Public Service Commission on 2241999.
Vide Communication (copy whereof is placed by the petitioner at pages 62 to 66 of the petition) its opinion was submitted on (sic) whereafter final order came to be passed on 8th March, 2000.
In this view of the matter no exception can be taken to the time taken in holding of the inquiry and thereafter passing of the final order.
Public Service Commission could not have been by-passed before passing the final order.
20.
So far the alternate plea urged on behalf of the petitioner that the punishment imposed in this case was disproportionate to the mis-conduct is alleged is concerned, ordinarily court might have favourably considered the same.
Unfortunately fact remains that petitioner because of his own conduct and in the circumstances of this case has dis-entitled himself from the grant of any relief.
21.
As it is revealed from the circumstances of the case petitioner had applied for the job in Hindustan Zinc Limited long before submission of Annexure "D", that too neither through proper channel nor respondents were ever intimated in that behalf.
In addition to this without awaiting for the outcome of his resignation he joined the duty probably in the month of September 92.
At this point of time he was well aware that he continues to be in the service of CRPF and his resignation had still not been accepted.
Matter did not rest here as is evident from the inquiry record as well as documents on this file that he made all out efforts to with-hold/suppress his address of the place where he has joined service while he was already in the service of CRPF.
Had the department not deputed special messenger, probably it may not have been possible to know his whereabouts.
Petitioner has made an attempt to find fault with the communications addressed at his Madras address as also elsewhere by means of his submissions Annexure "M" to the writ petition.
He has also tried to justify the submission of his resignation on the grounds detailed in it.
When a reference is made to Annexure "D" there is no such thing pointed out, therefore as a consequence of it all the facts pointed out in Annexure "M" can safely be presumed to be an afterthought with a view to overcome the inquiry report.
Admittedly Madras address was himself provided by the petitioner for conveying the outcome of Annexure "D".
In case there was change of address and/or the petitioner wanted that instead of Madras address he may be informed elsewhere, it was for him to have informed the respondents, whereas he wanted other way round thus respondents locating the whereabouts of the petitioner.
Recommendations made by the Public Service Commission, copy whereof is at pages 62 to 66 (supra), completely negative the case of the petitioner.
As such it cannot be said that the punishment inflicted upon the petitioner is disproportionate muchless excessive, particularly when petitioner had received the appointment letter from Hindustan Zinc Limited in the first week of May 92 and thereafter he without adhering to the requirement of law joined the said concern.
What seems to have irked him is that his services have been dispensed with by the Hindustan Zinc Limited also where as per Annexure "M" he was due to get promotion.
This seems to have compelled the petitioner to join the Unit at Jalandhar.
In case the said employer has not dispensed with the services of the petitioner, probably he would not have bothered at all for the present inquiry.
As a consequence of this discussion this plea urged on behalf of the petitioner must also fail.
Last but not the least this court cannot lose sight of the fact that petitioner was a member of the Para Military Force.
Unless breach of any provision of law in the course of inquiry was pointed out, this court ordinarily would not decide the matter as a court of appeal.
No infraction of any provision could be pointed out by the learned counsel by referring to the inquiry record, as such there are no circumstances which call for interference in this case.
22.
For the view that has been taken on the facts of this case, law cited by Mrs. Kaur on her plea that the resignation submitted vide Annexure "D" needs to be accepted by deeming provision as well as the punishment being disproportionate to the alleged mis-conduct is not being noted.
No other point is urged.
As a result of aforesaid discussion there is no merit in this writ petition which is accordingly dismissed.
Ex parte interim order date 7.4.2000 is hereby vacated.
Record is returned to Sh. Bhatt.
Petition dismissed.