TS Doabia, J - The respondent/writ-petitioner was visited with an order of punishment.
Severe reprimand was administered to him.
An order to this effect was passed on 1291995.
This punishment was awarded because the respondent/writ-petitioner was found guilty of dis-obeying the command given to him by his Superior Officer on 7.9.95.
He was also found using threatening language towards his officer.
This incident is said to have taken place on 891995.
The further fact is that the petitioner was promoted as Havaldar.
This was w.e.f.
191995.
HQ Signal No. C-2307 was issued on 2481995.
However, before a formal order of promotion could be issued the afore- mentioned punishment was awarded to him.
His promotion was with-held.
2.
The respondent/writ-petitioner challenged this action of the appellant.
The writ petition stands allowed.
The Union of India has come in appeal.
The writ petition was allowed inter alia on the grounds :  i) The promotion of the respondent/writ-petitioner having been cleared by the Departmental Promotion Committee w.e.f.
191995 any dis- ability or dis- qualification incurred by him can have only prospective effect; ii) If the order of promotion was to be with-held it would virtually amount to reduction in rank.
If this was to be done then it was incumbent upon the appellant and its officers to hold some inquiry in the matter.
3.
In addition to the afore-mentioned reasoning, while allowing the writ petition it was also observed that if promotion order was to be with-held then it was incumbent upon the authorities to comply with the procedure indicated in Rule 43 of the Border Security Force Rules.
As no inquiry was conducted, the order with-holding the promotion was found to be bad.
It is this order which is subject matter of challenge in this appeal.
4.
Learned counsel appearing for the Union of India submits that as promotion order was not actually issued and as before the promotion order was conveyed to him the respondent/writ petitioner was punished, therefore, the Union of India was competent to with-hold the promotion.
For this reliance is being placed on a Circular issued by the Ministry of Personal, Public Grievances and Pensions Department of Personnel and Training on 1491992.
In this circular the scope of the decision given by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2010, was considered.
5.
Learned counsel for the Union of India submits that as per the afore- mentioned circular, the writ petitioner is not entitled to any benefit.
As this circular is based on the decision of the Supreme Court of India.
It would be apt to notice the decision given by the Supreme Court.
In the afore- mentioned case the scope of sealed-cover procedure was being examined.
Number of cases were dealt with.
In some cases disciplinary proceedings were pending when the Departmental Promotion Committee met and in other cases promotion orders were made earlier and disciplinary proceedings were taken later on.
Two appeals which were decided alongwith other appeals dealt with the same situation as has arisen in this case.
Thus in Civil Appeal No. 3021 of 1987.
In para 11 of the judgment (supra) the facts were noticed.
Para 11 is relevant and is being re-produced below :  "11.
In this case, the DPC did not consider the case of the respondent- employee for crossing efficiency bar w.e.f.
14th Sept 1983 on the ground that disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against him.
We are, therefore, of the view that the Tribunal's direction that the DPC should be convened to consider the case of the respondent for crossing the efficiency bar w.e.f.
14th Sept 1983 on the basis of his confidential record at the relevant date and without reference to the contemplated disciplinary proceedings is both proper and valid.
In this case also the Tribunal has given the said direction without prejudice to the right of the appellant-authorities to take any disciplinary action as might have been contemplated.
This order also does not require any interference from this Court.
Hence, the appeal stands dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, however, there will be no order as to costs."
6.
Again while dealing with Civil Appeal No. 4379/90 the view expressed was that if no disciplinary proceedings are pending on the date when DPC meets then the sealed cover can be opened and the fate of the concerned employee would depend upon the view expressed by the DPC Para 13 is relevant and is being re-produced below :  "13.
In this case, the respondent-employee was not recommended for promotion by the DPC in its meeting held on February 1, 1988.
Instead the DPC had kept the result in a sealed cover because of the pending disciplinary proceedings.
Admittedly, no charge-memo was served on the employee till the date the DPC met on Feb 1, 1988.
It was issued only on March 2, 1989.
The Tribunal has, therefore, rightly directed the authorities to open the sealed cover.
We are, however, unable to understand the direction of the Tribunal to convene a Review DPC for considering the employee's case as on Feb 1, 1988.
If the DPC had considered the case of the employee on Feb 1, 1988 and withheld the result because of the pending disciplinary proceedings, the proper direction would have been to ask the appellant-authority to open the sealed cover and if the employee was found fit for promotion, to direct the authority to promote him from the date on which his immediate junior was promoted as a result of the recommendation of the DPC on Feb 1, 1988.
In case he is so found fit, he would be entitled to the benefits of seniority etc on a notional basis.
However, whether he would be entitled to the arrears of salary for the intervening period and to what extent will have to be decided by the appellate authority in the light of what we have stated above.
In case the authority denies to the employee the salary in full or in part, it will, of course, record its reasons for doing so.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed partly as above with no order as to costs."
7.
A perusal of paras 11 and 13 quoted above, makes it apparent that if on the dates when the claims of an employee were considered for promotion and there is no disciplinary proceedings pending against him then he is entitled to the benefit of the result of the consideration.
In this case the petitioner was ordered to be promoted.
A signal was issued.
This was not given effect to because of latter action with regard to incidents said to have taken place on 7th and 8th of September, 1995.
For these two lapses the respondent/writ petitioner was punished with severe reprimand.
If his promotion was to be with-held then this could be done after holding enquiry but this was not actually done.
Therefore, the view expressed by the learned Single Judge that the effect of reprimand would be prospective and it cannot take away the benefit which had already been conferred upon the writ petitioner, is the only view which can be taken on the issue.
When otherwise after having punished the writ petitioner with reprimand, inflicting of punishment i.e. with-holding the promotion would be putting him to double jeopardy for the same mis-conduct.
This would be contrary to the spirit behind the concept contained in Article 20 of the Constitution.
Thus looking from any point of view this appeal is liable to be dismissed.
This appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.