Radha Mohan Prasad, J. - In this writ petition, the petitioner, who claims to be the son of Late Khuddi Sah, who died in harness on 1631996 while in the service of the Board, has sought for a direction to the respondents to provide him employment on compassionate ground after the death of his father.
2.
It appears that the petitioner's deceased father was posted at Electric Supply Sub-division, Sabour and he died in harness on 1631996.
It is claimed that at the time of death of his father, family members were dependent upon this petitioner.
Pension Payment Order was issued in favour of her mother Fuddi Devi i.e. widow of the deceased.
The petitioner made an application in the prescribed form before the authority for appointment on compassionate ground on 541997 and annexed a copy of the medical certificate issued on 1041996 under Article 49 of the Civil Service Regulation.
Widow -daughter-in-law of the deceased also filed an application claiming appointment on compassionate ground and an affidavit was also filed by her along with the application which was sworn by the widow of the deceased saying that the youngest daughter-in-law may be provided with the appointment on compassionate ground.
3.
In view of the disputed claim, the Board, while considering the case of the petitioner according to the priority as provided in its resolution contained in Annexure A to the Counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the Board, referred the matter to the Medical Board in order to ascertain his age.
It is stated on behalf of the respondents that the Medical Board ascertained his age as 40 to 42 years on 1781997.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, referred to the letter dated 1111999 of the Deputy Director, Personnel, contained in Annexure C to the counter-affidavit in order to show that in all such cases where the Medical Board had fixed age in between 40-42 years he recommended for examination by a second Medical Board, on which the Board has not yet taken any decision and the matter is still pending.
4.
Learned counsel for the Board, however, submitted that pursuant to rule applicable for appointment on compassionate ground, contained in Annexure A, the maximum age prescribed in Clause (j) in the case of the petitioner who belongs to Backward Class is 37 years and the Medical Board ascertained his age between 40/44 years and, as such, he was not eligible for consideration of his case for appointment on compassionate ground.
Learned counsel for the Board has submitted that this principle was adopted by the Board on the basis of the principle being followed in the State Government service.
He fairly submitted that in the State Government service there is provision of relaxation of the said rule but there is no such provision made in Annexure A However, in the absence of specific rule relating to service condition the rule applicable to the Government servants applies to the employees of the Board also.
5.
It appears that the petitioner also filed an affidavit of his mother widow of the deceased employee in support of his claim.
6.
In view of the said controversy this Court considered it expedient to direct for personal appearance of the widow of the deceased employee vide order dated 2872000 in this Court today.
Pursuant to the said order, the widow of the deceased has appeared and stated that the petitioner, who is her eldest son, is taking all care of her and that he should be given appointment on compassionate ground.
She also denied about swearing any affidavit by her in favour of the daughter-in-law.
7.
Learned counsel for the Board has submitted that the Board cannot have any objection in considering the case for appointment on compassionate ground according to the rules and whoever fulfils the criteria will get priority in the matter of appointment, of course, keeping in view the interest of the widow and other dependents.
However, he further submitted that the petitioner has suppressed the age which is determined by the Medical Board, in reference by the Board.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that there is no question of suppression of the said fact by the writ petitioner in the present case.
It is true that the petitioner was sent for medical examination, about which he has mentioned in his representation, dated 13101999, which has been annexed as Annexure 3 to the writ petition.
9.
The Apex Court in the case of Sushma Gosain v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1989 SC 1976, has held that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such case pending for years so much so that the Apex Court has said that if there is no suitable post for appointment supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant.
10.
The object for making such provision for appointment on compassionate ground is, thus, to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
Obviously, keeping this in view, the Board also framed rules, vide Annexure A, to consider the case for appointment of the widow/widower of the deceased and his son, unmarried daughter and widow daughter-in-law in the preferential order and the second person is the son in the priority basis.
Thus, the claim of the widow is the prime consideration besides other members of the family dependent on the earning of the deceased.
11.
In the instant case, as I have already said above, the widow has strongly reposed confidence in the son i.e. the petitioner as, according to her, he is taking all care of her and has denied of swearing any affidavit before the Executive Magistrate, annexed as Annexure B to the counter-affidavit.
12.
Under such circumstances, in my opinion, the respondent-Board should consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground on priority basis and, if necessary, by making relaxation in the standing order with respect to the prescribed age within four weeks of the receipt/production of a copy of this order.
The writ application is, accordingly, disposed of.
Petition allowed.