DK Seth, J - The petitioner was appointed by virtue of resolution dated 1211997 for a period of 89 days purely on ad hoc basis or till the regularly selected candidate joins whichever is earlier.
There was another resolution dated 15.3.1997 whereby the petitioner's service was extended after 1989 till regularisation.
On the basis of this resolution, the petitioner alleges to be continuing in service.
The petitioner further contends that by an order dated 2641997 the petitioner's tenure was extended till regularisation.
Subsequently the petitioner was transferred from one place to another by an order dated 561997 which was also amended subsequently by an order dated 1761997.
He further contends after his transfer, his salary having been stopped, the petitioner has made a representation which is Annexure-9 to the writ petition.
On the basis of such representation, as contended in para 34 of the writ petition, the respondent No. 2 had granted sanction by his letter No. 273 dated 1221999 which has since been denied by respondent No. 3.
In these circumstances, the petitioner had prayed mandamus directing the respondents to pay the petitioner's arrears from March 1998 till March, 1999 as well as mandamus directing the respondents not to interfere with the petitioner's functioning and for regularisation.
2.
Shri BD Mandhyan, learned counsel for respondents, on the other hand, contends that the petitioner was never appointed as against any post, therefore, he cannot claim any legal right to establish his right through the writ jurisdiction.
He further contends that since the petitioner's appointment was for a limited period, by virtue whereof, he cannot be said to have secured any legal right on the post as has been held in several decisions of the Apex Court.
He further contends that the subsequent extensions were all de hors the rule and the petitioner having been engaged de hors the rule he cannot establish his right through writ jurisdiction.
He further contends that there were several appointments made de hors the rule for which the respondents had taken a decision to dispense with all such irregular and illegal appointments which are innumerable, therefore appropriate and adequate decision had been taken.
He further contends that there was no sanction for payment of salary after March, 1998 therefore the petitioner cannot claim any salary and right to continue after March, 1998 when there having been no sanction for payment of salary after March, 1998.
On these grounds, relying on various decisions on identical issue to which reference would be made hereinafter.
Mr. Mandhyan contends that the instant writ petition should also be dismissed.
3.
Shri Pradeep Chandra, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that the petitioner's services have not been terminated either by oral order or by written order, therefore, all these grounds made by Shri Mandhyan, cannot be sustained.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner Shri Pradeep Chandra and learned counsel for respondents Shri BD Mandhyan at length.
5.
Admittedly, Shri Mandhyan has not come out with a specific case that the services of the petitioner have been dispensed with - either by oral order or by written order, though he contends that by virtue of decision taken in general the petitioner cannot continue.
On the other hand he tries to impress upon that there having been no sanction after March, 1998 which itself is a sufficient indication that the petitioner's services have been dispensed with since March, 1998.
But that contention could be said to contain sufficient force if the letter No. 273, dated 1221999 as mentioned in para 34 of the writ petition was not issued.
However, the said letter dated 1221999 has not been annexed in the writ petition.
Whereas Mr. Mandhyan contends that no sanction was given.
In case sanction has been accorded by the said letter, in that event, the contention of Mr. Mandhyan cannot be substantiated.
At the same time in the absence of letter dated 1221999, it is not possible to decipher as to what are the contents of the said letter simply on the basis of statement made in paragraph 34 of the writ petition.
Since no counter- affidavit has been filed except a short counter-affidavit, it cannot be said that said paragraph No. 34 has not been denied.
In view of exigency, Shri Mandhyan has filed a short counter-affidavit.
It cannot be treated to be a counter-affidavit since he was not given such opportunity.
6.
At the same time, Shri Pradeep Chandra, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show as to against which post the petitioner was appointed nor it appears from record that the petitioner was regularly appointed.
From the initial appointment of the petitioner it is apparent that he was appointed for a period of 89 days or till regular selection is made whichever is earlier.
Therefore it was not a regular appointment.
It was an ad hoc appointment till regular appointment is made.
Thus the appointment of the petitioner is de hors the recruitment rule.
Subsequent resolutions which had sought to extend such limited period of appointment with the added appendage "i.e. : till regularisation" does not confer any right to continue on the post which could be enforced through legal process.
7.
In respect of several other cases identical question was posed to this Court which was decided on diversve dates.
In the decision decided on 20111997 in Writ Petition No. 35830 of 1997, Employees Union of Mandi Assistants v. Director, UP Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad and others, in similar circumstances, it was held that the petitioners therein do not have any right to the post by virtue of their employments which were all time bound.
In Special Appeal No. 3 of 1998 the order passed in Writ Petition No. 35830 of 1997 dated 20111997 has since been confirmed by the appellate Court.
Yet in another decision dated 29.1.1998 in the Writ Petition No. 2879 of 1998, Reghuvendra Nath Misra v. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad and othersthe same view was taken by another learned single Judge.
Identical view was taken by another learned single Judge in his order dated 6.8.1998 passed in writ petition No. 25272 of 1998 between Mohan Pandey v. The Director/Additional Director of Rajya Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad and others.
In the Writ Petition No. 7612 of 1998 decided on 631998 between Harendra Kumar v. Secretary, Rajya Krishi Utpadan Samiti and others.
I had taken a view that unless a person claims a right to the post he cannot claim any legal right to establish through writ jurisdiction and that the recruitment de hors the rule does not confer any right to continue.
In the decision dated 18.8.1999 passed in Writ Petition No. 10204 of 1999 between Awadh Narain and another v. State of UP and others I had held that in order to invoke writ jurisdiction, one must establish that he has legal right which he could enforce through writ jurisdiction.
Right to work is a right to livelihood but that does not mean that in every case the said principle would apply even when appointment is made orally on daily wage basis to serve a temporary need through stop-gap arrangement.
One has to show that he has acquired a right to the post in order to claim a right to livelihood.
Unless right to post is established, one cannot claim infringement of the right to livelihood.
One cannot expect such right to be established de hors the rule.
Such decision was arrived at relying on the decision in the case of Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi v. State of Bihar, 1997(76) Fac.
LR 237 of the Apex Court, and some other decisions mentioned in the said judgment.
8.
In that view of the matter, it will be open to the respondents to take proper step, if it is so advised in accordance with law but after taking into account the contents of letter No. 273 dated 1221999 referred to in para 34 of the writ petition, provided by the said letter the salary of the petitioner is so sanctioned for a particular period, provided further that the petitioner had actually worked and having regard to the attendance register annexed as Annexure-RA-1 to the rejoinder affidavit if admissible.
Such consideration shall be made by the respondent as early as possible preferably within period of one month from the date of production of certified copy of this order before the concerned respondent.
9.
With the aforesaid observation/direction this writ petition is disposed of.
10.
However, there will be no order as to cost.
11.
Let a certified copy of this order be supplied to the learned counsel for the parties on payment of usual charges at the earliest.
Order accordingly.