Satyabrata Sinha, J - These two writ applications involving similar questions of law and fact, were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
Two applications were filed before the Central Administrative Tribunal, one by Smt. Jolly George and 33 others marked as OA 29/AN/94 and the other by A Shamsudeen and 14 others marked as OA 5/AN/99 inter alia, for the following directions :  (b) For an order directing the respondents to fill up the vacant posts of Primary School Teacher in the Directorate of Education, Andaman and Nicobar Islands by giving appointment to candidates serially whose names appear in the merit list published in the Daily Telegrams on 12th September, 1993.
(c) For an order directing the respondents not to appoint any candidate in the post of Primary School Teacher without exhausting the merit list published on 12th September, 1993.
(d) For an order directing the respondents not to cancel the panel of Primary School Teachers as published in the Daily Telegrams dated the 12th September, 1993.
(e) For an order directing the respondents to consider the case of the candidates already empanelled on the basis of the interview held in October, 1992 for filling up the post of Primary School Teachers before giving any appointment in the post to any fresh candidate.
(f) For an order directing the respondents not to allow any candidates to continue in the post of Primary School Teacher who were appointed from outside the panel during July, 1993 and March, 1994, but whose names do not appear in the merit list of Primary School Teacher.
xxx xxx xxx xxx (h) An order quashing and/or setting aside the impugned panel shown at Annexure "A-12" to the original application.
(i) For a declaration that all appointments to the post of Primary School Teacher outside the panel/merit list shown at Annexure-"A-5" to the Original Application are bad in law and the applicants are entitled to get appointment to the post of Primary School Teacher on the basis of selection held in October, 1992.
3.
The fact of the matter is as follows :-  On or about 261992 the Directorate of Education notified vacancies for Primary School Teachers, wherefrom the Employment Exchange sponsored names of suitable candidates for the post of Primary School Teachers on 1161992 and 171992.
Allegedly, on 2661992, the Secretary (Education), by an order bearing No. 45/91-IW stated that there is no fixed life of the panel against directs recruitments.
Interview was held for the post of Primary School Teachers on 9101992 and 10.10.1992 wherein the members of the Departmental Selection Committee were the Director (IP&T) as Chairman, Mr. N Das, Assistant Director of Education (Admn.)
and Mr. Lucas Robert, Project Officer and nominee of Principal JNRM as Members.
Appellants herein had also published notices for filling up the post of Graduate Trained Teachers, wherefore also a Departmental Selection Committee took interview of the eligible candidates on 9th October, 1992 and 10th October, 1992, wherein the Selection Committee constituted for the said purpose consisted of the Secretary (Education) as Chairman, the Principal of JNRM and Director of Education as Members.
Allegedly, the Departmental Selection Committee, inter alia, recommended that all the candidates, who secured 45% marks and above in aggregate, may be empanelled.
The remaining merit list be kept separately and operated in case of temporary and maternity leave vacancies arising from time to time.
49 candidates were appointed as Primary School Teachers on or about 1271993.
As a complaint was made as regards the irregularities committed by the appellants herein, the Lt.
Governor, allegedly, directed publication of the panel of merit list of selected candidates by an order dated 6th August, 1993.
Such an order was passed, allegedly, because the authorities did not publish the merit list of the selected candidates who had been interviewed on 9th and 10th October, 1992 despite repeated requests from the candidates, yet again, on 1881993 six candidates were appointed as Primary School Teachers vide order No. 2788 dated 1881993 serially from the merit list published in the Daily Telegrams.
On 1881993 ten candidates were appointed, out of whom, 7 candidates had obtained below 45% marks and their names were not found in the merit list published by the Departmental Selection Committee, but their names allegedly appeared in the list published in the Daily Telegrams dated 12th and 14th September, 1993.
In the Daily Telegrams, a newspaper published from Port Blair, names of 176 selected candidates were published.
Such list was published after about one year from the date of interview and most of the appointees were graduates.
The medium-wise analysis of PST candidates are as follows :- Medium No. of candidates appeared No. of candidates selected No. of candidates not selected Hindi 90 86 4 Hindi (ST) 25 25 - English 04 04 - English (ST) 02 02 - Bengali 34 30 4 Tamil 14 14 - Telugu 15 15 - Total 184 176 8 4.
The aforementioned analysis would show that 184 candidates appeared in the interview, out of them 176 were selected 8 were not.
The original applicants have contended that the above analysis would show that the list published in the Daily Telegrams on 12th and 14th September, 1993 showing the merit position of the candidates, were to be given effect to and not any other purported selection list.
It was contended that although there were 4 Members in the Departmental Selection Committee except the Chairman, none other had signed, whereas the Directorate of Education and the Principal, JNRM have signed, who were the Members of the Selection Committee for conducting interview for the post of Graduate Trained Teachers and not for Primary School Teachers.
One of the candidate Shri Bahuranjan Baroi, whose name appeared at Sl.
No. 4 in the panel of the Primary School Teachers, English Medium, was appointed, although his name did not appear in the minutes of the Departmental Selection Committee as annexed to the Affidavit of the appellant before the learned Tribunal.
He even did not obtain 45% marks although the applicants/respondents got similar or higher marks.
Having regard to the aforementioned irregularities, representations were submitted to the authorities requesting them not to cancel the merit list published in the Daily Telegrams, which was reiterated by way of representation dated 921994.
A further representation was made requesting the respondent/petitioner authorities to make appointment against 5 vacancies of Primary School Teachers fallen vacant due to deaths and three promotions, serially from the published merit list.
However, despite that, the contention of the petitioner is that the said panel lost its life by lapse of time.
The Directorate of Education appointed 4 candidates on 2231991, out of which three candidates were appointed serially from the merit list, but the fourth one Smt. Soumini, was a rank outsider, who had neither applied for nor appeared for interview, nor was selected for the post of Primary School Teacher.
Against the appointment in relation to the aforementioned Smt. Soumini, a representation had been filed, whereafter, OA 29/A&N/94 was moved before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
By an order dated 22.11.1994 an interim order was passed to the effect that the appointment made on the basis of the first notification shall abide by the result of the said application.
However, in August, 1995 subsequent interviews were conducted for which no result had been published despite the aforementioned order dated 681993.
A further interim order was passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal on 891995 to the effect that any appointment made in terms of the notification dated 1871995, shall abide by the result of the writ application.
70 candidates were thereafter appointed by the Directorate of Education as Primary School Teachers on the aforementioned condition that their appointment shall be subject to the result of the said writ application.
It is stated that many other interviews were held and appointments have been made, details whereof are not known.
On or about 22111997 another interview was conducted, but the details of such interview had not been published despite the aforementioned order dated 681993.
Yet again, 59 persons have been appointed by the Directorate of Education in terms of the condition imposed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in OA/29/A&N/94.
Yet again, on 21101998, 42 candidates were appointed on the same condition.
Some of the petitioners intended to intervene in the pending application viz. OA/29/A&N/94, but by an order dated 27.11.1988 the said application was rejected with liberty to the applicants therein to file a separate writ application.
The petitioners herein, did not file any reply to the application for amendment, whereas OA 5/A&N/1999 was filed on 2431999.
No reply-affidavit was filed by the petitioners herein to the said application.
Both the applications were heard together.
5.
Before the learned Tribunal, the records were produced.
From a perusal thereof it appeared to the Tribunal that a requisition was submitted to the Employment Exchange on 261992 for the purpose of filling up 45 temporary posts of Primary School Teachers in general category and 3 in ST category.
However, from another document produced by the Administration it appeared that the vacancies on account of vacant post existing, number of new posts to be created etc. were less than the total number of vacancies announced.
The Tribunal, therefore, came to the conclusion that the details furnished for such appointments were not arithmetically correct.
It has further been found that although two Selection Committees were constituted, one for the Graduate Trained Teachers and another for Primary School Teachers, the signatories on the minutes are different.
Although it was recorded in the minutes that all the ST candidates and general candidates securing 45% and above marks be kept on merit list and the remaining merit list be kept separately, but no second list, as stated in the record, was published.
Only one list was published containing the names of 27 ST candidates and 59 general candidates who allegedly, have secured 45% or more marks.
It was further held : "In the records there is another merit list of candidates interviewed for the post of PST on 9/10th October, 1992 which consists of names of 149 candidates.
But according to the broad-sheet in which particulars of all the candidates interviewed have been give with their marks, the total number of candidates is 193.
The number of candidates who appeared at the interview held on 9/10th October, 1992 has been shown as 184 according to the minutes.
The above details show that the list of candidates who appeared in the interview as per minutes consisted of 184 candidates (157 general candidates and 27 ST candidates)."
The learned Tribunal, therefore, came to the conclusion that names of some of the candidates who had been given appointment and the names of such candidates in the list of Daily Telegrams dated 1291993 differ and some of them were appointed as Primary School Teachers, although they have not been interviewed therefor nor were included in the list of empanelled candidates in the list published in the Daily Telegrams dated 1291993.
Surprisingly, some of them, who had applied for Graduate Trained Teachers, were appointed as Primary School Teachers and even rank outsiders were appointed, and in doing so, the claims of the applicants for their appointment as Primary School Teachers were overruled, and as a result whereof their right had been seriously affected.
The learned Tribunal noticed that there has been serious anomalies in the minutes of the meeting of the Selection Committee as regards the number of candidates interviewed and approved for the post of Primary School teacher.
As regard the official records, it was observed :-  "122.
The position of official records and documents was still worse.
They have been maintained casually and very poorly.
Most of them don't bear any signature of any authority.
They give rise to doubt and suspicion.
123.
The minutes of the Selection Committee state for preparation of two lists but only one list was available.
It also states about life of the list for one year ending 10/93.
But appointment from the list has been given upto 2231994, that is about six months after the stated life of the list.
In other words, the list has no prescribed life and has to continue till the same is exhausted (Annexure 7).
124.
The recruitment was made for 48 vacancies as per requisition made to Employment Exchange, Port Blair, but appointment has been given to 70 persons upto 2031994.
Further appointment has been given to 177 candidates as PST by orders dated 2231994, 16101995, 131998 and 21101998.
It is submitted that there are still 77 vacancies of PST.
13.
We find that list which appeared in Daily Telegrams dated 291993 consisted of 149 general candidates and 27 ST candidates.
Since in effect there was no fixed life of the list and vacancies were available and the candidates were available, they should have been offered appointment as PST till the list was not exhausted.
This was not done.
Thus grave injustice has been done to the candidates of the list including the applicants which appeared by Daily Telegrams dated 1291993.
In the meantime, appointment has been given to a large number of candidates out of the list which appeared in Daily Telegrams dated 1291993.
The claim of these candidates in the list including the applicants for appointment as PST is thus better than the appointees out of the list or subsequent appointees.
In larger interest we would not like to set aside all such appointments, but they should definitely be considered after the claim of the applicants for appointment as PST has been met with all due benefits from the dates, juniors to them in the list or appointees out of the list have reaped the benefits."
6.
Mr. Bahadur, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners herein, inter alia, submitted that having regard to the fact that the life of the panel was valid till June, 1993 whereof OA 29/A&N/1994 was filed on 2241994 and the another application was filed on 2431999, the second application was barred by limitation.
It was submitted that having regard to the fact that in the years 1995 and 1997 fresh advertisements had been issued, pursuant whereto 17 candidates were selected including some of the applicants, whose names appeared in the list of the selected candidates, and they are estopped and precluded from contending that.
According to the learned Counsel, it is possible for a Departmental Selection Committee to make recommendation for appointment in lower post.
It has been submitted that some appointments have been made again short term vacancies or leave vacancies and thus no illegality has been committed.
In support of his aforementioned contention Mr. Bahadur relied upon a larger number of decisions viz. Rakesh Ranjan Verma and others v. State of Bihar and others, reported in 1992(3) SCT 144 (SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 1348; Madan Lal and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others, reported in 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC) : AIR 1995 Supreme Court 1099; State of Bihar and another v. Madan Mohan Singh and others, reported in 1994(1) SCT 530 (SC) : AIR 1994 Supreme Court 765; State of UP v. Rafiquddin and others, reported in AIR 1988 Supreme Court 162; Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., reported in AIR 1990 Supreme Court 434; R Namburajan and others v. S Thangavel and others, reported in AIR 1997 Supreme Court 2283; HRT Corporation v. Dinesh Kumar, reported in 1996(3) SCT 409 : AIR 1996 Supreme Court 2226; Government of Orissa v. Haraprasad Das and others, reported in 1998(1) SCT 271 (SC) : 1998 Supreme Court Cases 487; Sanjay Bhattacharyya v. Union of India, reported in 1997(4) SCC 283.
7.
Mr. Tapan Kumar Mukherjee, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the merit list was published in September, 1993, the life of the panel cannot expire in October, 1993.
In this connection our attention, as noticed hereinbefore, was drawn to the instructions from the Ministry of Home Affairs dated 2661992.
It was submitted that the Central Administrative Tribunal has clearly found that some of the appointments were illegal particularly when the Members of one Selection Committee has signed in the selection of another and some of the Members have not put their signatures at all.
The learned Counsel submits that having regard to the finding of fact arrived at by the learned Tribunal, it is evident that the candidates who had applied for one post, had been appointed against the other which was impermissible in law.
It has been pointed out that although before the Central Administrative Tribunal it had been contended that the life of the panel was upto October, 1993, a different stand had been taken in the writ petition herein stating that the life of the panel was upto 1995.
In this connection our attention has been drawn to the following Circular letter dated 2661992:-  "Andaman and Nicobar Administration Secretariat ...............................
Port Blair, dated the 26th June, 1992.
To 1.
All Secretaries, A&N Administration 2.
All Heads of Departments/Offices Sub : Preparation of Panel - instruction - reg : Sir, As you may be aware, as per the instructions of the Government of India, whereas validity of panel prepared against promotion quota is generally limited to one year, there is no fixed life of the panel against the direct recruitment post.
According to the Government of India's instructions thereof, a panel prepared for direct recruitment should not be unduly inflated and should take care of immediate vacancies and those which are likely to occur in the near future.
A maximum of ten per cent additional persons can be kept in the panel against the existing vacancies at the time of preparation of panel or vacancies likely to occur in the future.
Such a provision has been kept so that Government can obtain the services of better qualified persons if they become available in due course of time.
It has however been observed that those instructions of the Government of India are not being following by all the Departments of this Administration while preparing panel for direct recruitment as well as for promotion.
It is, therefore, brought to the notice of all the departments that in future panel for promotion as well as for direct recruitment against various categories of pots should be prepared strictly in accordance with the instructions of the Government of India issued from time to time.
Yours faithfully  Sd/-  (GL Jindgar)  Secretary (Personnel)" 8.
It was submitted that by producing forged documents the petitioners have committed a fraud upon the court and thus they are not entitled to any relief whatsoever.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on SP Chengvaraya Naidu (Dead) by LRs.
v. Jagannath (dead) by LRs.
and others, reported in 1994(1) RRR 253 (SC) : 1994(1) Supreme Court Cass 1.
It has further been submitted that although the empanelled candidates have no right on appointment, but if appointment is made from amongst the empanelled candidates, the same has to be made in accordance with law.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, reported in 1991(2) SCT 555 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1612.
As regards the subsequent selection of some of the candidates, it has been submitted that having regard to the fact that the applicants/respondents were permitted to take part in the subsequent selection subject to the result of the writ application, the principle of estoppel cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
9.
It is one of the few cases which depicts a sorry state of affairs in the matter of appointment made by a State.
10.
The Administration apparently committed illegalities in making appointments having regard to the legal principles embodied in the Recruitment Rules, and the provisions contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The advertisements made in the Daily Telegrams dated 12th and 14th September, 1993 clearly show that thereby a merit list had been published and not a list of the candidates who had appeared at the interview as was contended by Mr. Bahadur.
It may be true, as has been submitted by Mr. Bahadur, that the court or the Tribunal cannot direct grant of appointment in excess of the notified vacancies.
In this case, however, the findings of fact arrived at by the Central Administrative Tribunal have not and cannot be seriously challenged.
From certain documents it is evident that a large scale illegality has been committed.
It has not been disputed that in terms of the Recruitment Rules, the qualifications and the vacancies notified for the Graduate Trained Teachers and Primary School Teachers were different.
The candidates had applied for either one or the other category of teachers.
Two different Selection Committees were constituted for selection the candidates, although meetings of both the Committees took place on the same dates.
As noticed hereinbefore, the Departmental Selection Committee constituted for the purpose of selection of Primary School Teachers were the Secretary (IP&T) as its Chairman and Shri N Das, Shri Lucas Robert and the nominee of the Principal JNRM were the members, whereas the Selection Committee constituted for selecting the candidates for appointment as Graduate Trained Teachers in different mediums were the Secretary (Education) as Chairman and the Principal of JNRM and Directorate of Education as its Members.
Two different Selection Committees have thus been constituted.
It was not permissible in law for one Selection Committee to recommend the names for appointment in respect of other category of candidates, wherefor a different Selection Committee was constituted.
It betrays all reasons as to how in Annexure-A/12 although the names of the members of the Selection Committee had clearly been stated to be for selection of Primary School Teachers, the JNRM and Directorate of Education signed the minutes of the meeting of the Selection Committee, although the members thereof were Shri N Das, Assistant Director of Education (Admn.
), Shri Lucas Robert, Project Officer and the nominee of the Principal JNRM.
In our opinion, rightly the Central Administrative Tribunal has come to the conclusion that some of the candidates, who were appointed as Primary School Teachers, did not apply for the said post at all.
11.
It is further evident that from the merit list of the candidates interviewed, as occurring at page 139 of the writ petition, that several candidates, as for example, those whose names appeared at Sl.
Nos. 28 to 42, did not obtain the requisite 45% marks at all.
Even in relation to the teachers to be appointed for imparting education through Bengali Medium, the names of such candidates whose names appeared at Sl.
Nos. 6 to 15 did not obtain 45 per cent marks, and similarly in the list of selected candidates for Tamil Medium, although the persons whose names appear at Sl.
Nos. 7 to 9 did not obtain 45% marks, but despite the same, they were allegedly found fit.
Several other candidates were found fit for appointment as Primary School Teachers, although they had applied for the post of Graduate Trained Teachers.
The select list, which has been annexed to the writ application for the Graduate Trained Teachers, as contained in Annexure-A/12 suggests that even no uniform pattern had been followed.
Some candidates were alleged to have been found fit for appointment as Primary School Teacher although others similarly placed persons have been left out.
12.
In a case of this nature, the entire selection process should have been cancelled having regard to the large scale irregularities committed by the petitioners.
In Bihar Public Service Commission and another v. State of Bihar and others, reported in 1997(1) SCT 501 (SC) : AIR 1997 Supreme Court 2280 it has been held -  "Be that as it may, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court committed gross error of law in issuing the mandamus requiring the Public Service Commission and the State to give appointment to the respondent even after going through the Biswas Committee Report which in no uncertain terms indicates the gross irregularities and illegalities committed by the Services Selection Board in the matter of holding the examination and drawing the list of successful candidates."
13.
It is now a well settled principle of law that for making appointments, there must exist vacancies.
Only a person who is found suitable therefor, can be appointed.
Shri Krishna Chandra Medda v. General Manager, Dankuni Goal Complex and another, reported in 1999 West Bengal Law Reporter 141.
14.
In Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India (supra), the Apex Court clearly held that although an empanelled candidate had no legal right to be appointed, but the decision not to fill up vacancies, has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons and if the vacancies or any of them were filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates as reflected at the recruitment test and no discrimination in that regard can be permitted.
In Purushotham v. Chairman, MSEB and another, reported in 2000(1) SCT 1121 (SC) : 1999(6) Supreme Court Cases 49, the Apex Court held as follows :-  "In view of the rival submission the question that arises for consideration is whether a duly selected person for being appointed and illegally kept out of employment on account of untenable decision on the part of the employer, can be denied the said appointment on the ground that the panel has expired in the meantime.
We find sufficient force in the contention of Mr. Deshpande appearing for the appellant inasmuch as there is no dispute that the appellant was duly selected and was entitled to be appointed to the post but for the illegal decision of the screening committee which decision in the meantime has been reversed by the High Court and that decision of the High Court has reached its finality.
The right of the appellant to be appointed against the post to which he has been selected cannot be taken away on the pretext that the said panel has in the meantime expired and the post has already been filled up by somebody else.
Usurpation of the post by somebody else is not on account of any defect on the part of the appellant, but on the erroneous decision of the employer himself.
In that view of the matter, the appellant's right to be appointed to the post has been illegally taken away by the employer."
15.
It may be true that the appointments cannot be made after expiry of the panel.
The question which, however, may arise for consideration is as to whether such panel subsists or not.
In Steel Authority of India v. Deb Narayan Chaterjee, reported in 1999(1) Calcutta High Court Notes Page 588, this court having found that the appellants were given appointment in the years 1989 and 1991 from 1985 panel and further in view of the fact that no subsequent panel had been prepared during the last 14 years, the said panel was held to be subsisting.
It was held that two persons, who were in the panel, having been appointed, refusal to give appointment to others would be illegal.
16.
In the writ application reliance has been placed on Nagar Mahapalika, Kanpur v. Vinod Kumar Srivastava and others, reported in AIR 1987 Supreme Court 847.
In the said case the writ petition was allowed on the ground that a Government circular dated 29th May, 1979 over-rides the earlier circular.
However, as therein the High Court failed to notice the crucial works "list....." which was pending till then, the Apex Court held -  "The earlier instructions issued by the Government imposed two conditions viz. (1) a waiting list would be effective only for a period of one year; and (2) the list should not contain more than 25 per cent surplus candidates against vacancies existing and anticipated.
Therefore, the words "list which is pending" can only mean a list which had current force but which contained more names than 25 per cent surplus number of candidates against vacancies which existed or were likely to occur.
It could never have been the intention of the Government that lists prepared in the earlier years, irrespective of the interval of time, should be treated as pending lists and all the candidates included in those lists should be given employment before fresh lists of eligible candidates are prepared.
Another significant feature to be noticed in this case is that after the list of the year 1976 was prepared, a fresh list of candidates had been prepared in the year 1978, and the selected candidates have been given appointments.
In the face of this later list, there is no scope for treating the 1976 list as a pending list."
17.
Such is not the position in the instant case.
It is really a matter of grave concern for everybody that forged documents have been filed by the Administration Suppression of documents have been held to be a fraud on court in the case of SP Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath and others, reported in 1994(1) Supreme Court Cases 1.
The Kerala High Court recently in the case of Vijay Lakashmi v. Tehsildar, Pakkad, reported in 2000(4) SCT 325 (Kerala) (DB) : AIR 2000 Kerala page 262, held following the decision in the case, State of Tamil Nadu v. Guruswamy, reported in AIR 1997 SC 1199, that when a person has practicased fraud upon the employer by stating that he is a member of the Scheduled Tribe, and obtained benefit, a plea of estoppel cannot be raised as the same would amount to protection of fraud perpetrated and thereby defeat the constitutional objective.
18.
Reference in connection may also be made to Tarak Nath Manna v. Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd, reported in 1999(4) SCT 451 (Cal.)
(DB) : 1999 Labour and Industrial Cases 3633.
Yet again, in Gowrishankar and another v. Joshi Amba Shankar Family Trust and others, reported in 1996(1) RRR 685 (SC) : 1996(3) Supreme Court Cases 310, the Apex Court relied upon the decision in SP Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath (supra) and held as follows :-  "From the foregoing discussion is must be held that the trustees obtained the permission to sell the property to the purchasers practising fraud upon the court and in view of the following observation of this Court in SP Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath (supra).
`It is the settled proposition of law that a judgment or decree obtained by playing fraud on the court is a nullity and non est in the eyes of law.
Such a judgment/decree - by the first court or by the highest court - has to be treated as a nullity by every court, whether superior or inferior.
It can be challenged in any court even in collateral proceedings.'
19.
We also do not find any force in the submission of Mr. Bahadur to the effect that those who have been appointed subsequently are estopped from maintaining the Original Application inasmuch as they appeared before the subsequent Selection Committee.
Only in terms of the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal as referred to hereinbefore, wherein it has been held that any appointment made on the basis of a fresh notification shall abide by the result of the original application.
By order dated 891995, the Tribunal further directed that any appointment which may be made on the basis of the notification dated 18th July, 1995 shall abide by the result of the Original Application.
20.
We are also not in a position to subscribe to the submission of Mr. Bahadur to the effect that the application was barred by limitation, particularly when no such plea was raised before the learned Tribunal and in any event, as both the matters were directed to be heard analogously and particularly when the said application was filed pursuant to the order dated 27111998, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, question of limitation being a mixed question of facts and law, the same, in our opinion, should not be permitted to be raised for the first time in the writ application.
21.
In fairness to Mr. Bahadur, we may now consider some of the decisions cited by him.
In Rakesh Ranjan Verma and others v. State of Bihar and others (supra), the Court was considering a matter involving a different fact situation.
The question which arose for consideration was as to whether the persons who were appointed in lower post upon giving an undertaking that they would not lay any claim in future for the post for which they were selected, would give rise to the applicability to the doctrine of estoppel.
The validity of such appointment in that case was not questioned, as the appointing authority therefor, was the Bihar State Electricity Board.
Such is not the position here.
22.
In Ishwar Chander v. Shri Satyanarayana Sinha and others, reported in Supreme Court Rulings Vol. 2 page 522 (1970), it was held that if the majority members of the Selection Committee sign the Selection list, the same would be valid.
In the instant case outsiders, i.e. the persons who were not members of the Selection Committee, also signed, which is per se illegal.
23.
In Madan Lal and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others (supra), a plea of estoppel was raised on the ground that the persons having taken calculated risk and appearing in the interview, wherein they were declared unsuccessful, were not entitled to question the selection process unfair.
In the instant case, as noticed hereinbefore some respondents appeared at the subsequent selection stage having regard to the order passed by the Court that the same would abide by the result of the writ application.
24.
In State of Bihar and another v. Madan Mohan Singh and others (supra), it has been held that the Selection list got exhausted on completion of selection process under a particular advertisement.
In the instant case, the vacancies were to be filled up subject to the result of the writ application and having regard to he peculiar circumstances of this case, the learned Tribunal was constrained to pass the impugned order, more so, as appointments have been made de hors the rules.
25.
In State of UP v. Rafiquddin and others (supra), the Apex Court was concerned with the case of seniority.
Such question does not arise in the instant case.
26.
In Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan (supra) it has been held that the writ court does not sit in appeal over the decision of the Selection Committee and to scrutinise the relevant relative merit of the candidates.
In that case the validity of the selection process was not in question.
27.
In State of Tamil Nadu and others v. S Thangavel and others, reported in AIR 1997 Supreme Court 2283, it was held :-  "The provisions contemplate that the list of approved candidates for appointment by promotion and by recruitment by transfer to all the categories of posts in the State of Subordinate Services shall be prepared annually against the estimated number of vacancies expected to arise during the course of a year.
The estimate of vacancies shall be prepared taking into account the total number of permanent posts in a category; the number of temporary posts in existence, the anticipated sanction of new posts in the next year, the recruitment post of leave reserves; the anticipated vacancies due to retirement and promotion etc. in the course of the year.
It would thus be seen that in normal circumstances (underlined by me) a list shall be annually prepared in the prescribed manner taking into account the vacancies existing or anticipated as on the prescribed date due to contingencies enumerated therein.
That does not mean that Government is denuded of its power to make the list when new situation had arisen.
Undoubtedly, in this case, as on the prescribed date there where no exigencies and, therefore, a list could not be prepared.
But due to creation of new posts on account of administrative exigencies, namely, bifurcation of the firkas and upgradation of the sub- Taluks into Taluks, new posts were created.
Consequently new posts were required to be filled up.
As a result, the authorities, instead of making temporary promotions under Rule 39 of the Rules, filled them up on regular basis from all the eligible candidates.
Under those circumstances, the preparation of the list cannot be said to be unwarranted due to aforestated exigencies."
28.
It is thus evident that the circumstances obtaining therein absolutely was different.
29.
In Government of Orissa v. Haraprasad Das and others (supra), it was held :-  "It was contended by the learned Counsel for the appellant-State that the Tribunal in giving the aforesaid directions has acted beyond its jurisdiction and that the said directions are illegal inasmuch as they are contrary to Rule 11 of the Rules.
In our opinion the contention deserves to be accepted.
Merely because there were some vacant posts of Copyholders and the Director of the Press had recommended to the Government to fill up those posts it was not open to the Tribunal to direct the Government to fill up those posts even though it had good reasons not to do so.
It should have been appreciated by the Tribunal that mere empanelment or inclusion of one's name in the selection list does not give him a right to be appointed.
So also if the Government decides not to make further appointments for a valid reason, it cannot be said that it has acted arbitrarily by not appointing those whose names are included in the selection list.
Whether to fill up a post or not is a policy decision and unless it is shown to be arbitrary it is not open to the Tribunal to interfere with such decision of the Government and direct if to make further appointments.
The Tribunal in directing the Government to make further appointments on the efficiency ground of public administration went beyond its jurisdiction.
While giving such a direction what the Tribunal failed to appreciate was that the decision of the Government not to make further appointments was not challenged as arbitrary and it was challenged only on two grounds viz. (1) In between 981994 and 1311995 there was no ban and, therefore, the Government could have appointed the respondents on the vacant posts, and (2) the Government had made appointments in the same Press from out of a panel of Distributors, Binders, Type Suppliers etc. which was prepared about 7 years back and, therefore, the Government had meted out discriminatory treatment to the respondents.
The Tribunal did not find the action of the Government discriminatory possibly because as pointed out by the State in its counter filed before the Tribunal the Selection list, prepared for Distributors, Binders, Type Suppliers, was of a different nature and character as it was prepared on the basis of a trade test which was confined to the in-service employees eligible for promotion to those posts under Rule 17 of the Rules.
It may be recalled at this stage that the posts of Copyholders in the Government Press are base level Class III posts and are required to be filled up by direct recruitment from open market under Rules 10 and 11 of the Rules."
30.
We, however, find much force in the contention of the learned Counsel that the court could not have directed to notify vacancies.
The question, however, remains as to whether it was permissible for the petitioners herein to issue a fresh notification for appointment, as has allegedly been done in the years 1995 and 1997.
The matter would require consideration at the hands of the Central Administration Tribunal afresh.
Having regard to the well settled principles of law, we are of the opinion that no person should be appointed who was not found suitable for the post for which he had applied, and also no person should be appointed who had not been able to secure the minimum qualification (qualifying ?)
mark.
We are further of the opinion that the select list must be adhered to, and all appointments must be made on merit in terms of the correct select list.
All appointments made contrary to the well settled legal principles should be set aside.
We further direct that the inter se seniority of the candidates would be determined on the basis of the merit list.
We further direct that the Administration would be at liberty to initiate such departmental proceeding against such officers who may be found responsible therefor.
31.
In this view of the matter the operative portion of the impugned judgment cannot be sustained.
They are set aside accordingly.
These applications are disposed of and the matters are remitted to the learned Tribunal for issuing fresh direction having regard to the observations made hereinbefore and in accordance with law.
The petitioners shall bear the costs of the respondents which is assessed at Rs. 25,000/- in view of the gross illegalities committed by them.
Order accordingly.