Swatanter Kumar, J - Learned counsel for the petitioner-Ex-Sep Jarnail Singh, while appearing in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, prays that Annexures P/3 and P/7 be quashed, raising the following arguments for consideration of the Court :-  (a) that the petitioner was discharged from military service after he met with an accident on 30th Nov, 1992 and his disability was 40% at that time and, as such, he was entitled to received disability pension including the service element; (b) even if the petitioner was not entitled to grant of disability pension in accordance with law and particularly in view of Annexure P/1 he was entitled to shelter appointment; and (c) he would be entitled to service element of pension, as he was never examined by a duly constituted medical board in accordance with law and relevant rules.
2.
The claim of the petitioner is based on facts that he was enrolled in the Indian army on 19th July, 1986 as Sepoy.
He was given this appointment after he was found fit in all respects.
The petitioner met with an accident on 30th November, 1992 and was placed in Low Medical Category CEE but thereafter his medical category was upgraded and was permitted to continue to serve the army.
The injury was aggravated by military service.
The petitioner could not become medically fit for continuation in army service and was discharged on permanent Low Medical Category on 9th July, 1994.
According to the petitioner, he was brought before the Invalidating Medical Board which gave to the petitioner 40% permanent disability.
He had put in 8 years 6 months of service against the contractual period of 17 years, as pleaded.
According to him there was no justification for releasing the petitioner from army.
The petitioner claims that he was discharged without following the provisions of Low Medical Category persons in accordance with AO 46/80, Annexure P/1 to the petition.
The petitioner submitted his claim for disability pension, which was rejected on 30th October, 1995, vide Annexure P/3 to the petition.
The appeal which the petitioner preferred was also rejected on 17th February, 1996.
After serving legal notice praying for some relief, which was declined vide order dated 18th April, 1997, this resulted into the filing of the present petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
It was contended that the petitioner was on annual leave and was driving the motor cycle when he met with an accident, resulting in some injury to his foot.
The petitioner re- joined his unit and was finally discharged from the hospital on 22.1.1993, while giving him low Medical Category `CEE' temporary.
4.
At this stage, it will be relevant to refer to the relevant extract of the reply submitted by the respondents.
"The petitioner was further downgraded to medical category CEE (Permanent) on review w.e.f.
20.7.1993 due to the same diagnosis.
Finally due to his permanent low medical category CEE (Permanent) and the petitioner's request showing his unwillingness to continue in service in low medical category, the petitioner was discharged from service.
It is submitted here that the petitioner suffered injury while he was on annual leave.
Therefore, the injury cannot be attributable to military service.
It is further submitted here that the disability of the petitioner assessed at 6-10% by the Release Medical Board on 22894.
It is further submitted here that the disability of the petitioner was neither considered as attributable nor aggravated by the military service as the petitioner sustained the injury in peace area while on annual leave.
Therefore, the petition is misconceived and deserves to be dismissed."
5.
It is specifically denied that the petitioner was put to disability of 40%.
He was released by the medical board disability being 8 to 10% only, which is less than 10%.
It is further stated that requisite service for earning the pension was 20 years and not 17 years, as stated by the petitioner.
The claim of the petitioner for grant of other benefits was disputed as not being permissible in law.
6.
As far as the first submission of the petitioner that he is entitled to grant of disability pension is concerned, it certainly has no merit.
For attracting the applicability of regulation 173 (provisions dealing with the disability pension), all the conditions have to be satisfied cumulatively.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the injury was attributable to or aggravated by the military service because of the injury suffered by the petitioner, while he was on leave, even then he has to show that the disability was 20% or above.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Jarnail Singh v. Union of India, 1998(1) SLR 418 : 1997(3) SCT 484 (P&H)(DB), to contend that the injury is attributable to military service.
8.
I consider it necessary to discuss this issue because as shown by the respondents beyond controversy that the disability of the petitioner was less than 20%.
Further, it is stated that the petitioner was unwilling to continue in service in Low Medical Category.
Once the petitioner has exercised his choice and has accepted his discharge, he cannot be permitted to turn back and plead to the contrary now.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that he was never subjected to a medical board nor had he shown his unwillingness to serve the army.
This contention is equally unfounded.
These are the matter of facts, which would be in the best knowledge of the petitioner.
The petitioner has placed on record copy of the notice as well as during the course of hearing, counsel for the petitioner conceded that no such ground was taken by him in the appeal he preferred.
I also find no mention of these grounds in the notice, Annexure P/2 to the petition.
There is nothing on record to show that the disability of the petitioner was 20% or above, as such the claim of the petitioner for grant of disability pension only merits rejection.
10.
The claim of shelter appointment is also not sustainable for the same reason, as the petitioner had declined to continue with the military service in the Low Medical Category appointment, which has been specifically stated in the preliminary objections of the written statement.
Neither replication was filed to the written statement nor this averment has been denied.
The onus was on the petitioner to show that his disability was more than 20% or even he was willing to continue to service in the Low Medical Category.
The emphasis placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on AO 46/80 Annexure P/1 (Clause 2(b) does not forward the case of the petitioner any more.
The applicability of this instruction depends on willingness of the petitioner.
The respondents have taken a categorical stand that the petitioner was not willing to continue with the alternative appointment.
In the order dated 20th October, 1995, it was specifically recorded that the disability of the petitioner was less than 20% and other relief permissible to the petitioner was granted by the same order.
11.
It must also be noticed at this stage that in the appeal dated 22nd January, 1996, the petitioner has not even raised the claim with regard to refusal on the part of the respondents or his willingness to accept the alternative appointment.
In fact, he had specifically pleaded that he be permitted to complete 10 years of service to avail the benefits of other pensionary benefits on the same posts.
12.
It is the conceded case that the petitioner had put in little above 8 years of service.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to bring to the notice of the court any rule under which the claim for grant of pension could be allowed on the strength of the total rendered service of less than 10 years.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while relying upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Ajaib Singh v. Union of India, CWP No. 16605 of 1992 decided on 23121999 : 2000(2) SCT 492 (P&H), contended that the petitioner would be entitled to raise his claim before the respondents as his disability in any case is aggravated due to military service and is more than 20%.
If that be so, the petitioner is entitled to request the respondents to subject the petitioner to re-medical survey board.
I have no doubt in my mind that if such request is made by the petitioner, the respondents would consider the same in accordance with law and the procedure prescribed for that purpose.
For the reasons afore-stated, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed with the above observation, but without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.