RL Anand, J - Ranjit Singh, petitioner has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the State of Punjab, Govt. Medical College, Patiala-cum-Chairman, Admission Committee, Ms. Shalley Sharma d/o Shri U.D.
Sharma and Baba Farid University, Faridkot, and has sought the directions of this court in the nature of certiorari/mandamus directing that the action of the respondent-authorities in admitting respondent No. 3 in the MBBS Course at GGS Medical College, Faridkot, is illegal, arbitrary, mala fide, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and ultra vires of the Scheme enshrined in the Prospectus of PMET, 1999, and further directions have been sought directing the respondent authorities to admit the petition in the MBBS/BDS Course as per merit in the category of November 1984 Riots Affected Displaced Persons.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he applied for the Punjab PMET for admission to the Ist year of MBBS course.
This test was for filling up th seats in various Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab, including the Govt. Medical College, Patiala, Govt. Medical College, Amritsar and Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot.
Two per cent seats were reserved in the aforesaid three Medical Colleges for the children of November 1984 Riots Affected Displaced Persons, Terrorist affected persons etc., as under :-  a) Govt. Medical College, Patiala.
3 b) Govt. Medical College, Amritsar.
2 c) GGS Medical College, Faridkot 1 One seat in BDS at Medical College, Amritsar.
3.
Clause (xi) of the Prospectus, 1999, reserving 2% seats reads as under :-  "xi.
November 1984 Riots affected displaced persons, the children of army deserters killed/100% physically disabled, the children of the families of persons killed as a result of terrorist violence or by security forces acting in aid of Civil power and the children of innocent civilians who have sustained 100% disability in terrorist violence or during operation by security forces acting in aid of civil power."
4.
In the prospectus, 1999, the certificates in respect of the aforesaid categories were to be from the Deputy Commissioner concerned.
The petitioner applied in the category of November, 1984 Riots Affected displaced persons and submitted the certificate in the prescribed proforma duly signed by the Deputy Commissioner concerned.
Respondent No. 3 claimed admission in the category of Terrorist Affected family.
The inter se merit of the petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 and one Shivani who also applied in the said category is as follows :-  Name of Candidate Roll No.
Merit Position  Shivani 11436 4th Shalley Sharma(Respondent No. 3) 11153 6th Ranjit Singh(Petitioner) 11056 9th 5.
Respondent No. 3 is daughter of Shri U.D.
Sharma, who is working as Accounts Officer in the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called P.S.E.B.)
and is presently posted at Amritsar.
She intentionally did not submit the certificate in the prescribed proforma.
Later on, she submitted a certificate dated 2441998 which was signed by the SDM, Ajnala, claiming that her grandfather was killed by terrorists and she was entitled to the benefit of this category.
According to the petitioner, the benefit of this category could only be extended to such terrorist affected families that had lost their bread earners but in the present case, father of respondent No. 3 is serving in the P.S.E.B.
and, thus, she cannot claim herself to be a dependent of a terrorist affected family.
Similarly, the certificate submitted by respondent No. 3, which was an essential condition of the Prospectus was not in accordance with the proforma.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that Shivani d/o Parveen Kumar, who was at merit No. 4, was not given the admission by the respondent-authorities on the ground that she was not dependent of a terrorist affected family.
According to the petitioner, respondent No. 3 has been treated as a dependent of a terrorist affected family ignoring the fact that her father is serving in the P.S.E.B.
and, as such, she was not eligible for admission in that category.
It is also the case of the petitioner that since 8 seats were reserved for the category in which he applied and if two persons in the merit list; namely, Shivani and respondent No. 3, are held to be in-eligible, then, he is entitled to be admitted to the MBBS/BDS Course.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that the admission of respondent No. 3 in the MBBD/BDS Course is illegal, because she was not a dependent upon a terrorist affected person and moreover, the certificate supplied to the authorities by respondent No. 3 is not in accordance with the proforma.
Moreover, respondent No. 3 was not in possession of the certificate at the relevant time, i.e. on the date of interview.
6.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Three written statements were filed.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.
It was admitted by these respondents that the petitioner appeared in the PMET, 1999 and claimed reservation under the category of November, 1984 Riot Affected Displaced Persons.
It was also admitted by these respondents that there was 2% reservation for November, 1984 Riot affected displaced persons, children of army deserters killed/100% physically disabled, children of the families of persons killed as a result of violence or by security forces acting in aid of civil power and the children of innocent civilians who have sustained 100% disability in terrorist violence or during operation by security forces acting in aid of civil power.
According to these respondents, there were six seats for the MBBS Course, reserved for these categories.
The merit of the candidates is as under :-  Sr. No. Name of candidate Marks in PME Whether selected or not 1.
Abhishek Bansal 521 Patiala.
2.
Jasleen Kaur 484 Amritsar.
3.
Pushwinder Kaur 442 Amritsar.
4.
Shivani 440  (Selected at Patiala but has not produced the required certificate, therefore, not joined.)
+ + 5.
Jarnail Singh Bhatia 420 Patiala.
6.
Shalley Sharma 417 (Selected at Faridkot but now has been shifted to Patiala against vacant seat of Shivani).
+ + 7.
Manmeet Kaur 396 Selected at Faridkot.
8.
Rupinder Kaur 380 Now selected at Faridkot against resultant vacant seat.
9.
Ranjit Singh 358 Not selected.
7.
The above would show that if the selection of respondent No. 3 goes, for any valid reason, then, the petitioner comes into the picture because Shivani did not produce the required certificate and Manmeet Kaur did not join inspite of her selection.
It was also the stand of respondents 1 and 2 that respondent No. 3 was selected provisionally in the MBBS Course subject to production of proper certificates from the competent authority.
Respondents 1 and 2 also admitted in para-8 of the written statement that Shivani was provisionally selected in the MBBS Course under the reserved category of children of families of persons killed as a result of terrorist violence, etc.
Since Shivani had not produced the required certificate for claiming reservation, she was asked to produce the same and as she failed to submit the same, she did not join the course.
These respondents also submitted that Shalley Sharmas, respondent No. 3, was provisionally selected subject to production of required certificate and she submitted the certificate at the time of her admission and the Principal, Medical College, Faridkot, accepted the same.
With this broad defence, respondents 1 and 2 prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
8.
A separate written statement was also filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, who had taken the stand as that of respondents 1 and 2 and for our purposes, it is not necessary to incorporate in detail the stand of this respondent.
9.
Written statement on behalf of respondent No. 3 requires to be noticed, who has tried to justify her admission.
According to her she is fully eligible to apply for the reserved seats and the stand of this respondent is that she belongs to the family of a terrorist affected person.
There is a definite purpose why the word `family' has been used by the authority in the Prospectus.
The Govt. was aware that during the days of terrorism, terrorist violence was targeting the minority community in the State of Punjab.
The object of the terrorists was to eliminate the head of the family and in the process create a scare in the entire family and to disrupt the family life so that the members of the family may move out from Punjab.
If the head of the family dies in the act of violence, the entire family had to suffer as its normal life will be completely disrupted.
Making out a case for herself, respondent No. 3 submitted that her grandfather Daulat Ram Sharma and his four brothers were staying in Village Bua Nangli, Tehsil Ajnala, District Amritsar.
These five brothers had 50 acres of land.
It was the most prominent family in the village.
During the time of operation Blue Star on 561984, terrorists attacked the residence of grandfather of the respondent No. 3 and his brothers, which were located close to each other.
Grandfather of the respondent No. 3 was killed with swords.
Her uncles were shot dead on the same day at the spot.
Other family members were also attacked with spears and swords.
The property was ransacked.
The house was completely burnt to the ground.
The answering respondent got the report from Tehsildar, Ajnala, Patwari of the Area, Kanungo and the SDM in this regard.
The father of respondent No. 3 was residing with his father and this fact has also been certified by the SDM and also there is a clear indication of a joint family because the ration card was one.
Respondent No. 3 has admitted that her father was working as a Steno Typist in the P.S.E.B.
but they were all residing in the village and, in fact, respondent No. 3 was also born in that very village.
Respondent No. 3, in this manner, has tried to justify that though her father is in service, she is a member of a terrorist affected family and fulfils the aspirations and aims and object of the reservation policy and, therefore, the admission has been rightly granted to her.
In short, the stand of respondent No. 3 is that she fulfilled the requisite criteria for admission under the category of dependent of terrorist affected family and thus, prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
10.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
11.
It will be useful for me to incorporate the relevant clauses of prospectus as we all know that the terms and conditions of the prospectus are binding upon the candidates who apply for admission.
12.
Sub-clause (b) of Chapter 2 pertains to the eligibility for test/admission, wherein it has been stated that the condition of Punjab Resident status will not be applicable to November, 1984 riot affected/displaced persons and NRI candidates provided they fulfil the other conditions of eligibility.
According to clause 3.4(c) "incomplete applications and those received after the prescribed dates shall not be entertained and will be rejected without any intimation to the candidates".
According to sub- clause (xi) of Chapter 7, which deals with reservation in State Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges, 2% seats have been reserved for "November, 1984 Riots affected displaced persons, the children of army deserters killed/100% physically disabled, the children of the families of persons killed as a result of terrorist violence or by security forces acting in aid of Civil Power and the children of innocent civilians who have sustained 100% disability in terrorist violence or during operation by security forces acting in aid of civil power".
The laudable abject for providing reservation to the terrorist affected candidates is that since they have lost their bread earner, therefore, such type of candidates should be given preference in the matter of reservation, especially in the specialised courses of MBBS/BDS, etc.
The defining note 9(b) has to be read along with the sub-clause (xi) of Chapter 7.
13.
Counsel for respondent No. 3 has tried to make out a case for his client by stating that the benefit of reservation should also go to the children of the families of the persons killed as a result of terrorist violence and the word `family' has to be interpreted in a broader and larger perspective, therefore, respondent No. 3 has a case when her grandfather was murdered at the hands of terrorists.
Not only this, the brothers of her grandfather were also done to death.
Since, the family was joint, therefore, it cannot be said by the petitioner that respondent No. 3 had no eligibility.
14.
I would have accepted the contention of counsel for respondent No. 3 had the prospectus not defined the word `family'.
Sub-clause (b) of Note 9 clearly lays down that the dependent of terrorist affected families will mean a family which has lost its bread-winner in some terrorist action in Punjab.
No doubt, respondent No. 3 has lost her grandfather but in the presence of her father who is employed in the P.S.E.B., it cannot be said that respondent No. 3 was dependent upon her grandfather nor it can be said that her grandfather was a bread winner in the family.
Family in the common knowledge consists of a male head, his wife and unmarried children.
The broad and wider meaning as interpreted by the counsel for respondent No. 3 cannot be accepted.
Shri Daulat Ram Sharma might be living jointly with his other brothers or son but so far as respondent No. 3 is concerned, her bread winner is her father irrespective of the fact that this family suffered a lot at the hands of the terrorists.
In these circumstances, it has to be held that respondent No. 3 was not a dependent of a terrorist affected family in Punjab and, as such, she was not fulfilling the requisite criteria for seeking admission in the course.
15.
The things do not rest here.
Even the affidavit which was furnished by respondent No. 3 is not in accordance with the prescribed proforma.
As per the essentiality certificate, the certificate would be signed under the seal of the Deputy Commissioner and the certificate should be in the following proforma :-  "This is to certify that ................. son/daughter of ............. is a November 1984 riots affected migrant/displaced person/Terrorist affected person/Dependent of Terrorist affected family in Punjab."
16.
In this certificate, it has also been informed that a certificate from the authority other than the Deputy Commissioner is not valid.
In this regard, now we have to see what were the contents of the affidavit which was submitted by respondent No. 3, which is reproduced as under :-  "This is to certify that Miss Shelly Sharma d/o Sh. Uma Dutt Sharma s/o Sh. Daulat Ram Sharma resident of village Bua Nangali, Teh.
Ajnala, present Address 146 Power Colony, Majitha Road, Amritsar, is dependent of terrorist affected family in Punjab.
She is a child of family of persons killed as a result of terrorist violence on 561984.
Sd/- Sub Divisional Magistrate, Ajnala."
17.
Thus, it will be clear that this Certificate dated 2441998 is not signed by the Deputy Commissioner.
The other certificate which was submitted by respondent No. 3, certifies that Shri Daulat Ram Sharma s/o Shri Thakur Dass, resident of village Bua Nangli, District Amritsar, was killed by terrorists on 561984 and Shri Uma Dutt Sharma, resident of 146, Power Colony is a son of Shri Daulat Ram Sharma.
This certificate has been issued on the basis of the certificate already issued by the SDM Ajnala vide No. 21 dated 21.4.1998.
This certificate is signed by DR & PO for Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar on 461998 and was countersigned by the Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar, on 981999.
Thus, the second certificate, Annexure R-1, also does not conform to the requisite proforma.
Furthermore, the date of interview in this case was 881999.
Admittedly, the originals of Annexures R-1 and R-2 were not produced before the Committee on 881999 and any entertaining of the certificate after this date will not validate the admission of respondent No. 3.
18.
Faced with this difficulty, counsel for respondent No. 3 submitted that it will become a very hard case for respondent No. 3, if her admission is cancelled.
Her family is the biggest sufferer at the hands of the terrorists.
They were mercilessly butchered and harmed by the terrorists.
In case, the admission of respondent No. 3 is cancelled, she will adversely suffer, especially when she is already in the college for the last one year.
19.
This court appreciates the sentiments and arguments raised by the counsel for respondent No. 3 but cannot subscribe to the same because we are the law courts and adjudicate the rights of the parties as per law and rules and regulations.
The point for determination in this case is whether the admission of respondent No. 3 has been done in conformity with law or not and for the reasons given above, I have tried to show that the admission of respondent No. 3 is not in accordance with the rules and prospectus.
She was not eligible in that category.
She might hail from a terrorist affected family but in the presence of her father, she cannot be held to be dependent of the terrorist affected family.
The certificates produced by her are not in accordance with the proforma and she submitted the certificates later after the expiry of the cut off date.
20.
In Sachin Gaur v. Punjabi University, Patiala and another, 1996(1) RSJ 1 : 1996(1) SCT 837 (P&H)(DB), it was observed that an institution has necessarily to fix a cut off date for admissions as non-fixation thereof would result in non-finalization of admissions for an indefinite period.
The cut off date has to be fixed keeping in view the tentative date when the classes have to start and if cut off date has been prescribed in a prospectus, it cannot be styled to be arbitrary.
21.
During the course of submissions, it was also pointed out to this court by the counsel for respondent No. 3 that by cancelling the admission of respondent No. 3, the petitioner will not be able to cope up with the course of 1999 session and that some seats are still lying vacant in that session in the institution in the other categories.
Therefore, the petitioner or respondent No. 3 may be accommodated against those vacancies.
Counsel for respondent No. 3 tried to make a strong case for his client, perhaps keeping in view the background of the family of respondent No. 3, but no definite directions can be given to the respondent-authorities in this regard as I have already held above that the admission of respondent No. 3 to the course is illegal.
It is for the respondent-authorities to consider as a special case or on compassionate grounds, to accommodate respondent No. 3 but so far as the rights of petitioner are concerned, those have to be adjudicated, the moment this court gives a declaration that admission of respondent No. 3 is illegal.
22.
Resultantly, the present writ petition is hereby allowed and a writ in the nature of certiorari is hereby issued by declaring that the action on the part of the respondent-authorities in admitting respondent No. 3 in the MBBS Course at GGS Medical College, Faridkot, was illegal, arbitrary, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and against the Scheme enshrined in the prospectus, PMET, 1999, and further directions are given to the respondent- authorities to admit the petitioner in the MBBS/BDS Course as per his merit in the category of November, 1984 Riot Affected/Displaced Persons forthwith.
The admission of respondent No. 3 to the said course stands cancelled forthwith.
However, it is observed that the respondent-authorities may consider sympathetically and on compassionate grounds, to accommodate respondent No. 3 against any vacant seat in that session in any other category.
This observation has been made keeping in view the fact that respondent No. 3 is studying for the last one year and her family has suffered a lot in the terrorist activity.
23.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.