RL Anand, J - Ex-Sepoy Kamaljit Singh has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated 1611996.
Annexure P-4 passed by respondent No. 2 vide which the claim of the petitioner to disability pension was rejected.
The petitioner has also sought quashment of order dated 16121997 Annexure P-7, passed by respondent No. 1, who has dismissed the appeal of the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner through this writ petition has prayed for disability pension by making out the following case.
According to the petitioner, he was enrolled in the Sikh Light Infantry on 21.6.1989.
He was fully found medical fit at the time of his recruitment.
The unit of the petitioner was moving to exercise from Dehradun to Rajasthan and due to strain and stress, a trouble in the stomach developed and he was admitted in the military hospital, Suratgarh, where he was operated upon on 7.2.1992 for intestinal obstruction.
The petitioner remained under treatment and was later on placed in Low Medical Category "C" Temporary for six months by Military Hospital, Jalandhar Cantt.
After six months he reported back to the unit and was made to work again under stress and strain due to which there was aggravation in his condition and the petitioner was again placed in Category "C" Temporary, at Medical Hospital, Dehradun.
3.
On 3111995, the petitioner was discharged from service as being placed in Low Medical Category "C" permanent.
It is the case of the petitioner that the CCDA, Allahabad has illegally rejected his claim of disability pension on 1611996 on the ground that the disability was not attributable to the military service.
The petitioner filed an appeal with the Government of India which was also rejected on 16121997.
4.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Written statement has been filed.
According to the respondents, the disability attributed to the petitioner is not attributable to the Army service nor it has been aggravated when the petitioner was serving the army.
According to the respondents, it was a constitutional deformity and as such the petitioner is not entitled to disability pension.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
It is a matter of common knowledge and judicial notice can be taken that when a person enters the army he is supposed to undergo a medical check up.
There is nothing on the record to show that at the time of the admission of the petitioner in the army, he was declared unfit or it was found that the petitioner was suffering from any ailment much less intestinal obstruction.
The petitioner joined the Army in the year 1989.
The problem arose to the petitioner after 3 years.
7.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the disease of the petitioner was constitutional or that it was not attributable to the army service.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as 1997(1) SLR 98 : 1997(1) SCT 386 (SC), Union of India v. Baljit Singh, in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to uphold that before a disability case of pension is made out for army personnel, it has to be established that the disability related to the military service.
There is no dispute with the preposition of law propounded by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In the cited judgment, Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold that it would depend upon the facts of each case.
In the present case there is nothing to show that at the time of the admission of the petitioner in the army, he was suffering from any disability or disorder.
Therefore, it has to be inferred that the disability which the petitioner was found suffering at the time of discharge, must relate to the army service.
Therefore, present writ petition is allowed by setting aside the impugned Annexures and it is declared that the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension with effect from 121995.
The disability pension to the petitioner should be released according to the rules within three months from today, failing which, the petitioner shall also be entitled to 12% interest.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondents-authority.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.