Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J. - In this appeal judgment dated 191998 of learned Single Judge in SWP No. 653/83, titled Dr. Ghulam Mohd.
Bhat v. State of J&K and anr. is impugned.
2.
Appellant, petitioner before the Writ Court while serving as Senior Consultant, (Associate Professor)/Chairman Community Medicine in SKIMS Soura, Srinagar, Kashmir left for Saudia Arabia on foreign assignment on 1431983, without waiting for the applied leave to be sanctioned and no objection certificate being issued.
However, he was "discharged from service as Senior Consultant/Associate Professor in the Institute of Medical Sciences Soura Srinagar/Medical College, Srinagar", by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir vide its order No. 582-HMS of 1983 dated 1391983.
Petitioner challenged this order of discharge from service in SWP No. 653/83.
The writ Court upon hearing decided the matter in terms as under :-  ".....This petition is disposed of with the direction that the petitioner would stand re-instated in service with effect from the date of termination.
He would start getting wages with effect from the date he produces copy of the order passed by this Court before appointing authority, that authority would be at liberty to come to conclusion as to whether further enquiry is required to be held in this case or not.
If it comes to the conclusion that further enquiry is required to be held then change sheet would be served on the petitioner and enquiry officer would also be appointed.
In case it is not proposed to proceed further in the matter then petitioner be reinstated and given all benefits minus back wages.
Disposed of accordingly."
The learned counsel submits that while the order of discharge of petitioner from service has been set aside and he is reinstated the writ courts part direction, giving option to the appointing authority to decide whether further enquiry is to be held or not followed by other indicated steps, cannot be implemented insofar as the petitioner has retired form service even before the learned Single Jude handed down the impugned judgment on 191998.
He further canvasses that once an employee retires on superannuation and ceases to be an employee, in absence of any rules providing for holding or continuance of departmental inquiry, after retirement the case is taken out of the general rule of holding enquiry at the option of appointing authority once the employee retires and ceases to be so employed, the inquiry, as in this case, cannot be held.
3.
The counsel for respondents contends that the employer/Government, has the liberty to conduct the enquiry, notwithstanding the admitted position that the petitioner ceased to be an employee of the Government on 191998, the date of judgment, as he had by then superannuated.
The order of discharge referred as termination order in the judgment, has been set aside for the reason that the services of the petitioner could not have been brought to an end without holding an enquiry and without hearing in addition to the order being not reasoned one.
4.
The case revolves round unauthorised absence/overstay of leave in terms of Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir CSR Obviously, the enquiry has to be held in accordance with law.
Holding of enquiry and providing an opportunity to the other side has to be in terms of Article 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir and Rule 33 of Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.
The relevant rules nowhere provide that the enquiry should proceed against an employee who has retired on superannuation or for that matter has ceased to be member of service for any other reason.
5.
In Bhagirathi Jena v. Board of Directors, OSFC, AIR 1999 SC 1841 : 1999(2) SCT 651 (SC), the Apex Court in the context of Orissa Financial State Corporation Act, 1959, observed as under :-  "In view of the absence of such provision in the above said regulation, it must be held that the Corporation had no legal authority to make any reduction in the retiral benefits of the appellant.
There is also no provision for conduction a disciplinary enquiry after retirement of the appellant and nor any provision stating that in case misconduct is established, a deduction could be made from retiral benefits.
Once the appellant had retired from service on 30695, there was no authority vested in the Corporation for continuing the departmental enquiry even for the purpose of imposing any reduction in the retiral benefits payable to the appellant.
In the absence of such authority, it must be held that the enquiry had lapsed and the appellant was entiteld to full retiral benefits on retirement."
In our opinion, the direction of the learned Single Judge of giving liberty to the appointing authority to hold enquiry and in case the enquiry is decided to be held, then charge-sheet to be served on petitioner and an enquiry officer to be appointed, is not in tune with provisions of law.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, such direction would serve no purpose and is beyond pale of law.
It emerges to be noted that the State has not come in appeal against the impugned judgment.
The appellant also does not take any objection to the part of the order directing `no back wages' for the period of petitioner's absence from 1431983 till 3131988, when he was off duty from SKIMS, Soura.
Once the order of discharge is held bad in law, the petitioner is relegated to the position which he would have held, but for his discharge from service.
Though he will not get any back wages for the period of his absence, but all the same the period shall have to be counted towards pensionary benefits is case petitioner's service record shows that the petitioner could avail the period as leave of whatever kind due to him.
However, petitioner shall not get any leave salary or any other payment for the period of his absence from 1431983 to 3131988.
In result, for aforesaid reasons, the judgment with the above indicated modification is upheld and appeal is partly allowed in terms as above.
Appeal partly allowed.