Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The two petitioners were working at the Military Farm, Ambala Cantonment since June 1, 1990 and March 1, 1982, respectively.
Vide order dated January 12, 2000 they were transferred to the Military Farms at Ferozepur and Jalandhar.
The petitioners challenged the order of transfer before the Central Administrative Tribunal, inter alia, on the ground that they had been victimised for their union activities.
They had filed complaints against respondent No. 5.
When the said complaints were ignored, the petitioners had filed a writ petition in this Court.
The Bench had permitted the petitioners to lodge an F.I.R., if so advised.
This had annoyed the authorities.
2.
The Tribunal after consideration of the matter, found that the petitioners had stayed at the Military Farm at Ambala Cantonment for a long period.
They had disobeyed orders regarding performance of temporary duties.
They appeared to have been "indulging in acts of indiscipline from time to time causing a situation leading the Military Farm on (to) the brink of closure."
In this situation, the order of transfer could not be "faulted".
Thus, the petition was dismissed.
3.
Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
We have heard Mr. Sanjiv Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioners.
He has vehemently contended that the order of transfer is violative of the instructions issued by the competent authority.
He also contends that the action of the authority is wholly arbitrary and should, thus, be quashed.
5.
Mr. Bansal has referred to the instructions issued by the Headquarters, Western Common, vide letter dated March 8, 1996.
We have perused these instructions.
It has been, inter alia, provided that Group `D' (to which category the petitioners belong) employees can be transferred on promotion; on compassionate grounds; on being rendered surplus and on administrative grounds.
It has also been stipulated that "transfer will be resorted to in rare cases and normal disciplinary action will be initiated against the erring individuals".
Despite these provisions, we are of the view that the decisions regarding disciplinary action or transfer have to be taken by the concerned officer.
It is for the competent (authority) to determine as to whether the official should be transferred or subjected to disciplinary proceedings.
In the present case the Authority had chosen to transfer the petitioner.
This action is in no way violative of the instructions.
The transfer was for administrative reasons.
The work and conduct of the petitioners was found wanting.
The reasons have been noticed by the Tribunal.
The reasons were germance to the issue of transfer.
These were relevant to the running of a good administration.
These were not arbitrary.
Thus, there was no error in the order of transfer.
It has been rightly upheld by the Tribunal.
6.
Mr. Bansal has contended that the action was not taken by the competent authority.
According to the counsel, the Senior Record Officer could have passed the order of transfer.
In the present case the order of transfer has been passed by the Director, Military Farms, Chandimandir.
Mr. Bansal further submits that the order had, in fact, been passed on telephonic instructions from the Deputy Director General, Military Farms, New Delhi.
7.
Admittedly, the Authority which gave telephonic instructions is superior to the Senior Record Officer.
In this situation, we cannot say that the order of transfer was without jurisdiction.
The matter had been considered by an authority superior to the competent authority.
8.
We are clearly of the view that transfer is an incident of service.
Unless it is shown to be violative of rules, instructions, or suffering from the vice of mala fides, the Court is normally reluctant to interfere with an order of transfer.
In the present case the Tribunal has taken a just and reasonable view.
We find no infirmity in the order.
9.
No other point has been raised.
Resultantly, we find no ground to interfere.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
The respondents have entered a caveat.
No costs despite that.
Petition dismissed.