RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Mangat Rai, Ex. Cinema Operator has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction especially in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to grant pensionary benefits to the petitioner under Rule 42 of the Punjab Civil Services, Vol. II relating to pension and also in view of the law laid down in the case of Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab, reported as 1994(3) RSJ 543 : 1994(1) SCT 563 (P&H).
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was selected by the Subordinate Services Section Board, Punjab and was appointed as Cinema Operator vide letter dated 2121961 and he joined the services on 331961.
The petitioner served the Department of Rural Development and Panchayat (Punjab) from 331961 to 2381973, i.e. for period of 12 years 5 months and 23 days, when his post was declared surplus.
The petitioner could not be adjusted in any other department and he was relieved from service.
So much so, the Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Mahal Kalan (Sangrur) has written a letter to the Principal, Community Development Training Centre, Batala to take necessary action for the grant of pension and gratuity to the petitioner.
The petitioner also made a representation to the Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Mahal Kalan along with pension and gratuity papers for the grant of pensionary benefits.
Even the respondent No. 3 has written a letter to the respondent No. 4 to take necessary steps for the grant of pensionary benefits to the petitioner.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that respondent No. 1 has written a letter to respondent No. 4 regarding grant of pensionary benefits to the petitioner giving detailed reasons for taking delayed action by the petitioner, who had completed more than 10 years of service and was relieved of his duties being declared surplus.
Again the request was repeated by the petitioner to respondents, but in spite of that the petitioner has not been given the benefit of pension etc.  3.
The notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and the claim of the petitioner was contested by these respondents on the ground that the services of the petitioner were terminated on 2381973 due to the reduction of six posts of Cinema Operators in the department and the present writ petition has been filed after a lapse of 26 years and, therefore, it is barred by limitation.
Moreover, it is liable to be dismissed on account of delay and laches.
It was, however, submitted by the respondents No. 1 to 3 that the relevant papers of the petitioner have been sent to respondent No. 4 on 24.3.1998 and the sanction is yet to be awaited for the release of pensionary benefits to the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4 has filed a separate written statement and has disputed the claim of the petitioner primarily on the ground that the services of the petitioner were terminated and he did not retire from the government service and, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of pension etc.
Precisely, the stand of respondent No. 4 is as follows :-  "That the department of the petitioner was apprised from time to time to the effect that the pensionary benefits are not admissible to the petitioner as his services were terminated and he was not retired from Govt. service.
Also the Govt. had not issued any terms and conditions for allowing pension to such employees.
As regards Rule 42(1)(b) of Punjab CSR Vol. II, it is submitted that the same is not concerned with the pension.
Rather it is for addition to service qualifying for superannuation pension.
As regards judgment of the Hon'ble Court in CWP No. 2730 of 1994 decided on 4898, it is submitted that the same was awarded in the case of a voluntarily retired employee and not in the case of a terminated employee declared as surplus."
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records of this case.
5.
Two points are to be answered by this Court - first, whether the petitioner's services were terminated; or he was relieved from dries on becoming surplus.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents invites my attention to Annexure R-1, the order passed by Deputy Secretary Development, wherein it has been written as follows :-  "As a result of reduction of six posts of Cinema Operators in the Dev.
Deptt., the services of the following Cinema Operators are terminated with immediate effect from afternoon of 23rd August, 1973 :-" The word `terminated' is creating a confusion for respondent No. 4.
In the opinion of this Court, respondent No. 4 has not readily appreciated the order Annexure R-1.
It is banking too much on the word `terminated' without realising how the petitioner was relived from the duties.
If the order Annexure R-1 is read as a whole, it will suggest that six posts of Cinema Operators were abolished due to reduction in the cadre and as a result of that the services of the petitioner were declared surplus.
To understand the term `termination', respondent No. 4 ought to have consulted respondents No. 1 to 3 as to whether there was any charge-sheet etc. against the petitioner and whether any Disciplinary action was initiated by the department against him.
No such document is on the record.
Thus the first point is decided in favour of the petitioner by holding that the services of the petitioner were not terminated.
Rather he was relieved of the duties on becoming surplus in the parent department and he could not be accommodated in any other department of the government.
6.
The second point for determination is whether this writ petition can fail on the ground of delay and laches.
We all know that pensionary benefits are civil rights of an employee.
These furnish a recurring cause of action to an employee.
This Court is further of the view that when a public servant successfully performs his duties under the government, such employee/public servant must get the benefit of pension, gratuity etc. and his genuine claim of pension etc. should not be declined by the government on technical grounds or under the garb of limitation.
Rather the government should encourage its public servants and try to meet their demands by releasing pensionary benefits so that such public servants after retirement may also survive in the society.
The negative approach of declining of pensionary benefits by the government on such technical grounds should be deprecated.
7.
With regard to the point whether the petitioner is entitled to the pentionary benefit or not, it is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner had served for more than ten years.
He thus has put in qualifying service making him eligible for pensionary benefits and is entitled to the benefit of pension etc.  Resultantly, the present writ petition is hereby allowed and directions are given to respondents to release the pensionary benefits to the petitioner within a period of six months from the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which the respondents shall also be liable to pay interest @ 12 per cent per annum to the petitioner.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.