Mukul Mudgal, J - This writ petition challenges the award of the Industrial Tribunal dated 1st December, 1997 by which the Presiding Officer of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal had rejected the reference made to it at the behest of the petitioner herein on the ground that the telecom department of the Government is not an `industry'.
For this purpose reliance was placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in 1996(8) SCC 488 : 1996(3) SCT 786 (SC), Sub Divisional Inspector of Post v. Theyyam Joseph and others.
The Tribunal had relied upon the said judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Sub Divisional Inspector of Post case (supra) in preference to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewarage Board v. A Rajappa and others, reported as 1978(2) SCC 213.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that since then the view taken in the judgment of the Sub Divisional Inspector of Post has been overruled by a judgment of 3 Hon'ble Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as General Maganer Telecom v. A Srinivasa Rao and others, 1997(7) Scale 99 : 1998(1) SCT 230 (SC) where it has been held that it is not permissible for a Bench of three or for that matter any Bench of lessor strength to take a view contrary to that in the Bangalore Water Supply case.
In the said judgment of General Manager Telecom (supra) it was held that the telecom department of the Union of India was an `industry' within the meaning of industry as per Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
2.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1st December, 1997 is set aside and the matter is remanded to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal for disposal in accordance with law.
3.
The impugned order is thus set aside.
The matter is remanded back to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal with the directions to dispose of the matter expeditiously preferably within six months from the date of receipt of the orders.
4.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.