Swatanter Kumar, J - Ashu Kamboj has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to respondent No. 1 - Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Sangrur (hereinafter referred to as `Institute') to admit the petitioner to Computer Science and Engineering Degree Course.
2.
The relevant facts are :- that the petitioner passed Class 10th examination in the year 1995 from Punjab School Education Board.
He joined two years Certificate Course in the trade of Data Entry Operator and Word Processing.
This course was completed by the petitioner successfully in the year 1997.
Thereupon, in the same year, the petitioner joined two years Diploma Course of Computer Programming and Applications in the Institute.
In the year 1999, the petitioner passed the said diploma course.
The petitioner being desirous of pursuing further study intended to join three years degree course.
The respondent-institute in July, 1999 issued a prospectus for making admission to different degree courses run by the institute.
As per the prospectus, 50% candidates, who have passed the diploma course, upon clearance of the entrance test, are entitled to be promoted to the degree courses against vertical entry.
Remaining seats of the degree courses are to be filled up by direct entry.
The petitioner cleared the entrance test and claims to have got 10276 marks in accordance with the criteria laid down for determining the final merit for the purpose of admission to degree courses against vertical admission.
As per the criteria prescribed in the brochure, the merit has to be determined by giving 80% weightage to admission in the Entrance Test and 20% weightage to score in the Diploma course.
Resultantly, the petitioner was placed at serial No. 19 of the merit list prepared amongst the qualifying diploma candidates entitled to get admission to the degree course.
3.
The facts stated by the petitioner are hardly in dispute.
It is also common case of the parties that there are 60 seats in the department of Computer Science and Engineering Degree course, out of which 30 seats have to be filled up by vertical entry, out of the two trades of the diploma, which were feeding courses to the degree course.
There were 36 students studying the diploma course of Computer Programming and Applications, which the petitioner was pursuing, as such, 19 students were admitted on vertical admission to the degree course.
On these premises, it is contended by the petitioner that 30 seats in the degree course could be filled up by granting 50% seats to each of two feeding diploma courses and, thereafter, the remaining 6 seats had to be divided between the two courses and then give admission in order of merit.
4.
According to the respondent-institute, as 33 and 37 students had been admitted to the respective diploma programs which are feeding programs to the degree course so 17 and 19 students in order of merit were entitled to get admission and were so admitted.
However, the petitioner does not fall within two seats in order of merit, hence the petitioner was denied admission.
5.
In order to appreciate this controversy in its correct perspective, reference to the terms of the brochure would be necessary.
DIPLOMA , DEGREE PROGRAM 1.
Computer Programming & Appl.
50% Computer Science & Engg.
Computer Service & Maint.
50% 2.
Foundry Technology 50% Mechanical Engineering  Industrial & Production Engineering 50% Welding Maintenance & Plant Engineering 50% Manufacturing  Welding Technology 50% 3.
Chemical Technology 50% Chemical Technology  - Ploymer - Paper 4.
Food Processing 50% Food Technology 5.
Electronics & Communication Engg.
50% Electronics & Comm.
Engg.
6.
Instrumentation & Process Control 50% Instrumentation Engineering Note :- Admission in the vertical entry scheme shall be 50% of the strength of the students in the lower course who actually pass out in 1999 subject to the conditions of eligibility as per the relevant rule.
A common merit list in respect of branches mentioned against Sr. No. 2 and 3 above in both courses shall be prepared wherein all the admitted candidates shall be pooled together and the branches shall be allotted as per merit of SLIET Entrance Test and choice.
6.
As already noticed, there is no dispute to the basic fact and method of admission to the degree courses.
A short question that falls for determination is what should be the method to be adopted by the institute for filling up the seats in excess of prescribed seats in the degree or diploma courses, as the case may be.
A bare reading of the above program table shows the vertical entry has to be to the extent of 50% of the strength of the students in the lower course, who have actually passed out in the year 1999, subject to the condition of eligibility.
Furthermore, the proviso to the note is not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
It is specifically stated in the said proviso that a common merit list in respect of branches, mentioned in serial No. 2 and 3 above, in both courses will be prepared wherein all the admitted candidates will be pooled together for admission to the degree courses.
As far as the petitioner is concerned, admittedly he falls in serial No. 1 of the aforementioned table, as such, proviso is of no benefit to him.
The obvious result is that 50% of the strength of the passed students of the lower course are entitled to admission in the degree course in order or merit in their own course.
Thus, it was to be seen what is the merit of the petitioner in his own course, which he passed in the year 1999.
The petitioner himself has annexed as Annexure P/2 the merit list of the diploma in Computer Programming and Applications.
The petitioner falls at serial No. 19 of the said list, which is the last number in the merit of this course.
It is even conceded before this Court that nobody lower in merit than the petitioner in his own diploma course has been granted admission, as mentioned even in Annexure P/2.
The persons of lower merit, who have been granted admission, belong to Computer Service and Maintenance Diploma Course and have got admission on their own merit in their specific course.
Once, the brochure specifically excludes the course No. 1 from the operation of the proviso, the petitioner cannot be permitted to argue on the strength of the proviso.
There is no challenge to the terms and conditions of the brochure and, in fact, the petitioner has participated and taken advantage of the terms and conditions of the same brochure and he could hardly challenge the same.
A Full Bench of this Court in the case of Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab, 1993(2) P.L.R.
212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB) has clearly held that terms and conditions of a brochure are binding on the students as well as the authorities and none can act contrary to the declared terms and conditions of the brochure.
7.
Learned counsel appearing for the institute argued that even if the petitioner had a case on merit, he cannot be granted admission at this late stage of the course.
He places reliance upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Uttar Pradesh v. Dr. Anupam Gupta, JT 1992(4) SC 422 : 1992(2) SCT 292 (SC) and Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Swaranjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(4) RSJ 512 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H)(FB), in support of this contention.
It is clear that the course had started in the year 1999.
The last date for admission, as declared in the brochure, was July, 1999.
The course had started in August, 1999.
The first semester has already concluded and, in fact semester was over on 1st December, 1999.
In these circumstances, I have no hesitation even in accepting this contention pleaded on behalf of the respondent-institute.
For the reasons aforestated, I find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.