AR Lakshmanan, J - Heard Mr. B Raghunath for the petitioner, Mr. OV Radhakrishnan for the Kerala Public Service Commission and Mr. D Kishore for additional respondents 3 & 4.
2.
The Original Petition was filed by the petitioner for a mandamus directing the Public Service Commission to allow him to participate in the selection process to the post of Assistant Motor Vehicles Inspector and further to select him for appointment to the said post and for other incidental reliefs.
3.
During the pendency of the Original Petition, a Division Bench of this Court, while admitting the Original Petition, permitted persons like the petitioner to participate in the interview, which was conducted from 20th to 25th August, 1997 by the Public Service Commission.
The learned Judges of the Division Bench, of which one of us was a party, made it clear that the permission granted was subject to the result of the writ petitions and that if, by virtue of their selection in the interview, they are found fit, then their appointment will not be detained; but the same should be subject to the result of the Original Petition.
4.
Mr. Raghunath argued before us on the basis of the averments in paragraph 16-A of the Original Petition.
He submitted that the Public Service Commission has published a rank list dated 1991998 containing the names of 704 candidates for appointment to the post of Assistant Motor Vehicle Inspector and the petitioner is Rank No. 559.
It was stated that against the name of the petitioner it is noted `provisional'.
It is his case that he belong to Nadar community and in the ranked list there are only three candidates belonging to that community including the petitioner, of which the petitioner is the highest in rank.
It is submitted that on the basis of Rules 14 to 17 of the Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958, two appointments are earmarked for Nadars out of 40 under the other backward classes.
It is further submitted that there are 200 vacancies of Assistant Motor Vehicles Inspector, and, therefore, four candidates from Nadar community are entitled to get appointment under reservation apart from merit candidates.
It was contended further that there are two passed over vacancies to Nadar community on account of dearth of candidates during the last selection and, hence, altogether six posts should go to Nadar community, whereas there are only three Nadar candidates in the ranked list.
According to Mr. Raghunath, the petitioner fulfills all the qualifications and conditions for appointment and is entitled to get appointment in one of the notified or reported vacancies.
In support of this contention Mr. Raghunath invited our attention to Note.
2 to Rule 4(b) of the Kerala Transport Subordinate Service Special Rules, the relevant portion of which is extracted below :  Method of appointment Qualifications ---------------------------------------------------------------  Direct recruitment (i) Essential : Minimum general educational qualification of the SSLC Standard.
(ii) Diploma in Automobile Engineering issued after a course, the duration of which is not less than 3 years by recognised Universities or by Government.
(iii) Motor Driving Licence with endorsement for driving Heavy Passenger Motor Vehicles and Heavey Goods Vehicles.
Note :- In the absence of candidates possessing Motor Driving Licence with endorsement of eligibility for driving Heavy Passenger Motor Vehicles and Heavy Goods Vehicles those without such an endorsement in their licence will also be considered for appointment to the post.
Such candidates, if selected, shall however obtain the Heavy Passenger Motor Vehicles and Heavy Goods Vehicles endorsement within the period of probation".
Relying on the above note to Rule 4(b) it is submitted that it enables the petitioner to be considered as fully qualified for recruitment to the post of Assistant Motor Vehicles Inspector and that the petitioner obtained licence for driving light motor vehicles on 391993 and obtained learners licence for driving Heavy Goods Vehicles and Heavy Passenger Vehicles on 1871995 and the endorsement for driving Heavy Goods Vehicles and Heavy Passenger Vehicles on 23111995, before the date of the written test, which was held on 2011996.
Therefore, it is contended that since the petitioner is holding Ext.
P-3 licence right from 391933, applied for the learning licence for Heavy Goods Vehicles and Heavy Passenger Vehicles on 1871995, got qualified to get it on 18.8.1995 before the last date of receipt of the applications for recruitment to the post, viz. 30.8.1995, and obtained the licence for driving Heavy Vehicles on 23111995, before the date of written test and interview, the petitioner is qualified and entitled to be selected to the post in question.
5.
The claim of the petitioner is opposed by the Public Service Commission.
They have filed a counter-affidavit and also a supplementary counter- affidavit.
According to Mr. OV Radhakrishnan, learned counsel for the Commission, all applicants belonging to Nadar Community, who have submitted valid applications and have obtained the required marks both in the written test and interview are included in the ranked list and they will be considered for selection and appointment.
It is further submitted that at present there are only 57 vacancies reported to the Commission and steps are being taken to advise candidates.
Counsel further pointed out that as per rules, Nadar community enjoy only 2% reservation.
It is contended that the Commission have the right to reject the applications of candidates at any stage of selection, when defect is noticed and in the instant case the Commission have only intimated their stand to the petitioner before calling for interview.
Therefore, it is submitted that the petitioner, who is not qualified and whose application was not complete in all respect on the date of application, is not entitled to be considered for selection and appointment.
In answer to the submission made by Mr. Raghunath, Mr. Radhakrishnan submitted that Rule 4(b) of the Kerala Transport Subordinate Service Special Rules is not applicable to the case on hand since the notification was issued and the selection proceeded based on the Central Act, with the approval of the Government and that the date for determining whether a candidate does possess a qualification shall be the last date for receipt of application.
It is pointed out that in the instant case the petitioner did not possess the essential qualification on the last date for receipt of application, but acquired the same only thereafter.
It is further submitted that the petitioner was called for interview and included in the ranked list provisionally based on the interim direction of this Court, even though he is ineligible in terms of the notification for selection to the post.
In answer to the contention raised by Mr. Raghunath regarding community reservation it is submitted that dearth of candidates can occur while conducting selection by the Commission as the selections are based on merit, but the paucity of candidates will not be compensated by unqualified candidates.
6.
We see merit in the above submission of learned counsel for the Public Service Commission.
An unqualified candidate cannot put forth a claim for appointment merely because he belongs to a particular community.
Likewise, there is no substance in the argument advanced by Mr. Raghunath that since the name of the petitioner has already been included in the ranked list, he is entitled for appointment.
Courts have held that mere inclusion of the name in the ranked list will not confer any right or benefit on the candidates and the mere inclusion does not guarantee the right for appointment unless he satisfies the required eligibility conditions for the post in question.
We have carefully considered the argument pur forth with reference the note to Rule 4(b) of the Kerala Transport Subordinate Special Rules.
The notification inviting applications for the post in question does not mention the above rules and it is submitted that the Commission proceeded based on the Central Act with the approval of the Government and have finalised the ranked list on 1991998.
Moreover, the application of the Note to Rule 4(b) will not do any good to any particular community.
In the instant case, we are of the opinion that the action of the Public Service Commission is correct and they have adopted a uniform treatment to all who approached them.
It is submitted by Mr. Radhakrishnan that 704 candidates have been included in the ranked list and all of them except those who have been provisionally included were fully qualified for the post and hence there is no scarcity of candidates and even if scarcity is felt, it is submitted that the selection being a continued process, can be compensated by future selections.
In support of their case counsel for the Public Service Commission relied on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (AR Lakshmanan, J) was a party, reported in B Rajeshkumar v. Kerala Public Service Commission, (1998)2 Ker LT 945 : 1998 Lab IC 3435, which in turn followed the decision of the Supreme Court in S.L.P.
(Civil) No. 1292 of 1998.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in the Original Petition.
The Original Petition is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.