Arun Kumar Goel, J - Petitioners have filed this writ petition for the grant of following reliefs :  "In the premises, it is accordingly prayed that the Hon'ble Court may in the facts and circumstances of the case be pleased to show indulgence in the matter and by the issuance of writ, order or direction indulging (including ?)
a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to disburse/pay to the petitioner the facilities/incentives in the nature of disturbance allowance, transport and food, double HRA, one month's salary as advance on the analogy and principles on which it came to be provided to all the employees working in all the subsidiaries of the General Insurance Corporation of India in the Kashmir Valley, from the date the said incentives were provided to them."
2.
Admitted facts of this case are that petitioners are working with the United India Insurance Company Limited which is a subsidiary of General Insurance Corporation of India.
All the petitioners are presently working at Jammu since they migrated in the year 1990 on account of wide-spread disturbances in the Valley.
Prior to their migration, all the petitioners were working at different places in the Valley with the United India Insurance Company Limited.
3.
In the aforesaid circumstances petitioners claim that they be provided double house rent allowance (HRA), transport and food, board and lodge facilities, one month's advance salary and disturbance allowance.
All these incentives have been provided by the United India Insurance Company Limited (hereinafter referred to as respondent No. 2) to all its migrant employees, who had in fact resumed back their duties in the Kashmir Valley and leaving their families at different places/stations because of the situation prevailing there.
It is further not in dispute that to the employees, who pursuant to the directions of General Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as respondent No. 1) issued through its subsidiaries like respondent No. 2 resumed duties in the Valley were and are getting the aforesaid incentives.
It is further not in dispute that petitioners were neither willing nor are even now prepared to resume their duties in the Valley.
4.
The above said incentives have been claimed by the petitioners, as according to them those were to be granted to all the migrant employees.
As per petitioners' claim they are entitled for the grant of such incentives being migrants on account of their having sustained mental agony, tremendous inconvenience while working at Jammu, leaving their home and hearth as also other comforts which they had in the Valley.
Claim for the grant of such incentives is based on the plea that since migrants are also working far away i.e. at Jammu, therefore, relief deserves to be allowed to them as prayed for.
Further plea of the petitioners was that some other similarly situate persons have been granted the relief as prayed for by them in this writ petition.
5.
While admitting that the petitioners were working in the Valley prior to their migration to Jammu in the year 1990, it has been submitted by the respondents that none of them is entitled to the relief claimed for.
Further case of the respondents is that with a view to face the challenge of militancy as well as to ensure that the functionaries of Government of India including respondents 1 and 2 keep the office working, incentives detailed in the writ petition and referred to hereinabove were offered to such employees who were willing to go and work in the Valley after leaving their families at other places/stations.
Such incentives according to respondents are not available to those migrant employees who have come out of the Valley and are living with their families elsewhere.
On the other hand the incentives have been provided to such employees who are ready and willing, and who have in fact gone and resumed their duties in the Valley.
Thus according to respondents there is no similarity in the case of petitioners and all those employees who are presently working in the Valley and have been provided the incentives.
Details of such incentives offered in the year 1990 are mentioned in the reply in the following terms :  "1.
Payment of Disturbed Area Allowance.
2.
One month's (gross) salary in advance on refund basis.
3.
Personal Accident Insurance Cover (Premium to be paid by coy).
4.
Payment of 75% daily allowance.
5.
Additional HRA in lieu of leased accommodation to the family of those who were working in the Valley while their families shifted out of Kashmir.
6.
Boarding and lodging charges-cum-hotel charges.
7.
Food and Transport charges."
6.
Regarding payment of these incentives to other employees of the subsidiary of respondent No. 1, who were not migrants and were attending to their duties in the Valley, stand of the respondents 1 and 2 is that though they were not entitled to it but they preferred a civil suit in the Court of City Judge, Srinagar, wherein they sought declaration that they were also entitled to receive the incentives/allowances/benefits which were provided to migrant employees and had joined their duties in Kashmir Valley.
This suit was decreed by the trial Court and appeal against it was decided by the 4th Additional District Judge, Srinagar on 2281994.
It was in such situation that defendants/judgment debtors in execution of the decree granted to such employees risk allowance, one month gross salary in advance, personal accident insurance cover, transport charges, food charges and additional house rent from 1st March, 1990.
7.
In the light of aforesaid facts claim made by the petitioners is totally fallacious and without any legitimate basis as would be seen for the reasons recorded hereinafter.
8.
Keeping in view the peculiar situation and circumstances in which those employees, working with respondent No. 2 and other subsidiaries of respondent No. 1, were asked to go to Valley after turmoil in the year 1990 and after exodus of big number of them, with a view to make the offices functional special clause was carved out by the respondents by offering them special incentives.
These incentives were in the nature of an allurement to such migrant employees to return back to duties at the cost of deprivation and separation from their families.
In this view of the matter plea urged by Shri Koul that being migrants and on the analogy of employees working in Kashmir Valley his clients are entitled to the same benefit as offered to employee willing to serve in the Valley, is totally ill-founded and is hereby rejected.
9.
Another reason to turn down this plea is that all the petitioners are stationed and working in Jammu in different offices of respondent No. 2 and are here with their respective families.
10.
Now coming to the other argument that some other employees are getting the aforesaid incentives including those who are not migrants, so there being no question of their petitioners' resuming duties in the Valley.
Suffice it to say that it was pursuant to the execution of judgment and decree passed by the Court of City Judge, Srinagar, which was upheld in appeal.
As such no benefit can be derived by the petitioners from such payment.
At the risk of repetition it may be reiterated here that there is no similarity in the case of petitioners and those employees who had not migrated from Valley belonging to the staff of respondent No. 2 or other subsidiaries of respondent No. 1.
As such this argument is also without any legal foundation.
11.
From the above discussion it is manifestly clear that there is no similarity in the case of petitioners vis-a-vis other employees.
It may be appropriate to notice the submission of Shri Jamwal that all other migrant employees, who are ready and willing to go and work in the Valley, can be provided such incentives as admissible to them and are in force at the time of their joining the duty in the Valley under the decision of respondents governing the same.
12.
No other point is urged.
13.
In view of the aforesaid discussion there is no merit in this writ petition which is accordingly dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition dismissed.