Arun Kumar Goel, J - Both these petitions are being taken up together as they can be disposed of a by a common judgment.
2.
Brief facts of both the cases are given herein below.
S.W.P.
No. 1756 of 1997.
3.
Petitioner has prayed for quashing the notification dated 1st December, 1996 issued by respondent No. 2 Principal, Government Medical College, Jammu with a further direction to the respondents that she may be allowed to complete her compulsory rotatory Internship in terms of the order passed by the said Respondent No. 2.
Petitioner was a student of MBBS Final year and according to her while she was appearing in the final supplementary examination of the said Course, was found to be in possession a Ladies purse, which contained some notes etc.
Superintendent of the Centre detected it and thereafter her answer script was taken and instead another answer script was given to her in which she was supposed to write down her answers.
Record produced by Shri DS Thakur, Learned counsel for the respondent-University shows that the report was made by the Superintendent concerned in this behalf to the University Authorities and a copy of the said report has been placed on record as Annexure R-I Original of Annexure-R-I shows that it is signed by the petitioner as well as by Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent.
In the aforesaid background, Respondent-University issued show cause notice to the petitioner on 21111997 vide No. Eval-II/Prof/97/6038.
This was duly replied by the petitioner, Annexure-A attached with the writ petition on 27111997.
4.
Further case of the petitioner is that the respondent No. 4-Controller of Examinations of the Jammu University issued Notification, Annexure-B, wherein the petitioner had been shown being one of the candidates having passed the MBBS Examination in full.
This was followed by issuance of Annexure-C by Principal/Dean, Govt. Medical College, Jammu making Schedules of posting of Interns and petitioner figures in Batch 'C' of this Schedule.
5.
It appears that the Respondent-University informed the Principal, Government Medical College, Jammu that the case of the petitioner was kept under "UFM" (Unfairmeans) Category.
As a consequence of this Principal, Government Medical College, Jammu ordered that the name of the petitioner at Serial No. 2 of batch 'C' to undergo Compulsory Rotatory Internship (Annexure-C) was ordered to be treated as deleted.
It is against this Annexure that the present writ petition has been filed by this petitioner.
On the other hand, stand of the respondents 1 and 2, i.e., the State is that it was after the receipt of information from the University that action has been taken by the Principal, Government Medical College, Jammu.
Reliance is also placed on the explanation submitted by the petitioner on 27111997 (Annexure-A to the writ petition) as well as on Notification dated 1211998 issued by the Jammu University, whereby the petitioner was required to Re- appear in Paper of Medicine.
6.
Stand of the Respondent-University is that the petitioner was appearing in the paper of Medicine in the Examination held in October, 1997 (Special Session).
During the course of visit of the Flying Squad at the Centre, where the petitioner was taking her paper in question, it was found that she was in possession of some material found in her Purse, which were lying on her table.
In this back-ground, report was made by the Centre Superintendent as aforesaid and the petitioner was given another answer script.
Vide Annexure-R-II, notice was issued to the petitioner on the following charges :-  "Handwritten material was recovered from your possession which you had kept in your purse lying in the desk allotted to you during the course of exam".
Petitioner was required to appear before the Committee on 29111997 at 11.30 A.M. Pursuant to the show cause notice on the aforesaid charge, petitioner submitted her detailed reply vide Annexure-A to the writ petition.
While admitting that she had the reading material, which were lying in her purse, an attempt was made to explain that because she was late and in a hurry, she could not keep that reading material outside the Examination Hall.
It was also stated by the petitioner that she had not copied anything from the material.
It is in this back-ground that the present writ petition has been filed.
7.
When this writ petition was filed, petitioner was granted interim relief in the following terms :-  "Mr. Anil Sethi: Issue notice to the respondents returnable within three weeks.
CMP 158/97 IA-1/97: Issue notice in CMP also returnable within the same period.
The case of the petitioner is that she was declared as successful candidate by respondent No. 3 in terms of Annexure-B and thereafter was under-going training of Internship but at her back impugned order Annexure-E (No. JME/FAC/97-98/2184 dated 1121997) was issued by respondent No. 2 on the ground that respondent No. 3 has kept the petitioner under 'UFM' category vide Notification No. 2 Final Professional Examination Special 97 (Oct.
Session).
It is contended that if this was the position her result should not have been declared and she should not have been declared as a successful candidate and that this order which has been passed in ex parte manner suffers from patent illegalities.
Subject to the objections from the other-side the operation of the impugned order (Annexure-E) is stayed.
The petitioner shall continue under-going training as per Order No. JMC/FAC/2169 dated 27111997 (Annexure-C).
List in the last week of January, 1998.
4-1-1997 Sd/- (GD Sharma) J".
Thus the petitioner continued working as Internee under the orders of the Court.
S.W.P.
No. 161 of 1998.
8.
In this writ petition, the order dated 1211998 (Annexur-E) has been questioned, whereby the petitioner has been directed to Re-appear in the Paper of Medicine.
According to the petitioner vide Annexure-D dated 27121997 issued by the University of Jammu she was required to appear before the Sub- Committee on 311998, failing which action will be taken against her ex parte.
This Annexure-D was followed by putting the case of the petitioner as Re-appear in the Paper of Medicine and thus led to the deletion of her name from the names of candidates put on duty as Intern by the Principal, Government Medical College, Jammu.
In order to support her claim, reliance is also placed on Annexure-F, Provisional M.B.B.S.
Certificate issued by Principal, Government Medical College, & Dean Attached Hospitals, Jammu (J&K) and Provisional Certificate of Registration as Annexure-G  9.
Stand of the State is almost identical as in the case of S.W.P.
No. 1756 of 1997.
After receipt of notice dated 21111997 referred to hereinabove, written reply dated 27111997 was submitted by the petitioner before the University Authorities.
Original record of the University further discloses that the petitioner did come to the University to appear before the Sub- Committee on 29111997 in connection with her Unfairmeans case reported against her.
Attendance was marked by her in the Attendance Register maintained by the University for the purpose but she in fact did not appear on this date.
On 311998, petitioner appeared before the Sub-Committee in response to the Notice dated 27121997.
Her written reply is on the file of the University, which is to the following effect :-  "Respected Sir, I apologize that, due to confusion and coming late in Examination Hall, I carried the purse and all materials in that.
But Sir I admit that I had not copied at all in Examination Paper Part-I.
Please admit my this apology letter.
Thanking you, Dated 3.1.98 Yours faithfully Sd/- Renu Bhagat" On this written explanation of the petitioner impugned order Annexure-E came to be passed asking her to Re-appear in the Paper of Medicine.
10.
Mr. Sethi, learned counsel for the petitioner forcefully urged that there is infraction of Rules 2(a) & (b) of Chapter XXXI of the Statute framed by the Respondent-University and due to this, bath the writ petitions are liable to be allowed.
While further elaborating this aspect of the case, Shri Sethi, learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that there was no general announcement calling upon the candidates including the petitioner to deliver paper, book or notes, which any of the candidates may have in his possession and in case of late comes like the petitioner such a warning was required to be administered to the petitioner.
Not only this, but under the relevant rules Official Incharge Examination was required to furnish to the Controller every day declaration signed by him and witnessed by all the Invigilators then on duty regarding compliance with this part of the rule.
Further limb of the argument of Shri Sethi is that Annexure R-I, the charge which was to be answered by the petitioner is not sustainable as the answer script was not taken into custody in the manner envisaged under Rule 3 of this Chapter of the Statute.
Lastly it was pointed out that once the 2nd answer script has been sent for evaluation, in no case petitioner could be denied the benefit of such evaluation.
That being so, according to Mr. Sethi, Annexure-B to both the writ petitions was liable to be quashed and set aside.
All these contentions have been controverted by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
It was further pointed out by them that if the contentions urged on behalf of the petitioner are upheld, it would tantamount to put premium on the Unfair means adopted by the petitioner are upholding such an action on her part.
In addition to this, it was also pointed out that possession of material is admitted by the petitioner though an attempt has been made unsuccessfully by her to explain as to why she could not leave it outside the Examination Hall or hand it over to the Centre Superintendent, when she entered the said Hall.
Regarding sending of answer script for evaluation in routine by the University, Shri Thakur pointed out that moment this was detected the same was rectified and, therefore, the petitioner cannot take advantage from the fact that her 2nd answer script had in fact been got evaluated by the University.
11.
From the facts detailed hereinabove, one fact is clear that the petitioner was in possession of material at that time when it was detected by the Flying Squad of the University.
This position is clearly established from Annexure-A of Writ Petition No. 1756/97 and her written explanation dated 311998 before the Sub-Committee of the University.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the material that was found in her purse, which she admits to be her's was not concerned with or related to the subject of Medicine in which subject she was appearing at the relevant point of time.
That being so, the present case is squarely covered by the definition by Misconduct/Unfairmeans within the meaning of Rule 4 of Chapter XXXI (supra).
For ready reference, clause (a) of Rule 4 is reproduced below, which is to the following effect :-  "4.
Misconduct/Unfairmeans - A candidate commits misconduct/unfairmeans in respect of an examination, if he/she: (a) Possesses or keeps accessible in the Examination hall any paper, note book or material concerned with or related to the subject of the Examination in which he/she is appearing".
12.
That being so, the petitioner is clearly guilty of having committed act of Unfairmeans in respect of the Examination relating to the Paper of Medicine on 21101997.
This legal position could not be controverted by Shri Sethi.
13.
Once it is held that the petitioner is guilty of having committed acts of Misconduct/Unfairmeans within the framework of the Statutes of the University, thereafter she was afforded an opportunity in accordance with the principles of natural justice, fair-play and good conscience to explain.
Petitioner did explain firstly by means of Annexure-A referred to (supra) and then on the 2nd occasion on 3.1.98 as per written explanation of the said date.
Record of the case further shows that in original file of the proceedings taken by Sub- Committee relating to the case of the petitioner indicates that it had taken a lenient view of the matter and has thus ordered the cancellation of the Examination of the Paper in question, which resulted in her being called upon to Re-appear in the Paper of Medicine.
So far the plea of Shri Sethi that there is infraction of Rule 3(a) of the Statute (supra) is concerned, suffice it to say that the petitioner had not been able to demonstrate prejudice to her for want of non-compliance.
In addition to this, in the face of her consistent stand, no benefit can be derived by the petitioner from such non- compliance.
Here it is worthwhile to notice that the petitioner has also signed the form, which was filled in at the time when the case was detected.
Besides this, these rules are directory in nature and even it be assumed that those are mandatory, still in the face of the material on record, the petitioner cannot derive any benefit as was intended to be claimed by Shri Sethi, learned counsel for the petitioner.
14.
To be fair to learned counsel for the petitioner, another contention urged by him need to be noticed that there was no material either before the University or before the Sub-Committee appointed by it to determine the case of the petitioner, which could be legally translated against the petitioner so as to sustain the impugned Annexures in both the writ petitions.
At the risk of repetition, it may be noted here that in the face of the admitted position of the case by the petitioner as well as attending circumstances of the case, this is an argument which has been raised simply to be rejected, and is ordered accordingly.
With reference to rule 60 of Chapter XXX of Statutes, Shri Sethi pointed out that it is Syndicate of Jammu University, who had the power to quash the result of a candidate after it had been declared, as in the present case if a candidate like the petitioner was disqualified for using Unfairmeans in the Examination (Emphasis supplied).
In this behalf, it may be noted that mere possession is an act of Misconduct/Unfairmeans.
It is not the case of the University that the petitioner is guilty of `using Unfairmeans'.
15.
It hardly needs to be emphasised that a distinction needs to be drawn between an act, which by itself constitutes an Unfairmean and the act of actual use of Unfairmeans.
Both these acts are independent.
In the former case it is mere possession/keeping accessible the material as per Rule 4 reproduced, whereas in the latter case it also includes use of such material.
Case of the present petitioner is covered by the former.
That being so, no benefit can be derived by the petitioner from Rule 60 of the Statute XXVIV (supra).
Similarly with reference to Rule 58 of the said Statute also no benefit can be derived by the petitioner as it is nowhere the case pleaded by the petitioner that Controller of Examination had not reported the matter regarding the Amendment of the result of the petitioner in accordance with true position to the Vice Chancellor.
This is purely a Ministerial Act and does not give a right muchless enables the petitioner to call upon this Court to put a seal of approval on her acts of Misconduct/Unfairmeans detailed hereinabove.
16.
No other point has been urged.
17.
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, there is no merit in both these writ petitions, which both are accordingly dismissed alongwith connected CMPs.
No order as to costs.
Interim orders in both petitions stand vacated.
18.
Petitioner had been continuing in her job as a Internee pursuant to the orders of the Court despite having been ordered to Re-appear in the paper of Medicine.
With the dismissal of the writ petitions, she forthwith ceases to be an Internee and status quo ante before passing of the orders in the writ petitions comes into existence.
19.
Copy of the Judgment be placed on the file of S.W.P.
No. 161 of 1998.
Petitions dismissed.