RL Anand, J - Dr Brij Bhushan Sharma, Assistant Director, Punjabi Cell, Punjab School Education Board, SAS Nagar, Mohali has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the Punjab School Education Board (hereinafter called "the Board") and Dr. Jagir Singh, presently discharging the duties of Deputy Director Punjabi Cell of the Board, praying that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued quashing the order dated 12.5.1999 (Annexure P-6) vide which respondent No. 2, who was junior to him was ordered to be promoted to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell.
The petitioner has further prayed that direction be given to respondent No. 1 to consider and promote him to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell with effect from the date respondent No. 2 was ordered to be promoted with all consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he initially joined the Board as Subject Officer on 10.12.1975.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Assistant Director (Punjabi) on 2451977 in Medium of Instructions Section in the Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre of Academic and Planning (Punjabi Cell) of the Board, by way of direct recruitment.
The petitioner joined as Assistant Director on 2451977.
The qualifications of the petitioner are BA with Punjabi, B.Ed., MSc.
(Honours) in Chemistry, PhD and certificate course in German.
The petitioner throughout remained Ist Class.
He was confirmed as Assistant Director vide order dated 24.5.1979 with effect from 2451977.
The services of the petitioner are governed by the regulations, called "Punjab State Education Board (Employees Service) Regulations, 1988" (hereinafter called, "the regulations").
Regulation 13 deals with the qualifications and method of appointment and provides that the method of appointment and minimum educational and other qualifications and experience required for the post in the service of the Board, shall be as specified in Appendix "A", to the regulations and appointment to any post of promotion, shall be made strictly on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person can be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
As per Appendix "A" further promotion from the post of Assistant Director is to the post of Deputy Director.
25% of the posts of Deputy Directors are filled by way of direct recruitment or by transfer or by deputation and 75% by way of promotion from those Assistant Directors or Subject Experts who are MA Punjabi Second Division and are having four years experience in the office of the Board.
It is further pleaded that the Regulation Committee commended that the qualifications of MA Punjabi (Second Division) be replaced with Punjabi up to BA or Honours in Punjabi.
This recommendation of the Committee was placed before the Board in its meeting dated 2531998 and the proposed amendment was approved.
Thus, the petitioner was fully eligible to be promoted to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell.
3.
It is the grouse of the petitioner that respondent No. 2 Dr. Jagir Singh is junior to him as is evident from the seniority list circulated vide Circular dated 431992.
The name of the petitioner figures at serial No. 4 while that of respondent No. 2 figures at Serial No. 8.
The officer at Serial No. 1 had since retired while the officers mentioned at Serial Nos. 2 and 3 were not eligible for promotion to the post of Deputy Director as both these officers did not have the qualification of BA with Punjabi.
In spite of the fact that petitioner was senior, vide order dated 1121999 respondent No. 2 was given the charge of the post of Head, Punjabi Cell.
This action on the part of respondent No. 1 was totally illegal because the petitioner was eligible seniormost Assistant Director amongst all the Assistant Directors of the Academic wing.
The petitioner submitted a representation on 25.2.1999 and questioned the charge of the post of Head of Punjabi Cell given to respondent No. 2 and requested that he should be promoted as Deputy Director being fully eligible.
In spite of his representation and to the surprise of the petitioner, vide order dated 12.5.1999 respondent No. 2 was promoted to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell without considering his case.
This order dated 12.5.1999 is Annexure P-6 which has been questioned by the petitioner.
The petitioner further alleges that order dated 12.5.1999 endorsed on 1351999, in fact, was passed by the Chairman of the Board on the last date of his leaving the Board in order to oblige respondent No. 2, because this respondent was close to the then Chairman S Jasbir Ahluwalia.
Thus, the case set up by the petitioner is that his service record is excellent and that there is nothing adverse against him and that the criteria for promotion is seniority-cum-merit.
Thus, there was no justification on the part of the respondent-Board to promote respondent No. 2 to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell without considering the petitioner who was fully eligible and qualified for the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell.
The denial of promotion to the petitioner in the absence of any adverse service record has caused a serious prejudice.
4.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondent No. 1 i.e. Board filed the written statement and denied the allegations of the writ petitioner.
It was submitted that six persons in order of seniority were considered for the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell.
The persons at Serial No. 1, 2 and 4 did not have any knowledge of Punjabi language and, therefore, were not found fit for the post.
The rule of seniority-cum-merit was adopted for the purpose of promotion.
No person had a vested right for promotion only on the basis of seniority.
The petitioner possesses the qualification of PhD (Chemistry), BA with Punjabi as additional subject, whereas, respondent No. 2 is MA (Punjabi), PhD (Punjabi) and also possesses the qualification of MA (Religious Study) and MA (Music).
The petitioner did not work in Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre of the Board since 1980 and, therefore, he was found ineligible for the post having very little experience in the Punjabi Cell and that too, before 1980.
Respondent No. 2 was considered and was found fit and was promoted.
Since, the petitioner was duly considered and was not found fit, therefore, he has no locus standi to file the present petition.
According to respondent No. 1, even as per the rule of promotion, seniority does not entitle the employee to claim promotion.
At the best the petitioner had the right to be considered for promotion which consideration took place and for the valid reasons, he was ignored.
On merits, respondent No. 1 also took the stand that petitioner was not found eligible to be considered for the post of Deputy Director in the Punjabi Cell.
5.
Respondent No. 2 Dr. Jagir Singh filed a separate written statement and his stand is on the same footing as that of respondent No. 1.
In addition to that, this respondent stated that petitioner had done Punjabi only as an additional subject in BA and he had no other qualification in Punjabi.
He is MSc.
(Chemistry) and PhD (Chemistry).
He was not found fit by the Board, whereas the answering respondent was MA (Punjab), PhD (Punjabi) and also possessed the qualification of MA (Religious Study) and MA (Music).
He has been working in Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre since 1977 as Subject Expert in Punjabi.
Since the petitioner was not found fit, the answering respondent was considered and found fit.
If the strict rule of seniority is to be adopted for the purpose of appointment to the post of Deputy Director Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre even then the petitioner had no locus standi to say anything because two persons were also senior to him but they were not found fit as they had no requisite knowledge in Punjabi.
It was also pleaded by respondent No. 2 that no person has the vested right for promotion.
Only a right of consideration, is there.
The qualifications of the petitioner were considered, but he was not found fit.
It was also pleaded that without proper qualification in Punjabi, the petitioner would not be able to discharge duties of the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre as since the year 1978, the petitioner had not worked in the Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre of the Board and as such, he was ineligible to be appointed as Deputy Director.
The petition is liable to be dismissed because the petitioner has not impleaded Dr. Jasbir Singh Ahluwalia, the Vice Chancellor of Punjabi University, Patiala as respondent.
Replying respondent possessed the better qualifications than that of the petitioner required for working in the Punjabi Teaching and Research Centre, therefore, he was considered more suitable than that of the petitioner to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell.
The petitioner cannot claim his right of consideration to the post of Deputy Director simply on the ground that he joined the duty earlier to that of respondent No. 2.
It was also pleaded that the decision of the Board in exercise of the powers conferred under the relevant statute is not questionable in any Court of competent jurisdiction.
With the above broad defence, respondent No. 2 has prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
6.
In support of the petition, the petitioner has also placed on record certain documents in order to show the requisite qualifications for the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell; his seniority qua respondent No. 2, the representation made by him when respondent No. 2 was given the charge of the post of Deputy Director, besides the impugned order dated 12.5.1999 Annexure P-6 vide which respondent No. 2 was promoted to the vacant post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell in the Pay Scale of Rs. 12,000-18,000.
7.
No document either on behalf of respondent No. 1 or respondent No. 2 has been filed.
8.
We have heard Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, Shri Kanwaljit Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 and Shri Rajive Atma Ram, who appeared on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance, have gone through the records of this case.
9.
Seniority is one of the recognised civil rights of the employees which is protected by an equality clause as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
10.
While dealing with the cases of promotion the law Courts have always taken into consideration the factum of seniority, competency, rectitude and antecedents besides official records of the public servants who are in the zone of consideration in order to determine their suitability.
11.
The first point for determination before us in this writ petition is whether the petitioner was eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell because the challenge has been given by both the respondents in this regard.
12.
As per the notification Annexure P-8 dated 15.4.1998 which is applicable in the present case, when an Assistant Director is to be promoted to the post of Deputy Director, he/she should have an experience of four years as Subject Expert or Assistant Director in the office of the Board with Punjabi up to BA or Honours in Punjabi.
We can quote in varbatim the following extract from Notification Annexure P-8 dated 15.4.1998 :-  Sr. No. Name of post Mode of appointment Minimum qualification and other qualifications 1.
Deputy Director Punjabi Cell (ii) 75% by promotion 4 years experience as subject expert or Asstt.
Director in the office of the Board with Punjabi up to BA or Honours in Punjabi.
13.
The reading of the above would show that an Assistant Director working in the office of the Board with Punjabi up to BA is eligible to be considered for the promotion to the post of Deputy Director when such post is going to be filled by promotion.
The attack of the respondents is that the petitioner does not possess the qualifications of Punjabi up to BA  14.
The argument was developed that in order to make the petitioner eligible, it was incumbent upon the petitioner to show that Punjabi up to BA was his consistent subject when he was studying in BA III years Degree Course.
Since the petitioner had Punjabi Subject as an additional subject in BA Part-II and BA Part-III, therefore, it cannot be said that he was possessing the Punjabi qualification up to BA  15.
The argument is not acceptable to this Court.
In this regard, we can again refer to the basic qualifications required for an employee of the Board to be considered in the zone of promotion to the post of Deputy Director which clearly lays down that such public servant should be Assistant Director in the office of the Board with Punjabi upto BA During the course of submissions, we had the occasion to see the certificate of the petitioner issued by the Panjab University.
This certificate of BA III year Course Examination, clearly indicates that he had read Punjabi upto BA Therefore, the petitioner had the requisite qualifications and he was eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Director Punjabi Cell.
16.
We also examined the original proceedings dated 12.5.1999 in the relevant office file.
It was never the case of the Board that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualification for the post of Deputy Director.
Rather, his case was considered and the observation of the Chairman qua the petitioner was as follows :-  "Dr. Brij Bhushan Sharma is MSc.
Chemistry and PhD His Punjabi educational qualification is up to BA He had worked in the Punjabi Cell only from 141977 to 971980.
The post under consideration is that of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell which has a special field in Punjabi.
The duties of this post are enumerated in flag "A".
While considerating the case of respondent No. 2, it was observed by the Chairman as follows :-  "The second candidate in the panel is Dr. Jagir Singh who was initially appointed as Subject Expert in Punjabi on 2551977.
His educational qualifications are MA Punjabi.
MA Religious Study and PhD Since his appointment till today, the officer served in Punjabi Department and his performance have been indicated in flag "O" which has been perused by me."
Thus, it would be clear that when Chairman was considering the cases of Dr. Brij Bhushan Sharma and that of Dr. Jagir Singh along with another candidate Dr. Harbans Kaur Gill, it was not the case set up by the Department that the petitioner was not eligible for the post of Deputy Director.
17.
There is another angle of vision, through which the case set up by respondents No. 1 and 2 can be rejected.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Director.
In the advertisement given by the Board dated 26121976 the requisite qualifications for that post was MA Punjabi/MSc.
with Punjabi upto BA and besides teaching experience of two years etc.
Even at that time also, the Board was of the opinion that petitioner had the requisite experience in Punjabi upto BA If that is so, now it is not open to respondent No. 1 to say that petitioner had no requisite qualifications to be considered in the zone of promotion to the post of Deputy Director.
We have already held above that petitioner was eligible.
18.
Shri Rajive Atma Ram, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 2 submitted that his client can always agitate about the requisite qualifications of the petitioner.
Learned counsel further submitted that respondent No. 2 never availed the opportunity to attack the requisite, qualifications of the petitioner, when he was appointed as Assistant Director.
19.
The argument of Shri Rajive Atma Ram is dangerous to be accepted.
In that eventuality, the Court has to give the finding that the appointment of the petitioner to the post of Assistant Director was not lawful.
We are constrained to interfere in this regard when the petitioner had been serving in the Department since 1977.
At the cost of repetition, we are making a clear mention that the petitioner does possess the requisite qualifications as are required to be considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Director.
In this view of the matter, the first contention jointly raised by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 is hereby repelled.
20.
Now, we will like to concentrate as to whether the impugned order Annexure P-6 can be approved on the test of judicial scrutiny or not.
In this regard, we will like to go to the Rule which governs the process of promotion.
It is the common case of the parties that Regulation 13(ii) of the Punjab State Education Board (Employees Service) Regulations, 1988 is the relevant rule which lays down that appointment to any post by promotion shall be made strictly on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
Seniority-cum- merit and merit-cum-seniority are two different phrases which are used by the Administration while considering the case of promotion of a public servant.
By the term "seniority-cum-merit", we understand that seniority is to be reckoned at the first place and till a candidate under the zone of consideration is otherwise disqualified or ineligible for any valid reasons the seniority will be the first priority in order to give promotion to such public servant.
Admittedly, the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 2.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that petitioner was suffering from any departmental infirmity in the shape of any adverse record or entry.
There is no stigma.
His departmental career is not under any cloud.
Simply that respondent No. 2 had a better experience in the Teaching Cell will not justify the Board to supersede the right of consideration of the petitioner to the post of Deputy Director.
The Rule is not to the contrary that merit-cum- seniority will be the guiding factor.
21.
Our attention has been invited to a judgment of Division Bench of this Court reported as Ram Kumar Rao v. State of Haryana, 1995(4) SCT 762, which lays down as follows :-  "Rule 9 Sub-rule (3) specifically provides that promotion shall be made strictly on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
The Rule clearly envisages that under the normal circumstances a senior person shall be promoted unless adverse circumstances or service record exist against him.
If his claim for promotion is ignored, specific reasons are required to be assigned.
In the absence of adverse service record, the claim of the senior cannot be ignored on the basis of comparative merit with his junior.
The question of comparison would arise only if, a senior is found ineligible for promotion.
To hold a person ineligible for promotion, the promoting authority is to look into his record and cannot deny promotion in the absence of adverse service record."
In this view of the matter, the petitioner was supposed to be promoted even if respondent No. 2 is slightly more meritorious than that of him.
There is no adverse circumstance against the petitioner nor it has been pointed out by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 that the service record of the petitioner suffers from any defect.
If this is the situation, then the claim of the petitioner could not be ignored on the basis of the comparative merit with his juniors.
22.
Reliance can also be placed on State of Kerala v. NM Thomas, AIR 1976 SC 490, wherein it was held as follows :-  "The principle of equality is applicable to employment at all stages and in all respects, namely, initial recruitment, promotion, retirement, payment of pension and gratuity.
With regard to promotion the normal principles are either merit-cum-seniority or seniority-cum-merit.
Seniority-cum-merit means that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration the senior though the less meritorious shall have priority."
Thus, we also repel the second contention raised by the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 through which an endeavour was made before us to justify the promotion of respondent No. 2.
23.
Since respondent No. 1 has committed a violation of the statutory Regulation 13(ii) to the prejudice of the petitioner, therefore, the promotion of respondent No. 2 vide Annexure P-6, cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
24.
Consequently, the present writ petition is hereby allowed by quashing the promotion of respondent No. 2 given to him vide Annexure P-6 and we further issue a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent No. 1 to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Deputy Director, Punjabi Cell, according to Rules and Regulations of the Board.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.