OP Sharma, J - The petitioner, who holds a B Pharmacy Degree from Bangalore University, has applied for the post of Drug Inspector in pursuance of the Advertisement Notice No. 3 dated 2941997 issued by the 2nd respondent.
He is aggrieved of the Notification, in terms of which respondent No. 2 has short-listed the candidates for interview which was to be held on 22.7.1998, because only such candidates, who were possessing sixty five per cent and above marks in B Pharmacy, were invited for the interview.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that since no such criteria was notified in the Advertisement notice, the respondent No. 2 could not have short-listed the candidates after inviting applications.
3.
Mr. M Koul, appearing for the respondents, argued that short-listing of candidates depends upon the number of a vacancies for which recruitment is to be made and the total number of applications.
Rule 13(ii) of the J & K Subordinate Services Recruitment Rules, 1992, according to him, enables the Board to short-list the candidates.
The Board has exercised the discretion under this rule and, therefore, the short-listing in neither without jurisdiction nor arbitrary.
4.
The question involved for consideration is, whether the short-listing is arbitrary or irrational and, therefore, offends Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Rule 13(ii) of the Recruitment rules reads as under :-  "(ii) Ordinarily, the Board shall restrict the number of applications to be admitted to oral or written test to a maximum of five times the number of vacancies after doing the preliminary screening on the basis of marks obtained in the qualifying examination and such other criteria as the Board may deem fit."
It thus enables the respondents to short-list the candidates for interview in order to restrict the number with reference to the vacancies.
There is no challenge to the vires of this rule and rightly so because it is fair and reasonable to restrict the number, out of which selection is to be made.
The rule does not suffer from the vice of discrimination or arbitrariness, the only ground on which its validity could be questioned.
So the short-listing is allowed by the Recruitment Rules.
However, even in the absence of the enabling provisions, the short-listing has been approved by the apex Court in a number of judgments, the latest being Union of India v. Sundraraman, AIR 1997 SC 2418 : 1997(2) S.C.T.
810, holding that :  "Note 21 to the advertisement expressly provides that if a large number of applications are received the Commission may short-list candidates for interview on the basis of higher qualification although all applicants may possess the requisite minimum qualifications.
In the case of MP Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar Potdar, (1994)6 JT (SC) 302 : 1994 AIR SCW 4088, this Court has upheld short-listing of candidates on some rational and reasonable basis.
In that case, for the purpose of short-listing, a longer period of experience than the minimum prescribed was used as a criterion by the Public Service Commission for calling candidates for an interview.
This was upheld by this Court.
In the case of Govt. of AP v. P Dilip Kumar, (1993)2 JT (SC) 138 : 1993 AIR SCW 848 also this Court said that it is always open to the recruiting agency to screen candidates due for consideration at the threshold of the process of selection by prescribing higher eligibility qualification so that the field of selection can be narrowed down with the ultimate objective of promoting candidate with higher qualifications to enter the zone of consideration.
The procedure, therefore, adopted in the present case by the Commission was legitimate".
5.
Since short-listing in this case has been resorted to under rule 13(ii) of the J&K Subordinate Services Recruitment Rules, 1992 (SRO 194 of 1992 dated 1881992) which has not been challenged, the petition is not maintainable.
6.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition which is dismissed accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.