RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This Judgment will dispose of this writ petition as well as civil writ petitions No. 2048, 2444, 3271, 3762, 5024, 6614, 8923, 9592, 9587, 10006, 10454 and 12896, all of the year 1999, as common questions of fact and law are involved in all these cases.
2.
The petitioners in all these cases are JBT Teachers.
By virtue of a letter of the State of Punjab, which was issued on July 23, 1957, which was made the subject matter of interpretation in many cases starting from State of Punjab and others v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others, 1975(2) SLR 621, the law that came to be laid down was that on the basis of the letter of the Punjab Government aforesaid, a Teacher who may be having higher qualifications than the one required for the post a teacher was holding, he would be put in a higher pay scale depending upon his higher qualifications, though, as observed above, these qualifications may not be required for a post such an incumbent was/is holding at a particular point of time.
The State of Haryana issued instructions dated March 9, 1990, whereby it retracted from the earlier principle contained in letter of the Punjab Government dated July 23, 1957 that Teachers acquiring the BT or B.Ed.
degree or higher qualifications would be entitled to higher grade w.e.f.
the respective dates of their acquiring qualifications.
In other words, the instructons dated March 9, 1990, laid down that henceforth a Teacher, who may be appointed though may have the higher qualification than required for the post, would not get the pay scale of the higher post according to his qualification but would get the pay scale which is the pay scale of the post to which he is appointed.
It may be observed here that the instructions dated March 9, 1990, came up for consideration before the Apex Court in Wazir Singh v. State of Bihar, 1996(1) RSJ 784, and the same were upheld.
The apex Court in Wazir Singh's case (supra) held that the policy instructions issued by the Government would operate prospectively and any teacher acquiring qualifications of BT/BEd.
would not get the higher pay scale automatically on acquiring such qualifications.
It was made clear that those who had acquired such qualifications before march 9, 1990, and had also been appointed prior to March 9, 1990, would keep on getting the benefit of the Government letter of the State of Punjab dated July 23, 1957.
This meant that an appointee after March 9, 1990, though may have higher qualifications was put in the pay scale which was meant for the post to which he was appointed whereas a pre-March 9, 1990, appointee was put in a higher pay scale depending upon his qualifications though working on a post for which those qualifications were even not required.
As observed above, the petitioners herein are pre-March 9, 1990 appointees and have been enjoying the higher pay scale meant for the higher post as per their qualifications though working on lower posts of JBT Teachers.
3.
The State of Haryana issued revised pay Rules - Haryana Civil Service Revised Pay Rules, 1998, (hereinafter called the rules) which became effective from January 1, 1996.
These rules have been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Rules 3(c) and 3(d) of the rules are in the following terms:-  "Para 3(c) "existing scale" in relation to any post or any Government servant means the functional pay scale as on 31st December, 1995, prescribed for the post or post held by the government servant, as the case may be.
"Para 3(d) "functional pay scale" in relation to a Government servant means the pay scale which is prescribed for the post held by the Government servant.
It does not mean any other pay scale in which the Government servant is drawing his pay as a personal measure to him with any other justification like based on length of service, or higher/additional qualification or on upgradation of pay scale due to any other reason."
It may be observed at the outset that the petitioners have challenged the vires of the aforesaid rules.
The main attack on the vires of the rules is that once the petitioners were put in a higher pay scale depending upon their qualifications irrespective of the post they were holding and there is a corresponding revised pay scales to the pay scales the petitioners are enjoying, the petitioners cannot be denied the pay in the revised pay scales corresponding to the pay scales they had been enjoying prior to the issuance of the aforesaid rules.
It has further been argued that the rules would nullify the judgment(s) in favour of the persons like the petitioners where by they were held entitled to the higher pay scale in view of the letter dated July 23, 1957 as now they will be fixed in the pay scales which is meant for the JBT Teachers and not in accordance with the revised pay scale which is corresponding to the pay scales they were enjoying prior to the issuance of the rules.
4.
The question that arises for our consideration is whether the effect of 1957 letter can be made to come to an end by a competent legislation or by issuance of any executive instructions to that effect.
According to us, the 1957 letter gave incentive to those who had the higher qualifications than required for the post or had acquired the same during the tenure of service.
Can this incentive be given a go-bye ?
As noticed above on March 9, 1990, the State of Haryana thought of giving a go-bye to the incentive to those Teachers who came to be appointed after March 9, 1990, or acquired the higher qualifications after March 9, 1990.
As observed above, such stoppage of giving incentives as aforesaid has been upheld by the Apex Court in Wazir Singh's case (supra).
5.
Now coming to the cases in hand.
By the impugned rules what the State Government has done is that the incentive which had been given to the persons like the petitioners has come to a naught.
In other words they will get from the enforcement of 1998 Rules the pay scales which are meant for JBT Teacher as revised from time to time subject to one rider that the pay which is being drawn by them w.e.f.
the enforcement of the rules will be protected in the revised pay scale of a JBT teacher.
Can the State Government stop the incentive which has already been enjoyed by the Teachers ?
To us the answer seems to be in the affirmative in favour of the State.
With effect from the date of enforcement of the Rules, the incentive which was being enjoyed by the Teachers like the petitioners has come to a naught.
In other words, all Teachers whether they are appointed after March 9, 1990, or before March 9, 1990, would enjoy the same pay scale irrespective of their qualifications.
However, the pay of such teacher who had been enjoying higher pay scale on the basis of higher qualifications, which was personal of them would be protected.
6.
The emoluments of pay scale of a government employee is a condition of service.
Can such a condition of service be changed or altered which may have the effect of altering the emoluments ?
The answer to this question can be found from the judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in Roshan Lal Tandon v. Union of India, 1967 SLR 832, wherein at pages 841 to 843 it was observed as under:-  "We pass on to consider the next contention of the petitioner that there was a contractual right as regards the condition of service applicable to the petitioner at the time he entered grade 'D' and the condition of service could not be altered to his disadvantage afterwards by the notification issued by the Railway Board.
It was said that the order of the Railway Board dated January 25, l958, Annexure 'B', laid down that promotion to Grade 'C' from Grade 'D' was to be based on seniority-cum-suitability and this condition of service was contractual and could not be altered thereafter to the prejudice of the petitioner.
In our opinion, there is no warrant for this argument.
It is true that the origin of government service is contractual.
There is an offer and acceptance in every case.
But once appointed to his post or office the government servant acquires a status and his rights and obligations are no longer determined by consent of both parties, but by statute or statutory rules which may be framed and altered unilaterally by the Government.
In other words, the legal position of a Government servant is more one of status than of contract.
The hall-mark of status is the attachment to a legal relationship of rights and duties imposed by the public law and not by mere agreement of the parties.
The emoluments of the government servant and his terms of service are Governed by statute or statutory rules which may be unilaterally altered by the Government without the consent of the employee.
It is true that Art. 311 imposes constitutional restrictions upon the power of removal granted to the President and the Governor under Art. 310.
But it is obvious that the relationship between the Government and its servant is not like an ordinary contract of service between a master and servant.
The legal relationship is something entirely different, something in the nature of status.
It is much more than a purely contractual relationship voluntarily entered into between the parties.
The duties of status are fixed by the law and in the enforcement of these duties society has an interest.
In the language of jurisprudence status is a condition of membership of a group of which powers and duties are exclusively determined by law and not by agreement between the parties concerned.
The matter is clearly stated by Salmond and Williams on Contracts as follows: "So we may find both contractual and status-obligations produced by the same transaction.
The one transaction may result in the creation not only of obligations defined by the parties and so pertaining to the sphere of contract but also and concurrently of obligations defined by law itself, and so pertaining to the sphere of status.
A contract of service between employer and employee, while for the most part pertaining exclusively to the sphere of contract, pertains also to that of status so far as the law itself has seen fit to attach to this relation compulsory incidents, such as liability to pay compensation for accidents.
The extent to which the law is content to leave matter within the domain of contract to be determined by the exercise of the autonomous authority of the parties themselves, or thinks fit to bring the matter within the sphere of status by authoritatively determining for itself the contents of the relationship, is a matter depending on considerations of public policy.
In such Contracts as those of service the tendency in modern time is to withdraw the matter more and more from the domain of contract into that of status."
(Salmond & Williams on contracts 2nd edition P 12).
We are therefore of the opinion that the petitioner has no vested contractual right in regard to the terms of his service and that counsel for the petitioner has been unable to make good his submission on \this aspect of the case."
(emphasis supplied).
7.
Is the State Government competent to say in a given set of circumstances that because of financial stringency it is entitled to reduce the pay scale of a particular class of persons?
To us it seems that there should not be any legal bar for the State Government in certain circumstances to reduce the pay scale of a particular class of persons.
If the revision can be upwards, it can be downwards also.
This, of course, would be subject to one rider that even if the pay scales are reduced, the pay which a person may be getting in the pre-revised pay scale will have to be protected.
In the present case, it is not being disputed that the pay which the petitioners were getting before the enforcement of the rules is being protected.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in these writ petitions, which are here by dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs, since the rules of 1998 are being made effective from May 1, 1996, we may just clarify that if the petitioners have received more pay as on the date of issuance of the rules (not w.e.f.
the enforcement of the rules), the same would not be recovered.
Petitions dismissed.