SS Goindi, Member - Malkiat Singh, the petitioner, was employed since 1371967 as Conductor in Punjab Roadways, Tarn Taran Depot.
His services were terminated by an order dated 29th August, 1991 after an enquiry was held against him on charges of tampering with the way-bills.
The Enquiry Officer who conducted the regular enquiry, after serving charge sheet on the petitioner, formed the view that the tampering had been done with a view to resell the same tickets.
Malkiat Singh sought a reference under Section l0(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The matter was decided by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court vide award dated 27.9.1989 Annexure P-1.
He found that the enquiry held against the petitioner was fair and proper and the termination was justified.
Malkiat Singh then approached this Court through the present writ petition which he filed on 8th February 1991.
Unfortunately, within less than 10 days thereafter on 1721991 he was killed by the terrorists.
His widow and three minor children were brought on the record.
2.
Since Malkiat Singh has already expired, the relief sought in the writ petition for his reinstatement in service on setting aside the award does not survive.
However, the question of payment of back wages to the widow, and the minor children was to be considered and for this purpose the State of Punjab sought adjournments which we granted vide our orders dated 2221999, 451999, 1271999, 3181999 and then on 27.9.1999.
This is how the matter has come up today.
3.
On 4th May 1999, we had, inter alia, recorded in our order as under :-  "Shri RK Kawatra, learned AAG, Punjab on instructions from Shri Santokh Singh, Law Officer, Punjab Roadways, Tarn Taran, states that the back wages payable to the deceased-workman shall be worked out and approval of the District Committee shall be obtained for making payment to his legal representatives.
Efforts shall be made to do the needful within two months.
The matter shall come up on July 12, 1999.
Copy of this order shall be supplied to Shri Kawatra free of costs within three days."
4.
Unfortunately, however, no positive response came.
Today Ms. Gurveen, learned AAG, Punjab, on instructions from Shri Santoksh Singh, Law Officer, Punjab Roadways Tarn Taran states that the Deputy Commissioner heading the Standing Committee has not so far decided the matter.
We feel that this matter is hanging fire with the Lok Adalat for quite long and does not brook any further delay.
We have gone through the submissions made in the writ petition and also the award.
We feel that the finding of the Enquiry Officer could have been either way on the basis of the facts of the case.
The matter could have been decided even in favour of Malkiat Singh deceased.
In fact, the workman was not allowed time by the Enquiry Officer after the charges were read out to him and immediately after the charges the evidence was recorded.
The observation of the Labour Court that no prejudice was caused to the workman as he did cross-examine the witnesses does not overcome the non-compliance of an essential procedural requirement of a proper departmental enquiry.
5.
In this view of the matter, we direct the respondents to pay 50% of the back wages of the deceased to his widow Smt. Rani Amarjit Kaur for herself and for the maintenance of her three minor children within a period of three months from today.
In case the payment is not made within the aforesaid period, the amount thus payable shall carry interest at the rate of 18% pa. with effect from the date on which it actually fell due.
6.
This direction shall constitute a decree under Section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, and shall be meticulously complied with.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
Copy of this order shall be supplied the parties free of cost within a week.
Petition allowed.