JS Narang, J - An order dated 991997 had been passed by the Division Bench of this Court in CWP 19052 of 1996, by which the writ petition was allowed and it had been directed that the petitioner's claim has to be sustained.
The respondents were directed to consider the petitioner's claim for regularisation with effect from the date the claims of the persons junior to him were considered.
The said directions had been ordered to be carried out within one month from the date of receipt of copy of the order.
2.
The respondents failed to comply with the order passed by the Division Bench and as a sequel thereto, contempt petition No. 950 of the 199(sic) had been filed under section 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, for initiating appropriate proceedings against the respondents mentioned in the said petitioner.
A notice was issued to the respondents and in response thereto the Chief Administrator of the Board filed an affidavit by way of reply to the contempt petition stating that for regularising the services of the petitioner, the competent authority was Secretary of the Board, he passed order on 191998 regularising the services of the petitioner with effect from 3111996 and the copy of the said order had been appended with the said affidavit.
3.
The learned Single Judge has categorically observed in his order dated 1121998 that the directions of the Court have since been complied with but for compliance of the same, there has been an inordinate delay of one year.
It is an admitted fact that Ramesh Krishan appellant i.e. Secretary of the Board had not been impleaded as a respondent in civil writ petition and so also in the contempt petition as a contemner nor any notice seems to have been issued to the appellant.
It is obvious that the appellant had not been given any opportunity of hearing before passing an order penalising the appellant with costs assessed at Rs. 5000/-.
The appellant has contended that he was neither a party to the writ petition vide which a direction had been ordered nor he was party to the contempt petition filed by the petitioner.
Thus, at no given point of time, he had been given the opportunity to explain his conduct vis-a-vis the delay which might have occurred in compliance of the order passed by the Division Bench.
It is well settled that no one can be condemned unheard.
Apart from this, the learned Single Judge further has categorically observed as under :-  "......Now that the Court direction has been complied with, I refrain from taking any action against the Secretary of the Board.
However, he is directed to pay to the petitioner the costs of this petition which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
It is made clear that the amount will not be debited to the funds of the Board."
4.
We are of the opinion and respectfully observe that the learned Single Judge fell in error in imposing costs and further directing the Secretary i.e. the appellant to pay the same to the petitioner as he had not been given the opportunity by way of issuance of any show cause or by way of impleadment in the contempt petition.
Thus, no opportunity of being heard had been accorded to the appellant before passing the impugned order.
5.
In view of the above, we partly accept this appeal and set aside the impugned order dated 1121998, passed by the learned Single Judge to the extent of imposing costs upon the appellant.
Appeal partly allowed.