JS Narang, J - In the month of February 1984, Haryana Public Service Commission had advertised 17 posts of HCS (Executive Branch) and other allied services.
Out of the said 17 posts, one post was reserved for Backward Classes for HCS (Executive Branch) and also one post of `A' Class Tehsildar.
Here, we are concerned with the post meant for Backward Classes for HCS (Executive Branch).
2.
The petitioner being a Backward Class candidate applied for the said post reserved for the Backward Classes and along with the petitioner one Shri NK Wadhawan had also applied.
In the merit list of Backward Class candidates Shri NK Wadhawan was placed at Serial No. 1 and the petitioner (Ramesh Chand Verma) was placed at Serial No. 2.
Shri NK Wadhawan was recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission (Executive Branch) but he did not join and had communicated his inability to do so in this regard.
In this eventuality, petitioner being at Serial No. 2 became entitled to be appointed in place of Shri NK Wadhawan.
The Government of Haryana did not offer the said position to the petitioner which led to filing of CWP No. 7057 of 1988 by the petitioner.
The said petition was contested by the Government of Haryana and the same was finally allowed by this Court vide judgment dated 9.11.1990, copy Annexure P4.
The relevant portion of the judgment reads as under :-  "Admittedly, the petitioner is a member of the backward class and is next in the merit list amongst the backward class.
As the petitioner is available who can be appointed against the post reserved for the backward class on the basis of his merit, this post could not be carried forward.
In this view of the matter, I allow the writ petition and I am of the opinion that in the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh's case (supra), the petitioner is entitled to be appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) against the post meant for the backward class with retrospective effect from the date the other candidates of the HCS (Executive Branch) of his batch were appointed as a result of the competitive examination.
The entire period from the deemed date of appointment shall count towards seniority.
However, the petitioner will not be entitled to any arrears of pay and allowances.
The respondent-State of Haryana is directed to appoint the petitioner in the HCS (Executive Branch) cadre with retrospective effect from the date the other candidates were appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) within a period of one month and he should be assigned proper seniority as a result of this retrospective appointment.
In view of the peculiar facts of the case, there will be no order as to costs."
The Government of Haryana being dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge filed LPA No. 175 of 1991, which was dismissed vide order dated 841993, copy Annexure P5.
3.
The petitioner had competed in the examination for Register `B' as envisaged under HCS (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 (hereinafter referred to as "the rules").
The persons who were finally selected are included in Register `B' in order of merit as provided under Rule 11 of the Rules.
The appointment from the said register is also to be made in accordance with the rules provided in this regard.
The net result of combined reading of Rules 17 and 20 of the Rules is that first two candidates are appointed from Register `B', third from Register `A-1', 4th and 5th again from Register `B', 6th from Register A-II, 7th, 8th and 9th from Register `B' and so on upto 25 posts.
If the HCS (Executive Branch) list is exhausted and the vacancies are filled up then the remaining candidates on merits are placed in the allied services.
Since Shri NK Wadhawan had been found to be more meritorious and was placed at Serial No. 1, he could find berth in HCS (Executive Branch) and petitioner Shri Ramesh Chand Verma at serial No. 2 in the merit list of Backward Class candidates would be in the writing.
As per vacancies read in consonance with the rules, only one vacancy was to be given to Backward Classes which was offered to Shri NK Wadhawan.
Since he did not join as such the petitioner became entitled to be placed in the said seniority list at Sr. No. 2.
4.
The Government of Haryana passed an order dated 27.8.1993 and the petitioner was placed at Serial No. 14, that is at the bottom of all the recommendees vide order dated 31.1.1986.
However, it had been observed that a post of Register `B' was filled up in excess of rotation given as per rule 17 of the rules.
Thus, while determining the seniority of the petitioner, an extra post of Register `B' has been mentioned against his name and it had been observed that he is also at the bottom on the merit list prepared by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
An opportunity had been provided for raising objection to the seniority so determined and the said objections were required to be filed within 21 days of the receipt of the communication.
The petitioner filed objections vide communication dated 891993.
In pursuance to the said objections, the impugned order dated 23.12.1993, was passed by the Govt. of Haryana, copy Annexure P8.
The petitioner being dissatisfied with the impugned order made the same subject matter of challenge in this petition.
5.
The respondent filed reply to the petition and has taken the stand that the seniority had been accorded to the petitioner by the Haryana Public Service Commission at the bottom having been appointed against the post in excess from Register `B', as such the seniority could not be disturbed.
Thus, in view of the seniority accorded by Haryana Public Service Commission, the petitioner is not entitled to claim the vacancy which had been left by Shri NK Wadhawan.
6.
I have given my thoughtful consideration and I find that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner deserves to be accepted specially in view of the observations made by the learned Single Judge while allowing CWP No. 7057 of 1988 and the said judgment having been upheld by the Letters Patent Bench of this Court, in which a categoric observation had been made by the learned Single Judge to the effect that the petitioner is entitled to be appointed to HCS (Executive Branch) against the post meant for the Backward Classes with retrospective effect from the date the other candidates of HCS (Executive Branch) of his batch were appointed as a result of competitive examination.
The entire period had been directed to be counted towards seniority by giving the deeming fiction.
The petitioner had not been held to be entitled to any arrears of pay and a categoric direction had been given that the petitioner should be appointed with retrospective effect within a period of one month and he should be assigned proper seniority as a result to his retrospective appointment.
In this view of the matter, the petition is allowed, the impugned order dated 23.12.1993 Annexure P8 is quashed and the respondent is directed to assign seniority to the petitioner which would have been accorded to Shri NK Wadhawan in whose place the petitioner became entitled to be appointed and had been appointed by the respondents.
This exercise be carried out within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order from this Court or is supplied by the petitioner whichever is earlier.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.