JS Narang, J - The petitioner is a blind person and despite this handicap passed his graduation in the year 1974 and thereafter passed LLB.
examination from Agra University, Agra in the year 1984.
After obtaining the degree of LLB.
the petitioner got himself enrolled as a member of the Bar Council and stated to have practised as an Advocate for three years.
However, the petitioner perhaps wanted to take up employment and in respect thereof got himself enrolled with Employment Exchange, Karnal.
The social organisations taking up the case of un-employed blind youth, had impressed upon the Government of Haryana for considering such cases sympathetically.
The Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana addressed communication dated 22/2311988 (copy Annexure P-4) to various Heads of the Departments for absorbing blind persons against the posts where ever is possible and in this regard also observed that the age relating to the post shall also be relaxed by taking it as minimum age of 45 years.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Legal Assistant in the office of Legal Remembrancer and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Department of Law and Legislation on temporary basis against an ex-cadre post and subsequently, the said post was made permanent.
The ex-cadre post in question was created by Law Department as observed from letter dated 441998 addressed by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Administration of Justice Department (copy Annexure P-5).
The petitioner was appointed as Legal Assistant with effect from 19.8.1988 against an ex-cadre post in the law and Legislation Department, Haryana in pursuance to letter dated 1181988 (copy Annexure P-7).
The appointment of the petitioner has been shown against the temporary post of Legal Assistant in the gradation list as on January 1, 1992 and subsequently, the post having been made permanent was retained as ex-cadre post meant for the blind persons.
The appointment of the petitioner was reflected against the said post in the gradation list as well.
The petitioner claimed vide communication dated 28.7.1992 that he is senior to Shri Ramji Lal who had joined on 3151989 and whereas the petitioner had joined on 19.8.1988.
3.
In respect of determination of seniority, the matter was taken up by the Legal Remembrancer and Secretary to Government of Haryana with the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Administration of Justice Department vide communication dated 1461993 (copy Annexure P-14).
It has been categorically averred in the said communication that the post was created for blind person and the petitioner was appointed with effect from 19.8.1988.
In the gradation list, the said post has been shown separately as the same was not to be treated in the cadre but was defined as ex-cadre post.
It has also be categorically stated that the petitioner was not entrusted with the job of litigation, opinion and legislation etc. as without the Braille Law Books, the petitioner cannot render any assistance to the officers.
A query had also been raised as to whether the petitioner can be treated at par with others and can be given seniority amongst the other Legal Assistants and also whether the post of Legal Assistant (Blind) would fall vacant, if the petitioner is to be considered for promotion.
The Commissioner sent a categoric reply (copy Annexure P-17) that the appointment of the petitioner to the post was made by ignoring the normal recruitment rules and the post against which the petitioner has been posted in an ex-cadre post, therefore, the petitioner cannot be considered for promotion on higher post in the cadre alongwith other employees placed in the said cadre.
Thereafter, respondent No. 4, Shri Ramji Lal was promoted as Superintendent (Legal) vide order dated 1841995 (copy Annexure P-19).
The said order of promotion has been impugned by the petitioner by way of filing the present petition.
4.
The petitioner while claiming promotion to the post of Superintendent (Legal) also questioned the legality of appointment of respondent No. 4 to the post of Superintndent (Legal) on the ground that respondent No. 4 is not qualified to be promoted to the post of Superintendent (Legal) as he does not fulfil the requisite qualifications as provided in Haryana Government Law and Legislative Department State Service Group `B' Rules, 1979 because the respondent No. 4 has only passed BGL from Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra whereas the requirement under the rules is that the candidate should be Bachelor of Law (LLB.)
with three years service experience.
As per the petitioner, the respondent No. 4 is not qualified, therefore, the order of promotion passed in favour of respondent No. 4 is not sustainable under law and the same deserves to be quashed.
5.
The State of Haryana filed reply to the petition and raised a preliminary objection that the petitioner could not have been considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent (Legal) as he had been appointed against a post created for Blind Law Graduate and the said post being ex-cadre post, the petitioner could not claim any promotion as the petitioner did not lie in the channel of promotion.
6.
So far as respondent No. 4 is concerned, the State maintained that he has been rightly promoted as he had the requisite experience and holds BGL degree which has been equated at par with LLB.
(Academic degree).
In this regard, a communication from the Registrar, Kurukshetra University has been appended as Annexure R-4 with the written statement.
The excerpt of the same is as under :-  "In this regard, it is to inform you that LLB.
(Academic) and Bachelor of General Laws (BGL) are the same course.
Only the nomenclature of the said course from LLB.
(Academic) to BGL (Bachelor of General Laws) was changed w.e.f.
the sessions 1981-82 by this University on the directions from Bar Council of India, vide Resolution No. 13 of the Executive Council's meeting held on 24.3.1981.
However, the BGL is a terminal course and passing out this degree does not entitle a person to be enrolled as an Advocate under the rules of Bar Council of India."
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that no specific order was ever passed for creation of ex-cadre post, as such, the petitioner had been appointed against a cadre post, thus is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent (Legal).
In this context, various citations have been referred to which deal with the process and procedure to be adopted for creation of the cadre post, the same have no applicability to the case, nor is supportive of the contention raised by the learned counsel.
As per the reference and the perusal of the communications, it is absolutely clear that a post had been specifically created for the petitioner and the said post had also been defined separately in the gradation list right from the beginning and even after the post having been made permanent.
In this regard, reliance has been placed upon a judgment rendered by the Apex Court in National Federation of Blind v. Union Public Service Commission and others, AIR 1993 SC 1916 : 1993(2) SCT 740 (SC).
I am afraid, the same does not help the petitioner, rather the Apex Court has categorically observed that a visually handicapped person, if not found suitable by the Government, shall not have any right to claim the promotional post.
The observation is reproduced as under :-  "We make it clear that once recruited to the lowest level of the service the visually handicapped persons shall to be entitled to claim promotion to the higher posts in the service irrespective of the physical requirements of the jobs.
If in the hierarchy of promotional posts it is found by the Government that a particular post is not suitable for the visually handicapped person he shall not have any right to claim the said post."
In the present case, the petitioner had never been appointed against cadre post but all along was appointed against an ex-cadre post.
As such the petitioner does not have any right to seek promotion to the next higher post.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that respondent No. 4 is not qualified to be promoted as Superintendent (Legal) and in this context, reliance has been placed upon Rule 7 of the Haryana Law and Legislation Department State Service Group-B Rules, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the rules) which reads as under :-  "7.
No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in Appendix B to these rules."
"Appendix `B'Qualification and Experience Sr. No.
Designation of posts For Promotion For transfer or deputation For direct recruitment 1 2 3 4 5 2.
Superintendent (Legal) (a) BA, LLB.
and (a) BA# LLB.
(a) BA, LLB (b) Who has worked in the Law and Legislative Department against the post of (i) Legal Assistant for a period of not less than three years; or (ii) Personal Assistant, Assistant or Senior Scale Stenographer for a period of not less than five years including an assignment involving legal work for a period of not less than three years."
(c) who has held an assignment involving legal work for a period of not less than ten years.
(b) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard; and (b) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard;  (c) who has held an assignment involving legal work for a period of not less than 10 yrs.
; or(d) has practised at the bar for a period of not less than 5 years."
(Amendment notified on 2271983)  In this context, learned counsel for the respondents placed reliance upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Kuldeep Singh v. Haryana Vidhan Sabha through its Secretary and others, 1992(2) SLR 400 : 1992(3) SCT 389 (SC).
A similar question had arisen as to whether Bachelor of General Laws (BGL) degree of two years duration awarded by Kurukshetra University is equivalent to LLB.
(Academic), the answer has been given in the affirmative.
It has been categorically held that the said qualification, i.e., BGL is a degree of laws which is conferred after two years.
It may be that some Universities may define it as LLB.
whereas in other Universities particularly Kurukshetra University, it is known as Bachelor of General Laws (BGL) Degree.
The respondent in that case also possessed Bachelor of General Laws (BGL) degree who was held to be eligible for the post in question.
9.
Similar question in the present case is also involved, i.e., respondent No. 4 has also passed BGL from the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra which is obviously academic qualification in the subject of Laws meant for the purpose of promotions to be earned in the administrative service.
I am in respectful agreement with the interpretation rendered by the Division Bench of this Court.
Thus, respondent No. 4 is qualified as per requirements under the rules and, therefore, has been correctly promoted to the post of Superintendent (Legal).
As such, no infirmity can be found in the order dated 1841995 (copy Annexure P-19) vide which respondent No. 4 has been validly promoted.
10.
Further, no case has been made out by the petitioner to be considered for promotion to the promotion post in the regular channel, as the petitioner has been appointed against the ex-cadre post.
The petition is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.