N K Agrawal, J - This is a revision petition by the defendant against the order dated July 30, 1999 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Gurgaon, whereby the defendant school has been directed to provisionally admit the plaintiff to the 11th Standard in the non-medical course of study.
2.
The plaintiff (Ajit Tanwar), a minor filed a civil suit for mandatory injunction through Rajbir Singh his father, guardian and next friend, seeking a direction to the defendant-School (D.A.V.
Public School, Sector 4/14, Urban Estate, Gurgaon) to grant admission to him to the 11th Standard in the non-medical stream.
The plaintiff had joined the said School in the 6th Standard.
He passed the examination for the 10th class securing 64% marks in the aggregate.
The Principal of the School refused him admission to the non-medical course on the ground that he had not secured 70% marks in the 10th Standard.
Admission was given to the outside candidates coming from other Schools.
3.
The order of the learned Civil Judge has been challenged by the defendant-School with the plea that there was no provision in any law nor any guideline governing the admission to the 11th Standard.
The defendant-School was a recognised unaided School.
The Principal had every right to admit only the meritorious students to the medical and non-medical courses of study as there were only limited seats.
The plaintiff was actually not denied admission to the 11th Standard and was duly promoted and retained in the School.
He was allowed to opt for the Commerce or the Humanities Course of Study.
All the students, who were given admission to the 11th Standard in the medical and non-medical streams, had secured more than 70% marks in the 10th Class examination.
Admission was given strictly on the basis of merit.
The plaintiff was not given admission to the non-medical course of study as he had secured 64% marks only.
4.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff has, on the other hand, argued that the Principal had arbitrarily fixed the cut off percentage of marks at 70%.
The Principal had no power to fix any cut off marks for his own regular students.
Admission to the next higher class in the same School was a matter of routine promotion and was not a case of fresh admission or promotion.
The students of the 10th Standard were wrongly coerced in opting for the Commerce or the Humanities Courses of Study in the 11th Standard or in the alternative to leave the School.
5.
Reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent on a decision of the Supreme Court in The Principal, Cambridge School and another v. Ms. Payal Gupta & Ors., JT 1995(6) SC 101 : 1995(4) SCT 594 (SC).
6.
On a consideration of the matter, it is noticed that the defendant-School has not denied promotion to Ajit.
He has not been asked to leave the School.
Therefore, the contention that the defendant-School has denied its own student the admission to the next higher class is found to be not correct.
The only question which remains to be decided is whether the student had a right to join the non-medical stream of study despite having secured marks lesser than the cut off marks laid down by the Principal of the School.
In the case decided by the Supreme Court (supra), a question had arisen about the right of the student to be promoted to the next higher class in the same School.
it was noticed that in Rule 138 of the Delhi School Education Rules, 1973, a student who had failed at any public examination could not be refused re-admission in the School or the Class.
Looking to that specific provision in the rules, it was held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court that a student who had secured marks lesser than the cut off percentage had a right to seek promotion to the higher class.
If a student who had failed in his examination had a right to seek re-admission in the same School or in the same class, the student who had passed but had secured lesser marks had definitely a better right to seek admission in the higher class in the same School.
7.
In the present case, no rules of admission or any guidelines have been placed on record.
It is conceded by the counsel for the parties that there are no rules in Haryana similar to the Delhi School Education Rules, 1973.
As has been seen, Ajit has not been denied admission to the next higher class.
He has been denied admission to the non-medical course of study on the ground that he was less meritorious.
He secured marks lesser than the cut off percentage fixed by the Principal of the School.
In the absence of rules, the decision of the Supreme Court relied upon by the learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent does not help him.
Since only limited seats are available in the non-medical course of study, the Principal of the School was justified in fixing a cut off percentage of marks for admission to the specialised course.
The plaintiff cannot insist upon a particular course of study.
There is nothing to show that the Principal of the School had no power to fix a particular percentage of marks for the purpose of regulating admission to the technical courses of study.
In the result, the revision petition succeeds and the order of the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Gurgaon, dated July 30, 1999 is quashed.
The plaintiff may, if so advised, opt for the study course in the Commerce or Humanities Stream in the 11th Standard in the defendant-School.
Petition allowed.