Jawarlal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a retired teacher, has approached this court through the present petition with the prayer that the appointment of respondent No. 6 as Lecturer in Electrical Engineering be quashed.
The petitioner asserts that he was no personal interest in the case and that he is approaching the Court purely in public interest.
He points out that respondent No. 6 who has been selected and appointed as Lecturer in Electrical Engineering does not fulfill the qualifications as notified by the institution vide its advertisement, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
According to this advertisement the minimum qualification which a candidate had to fulfill was - "1st Class Bachelor's Degree in appropriate branch of Engineering".
The petitioner asserts that as many as 30 candidates had applied.
After verification of the particulars respondent No. 5 had called 10 candidates for interview.
Only 3 had appeared including respondent No. 6.
Two candidates viz. Jaspal Singh and Miss Aarti Sharma possessed the qualification of Bachelor in Electrical Engineering.
They also had experience.
However, respondent No. 6 who had "simply passed Section A and B of Institute of Engineering........ and he has not joined any Degree College of Electrical Engineeringand has not passed Degree of Electrical Engineering in 1st Class......." was selected.
The petitioner maintains that the selection and appointment of such ineligible candidates would be against public interest and that it deserves to be set aside.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2, 4 and 5 by the College Principal.
The petitioner's locus standi had been challenged on the ground that he has not approached the court bona fide.
He had got two sons who have passed AMIE examination.
It has been alleged that he had approached respondent No. 5 for adjustment of his sons.
Since this was not done, he has filed the present writ petition.
On merits, it has been averred that "although the post of Lecturer in Electrical Engineering was advertised to be filled in by way of direct recruitment but,......................... as only two candidates had appeared before the Selection Committee and were not found suitable ...................... the Departmental candidate i.e. respondent No. 6 was available, therefore, he was considered and promoted to the said post in the promotion quota by the Selection Committee".
It has also been stated that the qualification for appointment to the post of Lecturer have been laid down by the State of Punjab in its order issued under Article 320 (3)(b) of the Constitution.
According to this order, persons possessing the qualification of "2nd Class Bachelor's Degree in Engineering or Technology or equivalent (other than AMIE) OR Section A&B of AMIE after a regular diploma course of three years duration of a recognised Institute of the State Board of Technical Educational" are eligible.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
On behalf of the petitioner it has been contended that respondent No. 6 does not have a Degree in Electrical Engineering.
Still further, it has been pointed out that candidates who fulfilled the requisite qualifications were available.
They have been declared unsuitable without any basis.
On the other hand, Mr. Ravi Kapur, appearing for the institution as well as the selected candidate viz. respondent No. 6, has contended that the post has been filled up by promotion and that the incumbent is fully eligible.
5.
Admittedly, the institution had issued the advertisement.
The only qualification prescribed for the post of Lecturer in Electrical Engineering was a 1st Class Bachelor's Degree in Engineering.
It has not even been averred in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that the selected candidate fulfills this qualification.
Thus, he is clearly ineligible.
Mr. Kapur contends that the State Government has laid down qualification as mentioned in the document at Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
We have seen this document.
It purports to have been issued in exercise of the powers under Article 320 (3)(b) of the Constitution.
For the post of Lecturer in the scale of Rs. 840-1850 the following qualifications have been laid down :-  "LECTURER IN THE SCALE OF Rs. 840-1850 + Rs. 100 S.P.
(a) Qualifications : 1.
A 2nd Class Bachelor's Degree in Engineering or Technology or equivalent (other than AMIE) or Section A&B of AMIE (after a regular diploma course of 3 years duration of a recognised Institute of the State Board of Technical Education).
OR B.
Regular diploma a course of 3 years duration/or equivalent of a recognised Institute of the State Board of Technical Education with TTTI Diploma provided the appointee with these qualifications will not be allowed to earn any increment in the grade for the post of Lecturer till he makes up his deficiency in TTTI Diploma training by attending two short term courses arranged by the TTTI.
Preference will be given to persons with professional and/or teaching experience of three years after acquiring the minimum qualifications."
6.
On a perusal of the above we find that the State Government has prescribed the minimum qualification.
However, the institution had made its intention clearly manifest while issuing the advertisement.
It had not considered persons having a 2nd Class Bachelor's Degree as eligible.
It had only allowed candidates with a 1st Class Degree in Engineering to compete.
Furthermore, it is also clear that even those persons who had qualified Section A and B of AMIE were not considered as eligible.
This qualification was never mentioned in the advertisement.
Thus, even if it is assumed that the State Government had rightly prescribed the qualifications for the post of a Lecturer, these were only the minimum conditions of eligibility.
The institution had consciously laid down a higher qualification and excluded others from competing.
7.
Faced with this situation Mr. Kapur has contended that the qualification of AMIE is equivalent to a Bachelor's Degree.
Thus, the 6th respondent should be considered as eligible.
Even this contention is misconceived.
A perusal of the advertisement shows that candidates with AMIE were not treated as eligible for competing in any of the disciplines for the post of Lecturer.
Still further, wherever the authority wanted a person with an equivalent qualification to be eligible, it has so specified.
To illustrate on a perusal of the advertisement we find that for the post of Workshop Instructor, persons with qualification of matriculation or its equivalent were treated as eligible.
However, in case of Lecturers such was not the position.
8.
Lastly, it has been contended that respondent No. 6 was appointed by promotion.
Even this plea is misconceived.
Admittedly, the post of Lecturer in Electrical Engineering was to be filled up by direct recruitment.
The institution had advertised the post for this purpose.
Eligible candidates had applied.
Out of a total of 30 candidates, 10 were called for interview.
Three including the 6th respondent had appeared.
A Selection Committee had been constituted.
An extract from the proceedings of the Selection Committee has been produced as Annexure R-3 with the written statement.
This Selection Committee was not meeting to consider the claims of departmental candidates for promotion.
It has, admittedly, been constituted to interview candidates for direct recruitment.
The committee had selected respondent No. 6 despite the fact that he did not fulfill the qualifications as laid down in the advertisement.
Thus, we are constrained to hold that it had erroneously selected respondent No. 6.
9.
Mr. Kapur contends that the petitioner has not filed this petition bona fide.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The petitioner had, admittedly, been a Teacher.
The allegations made in the written statement have been controverted by him by filing a replication.
Irrespective of that, every citizen has a right to raise his voice for the proper management of the institutions of this country.
The matter has come to the notice of the Court.
We are not inclined to throw out the petition on the mere question of locus standi.
We have found that respondent No. 6 was not eligible.
It would be unfair and unjust to the students to allow him to continue on the post of Lecturer in the respondent institute.
10.
No other point has been raised.
11.
In view of the above, we quash the selection and appointment of respondent No. 6 as Lecturer in Electrical Engineering at the respondent institute.
He shall vacate the office immediately.
The post shall be filled up in accordance with law from amongst the eligible candidates.
12.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of No. costs.
Petition allowed.