VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Sachin Ahlawat seeks quashing of order dated 5.4.1999 and to permit him to study in Shri Baba Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar, Distt.
Rohtak.
2.
The relevant facts are that the Director of Technical Education, Haryana, had issued admission Brochure for admission to various Regional Engineering Colleges in the Country and various Government/non-Government Engineering College in Haryana State.
Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra was entrusted the duty with respect to the admission.
The petitioner applied for admission in pursuance of the Admission Brochure and appeared in the written test.
He was offered admission in Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical) in BMN College, Asthal Bohar, Distt.
Rohtak.
He started attending classes on 1281998.
There is a provision in the Brochure that a candidate once admitted cannot be allowed to participate in the next counselling.
The petitioner with certain other persons had filed a civil writ petition challenging the said condition of the Brochure.
They had claimed it to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The said petition was admitted and interim order was passed by this Court on 21.9.1998.
The petitioner and others were allowed to join the counselling subject to further orders of the Court.
The petitioner thereupon was allowed to participate in the next counselling.
He was allotted Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal.
He appeared in the said College in October, 1998 and was offered the Architecture branch which was not acceptable to him.
He continued his studies in Shri Baba Mast Nath Engineering College.
The petitioner took his first semester examination and continued his studies.
The petitioner subsequently had withdrawn the Civil Writ Petition No. 14532 of 1998.
He submitted an application to respondent No. 1 that he may be allowed to study at a place where he was originally admitted.
The said application has since been rejected.
The petitioner by virtue of the present writ petition challenges the order rejecting his request to permit him to study in Shri Babu Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar.
3.
In the reply filed, respondent No. 1 had contested the petition.
It is admitted that the petitioner was allowed to participate in the subsequent counselling as per interim order passed by this Court on 21.9.1998.
The petitioner was given admission in Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal.
The petitioner continued to study in Shri Baba Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar.
It was asserted that the petitioner cannot continue to study at Asthal Bohar and the action of the respondent rejecting his request is valid.
4.
A perusal of the basic facts clearly shows that the petitioner had been admitted as a regular student in Shri Baba Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar.
He was allowed to take part in the counselling in pursuance of the interim order passed by this Court on 21.9.1998 in CWP No. 14532 of 1998.
Admittedly, the petitioner was allowed to withdraw the said writ petition.
Once the said writ petition qua the petitioner has been dismissed as withdrawn, the result is obvious.
The interim order would also come to an end.
Therefore, his admission in Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal, would be null and void.
Keeping in view the said fact, he has a right to continue his studies in Shri Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar.
5.
Not only that, another important fact which weighs heavily in favour of the petitioner is that he has already studied of almost 2-1/2 semesters at Shri Baba Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar.
He had been taken as a student in Mechanical discipline.
In Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal, said discipline had not been offered to the petitioner.
At this stage, asking the petitioner to go to Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal, would certainly mean change of discipline without attending the classes.
That would be totally inequitable.
6.
In these circumstances, taking note of the totality of the facts, it must be held that the petitioner is entitled to continue his studies at Shri Baba Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar.
The impugned order is accordingly quashed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.