ML Singhal, J - Constable Ranbir Singh was posted on the rolls of Police District Sirsa.
His constabulary Number was 737.
He was dismissed from service by Superintendent of Police, Sirsa vide order dated 24.4.1992.
His appeal was dismissed vide order dated 20.10.1992.
His revision was dimissed vide order dated 2011994.
He filed suit for declaration challenging his dismissal from service.
Charge against him was that of habitual absence from duty.
It was alleged that while posted at Police Barrier of Truck Union Sirsa as on 8101991, he was sent to Police Station City Sirsa for temporary duty but he did not report there in the police station and absented without any leave or permission.
He was marked absent as per daily diary entry No. 5 recorded on 8101991.
During his absence, he participated in picketing (Dharna) staged by the other members of the police force, who had formed themselves into an association known as "Sarv Karamchari Sangh" in front of the office-cum-residence of the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa on 11101991.
He returned to duty vide daily diary entry No. 15 dated 26101991 after having remained absent for a period of 18 days without any leave or permission.
It was alleged that while dismissing him from service, the Superintendent of Police had nowhere observed that absence from duty was the gravest misconduct and it should entail dismissal from service.
Provisions of Order 162 of the Punjab Police Rules were not taken into account by the Superintendent of Police when he dismissed him from service inasmuch as regard should have been had to the length of his service and further whether by being absent from duty, he was incorrigible to an extent that be became completely unfit for police service.
Superintendent of Police did not apply his mind to this aspect of the matter while dismissing him from service and, therefore, dismissal was illegal, unconstitutional and arbitrary.
2.
Defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit urging that absence from duty and participation in Dharna was the gravest act of misconduct rendering him completely unfit for police service.
Show cause notice was served upon him calling upon him to show cause why he be not dismissed from service.
He failed to put in reply to the show cause notice as he was continuing absent.
He could not be given personal hearing.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 24.4.1992 passed by defendant No. 2 and the order passed in appeal, dated 24.10.1992 and the order dated 2011994 passed in revision are illegal, null and void ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD  3.
Whether Civil Court at Hisar has no jurisdiction to entertain and try the present suit ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD  5.
Whether the suit is bad for want of notice under Section 80 CPC ?
OPD  6.
Relief.
4.
Learned Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division) Hissar dismissed the pliantiff's suit.
She, however, directed the appeal to be heard and decided de novo and also the revision, if any.
Plaintiff went in appeal against the decree of Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Hissar dated 1311997.
Additional District Judge, Hissar dismissed the appeal vide order dated 891998.
Still not satisfied, the plaintiff has yet knocked the door of this Court.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the only charge against the appellant was mere absence from duty.
Charge against him was that while posted at Police Barrier Truck Union Sirsa on 8101991, he was sent to Police Station, City Sirsa, for temporary duty but he did not report there at the Police Station and instead absented himself without any sanction of leave or permission.
He was thus marked absent in daily diary at entry No. 5 recorded on 8101991 and during his absence, he participated in picketing (Dharna) staged by other members of the police force who had formed themselves in to an Association known as Sarv Karmachari Sangh in front of the Office-cum-Residence of the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa on 11101991.
He returned to duty vide daily diary entry No. 15 dated 26101991.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the charge against him was only "absence from duty" for a period of 18 days which should not have cost him his job.
Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules is reproduced as under :-  "162.
Dismissal - Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
"Explanation.
- For the purposes of sub-rule (1), the following shall, inter alia, be regarded as gravest acts of misconduct in respect of a police officer, facing disciplinary action -  (i) indulging in spying or smuggling activities;  (ii) disrupting the means of transport or of communication;  (iii) damaging public property;  (iv) causing indiscipline amonst fellow policemen;  (v) promoting feeling of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language;  (vi) going on strike or mass casual leave or resorting to mass abstentions;  (vii) spreading disaffection against the Government; and  (viii) causing riots and the life."
(2) An enrolled police officer sentenced judicially to rigorous imprisonment exceeding one month or to any other punishment not less severe, shall, if such sentence is not quashed on appeal or revision, be dismissed.
An enrolled police officer sentenced by a criminal Court to a punishment of fine or simple imprisonment, or both, or to rigorous imprisonment not exceeding one month, or who, having been proclaimed under Section 87 of the Code of Criminal Procedure fails to appear within the statutory period of thirty days may be dismissed or otherwise dealt with at the discretion of the officer empowered to appoint him.
Final departmental orders in such cases shall be postponed until the appeal or revision proceedings have been decided, or until the period allowed for filing an appeal has lapsed without appellate or revisionary proceedings having been instituted.
Departmental punishments under this rule shall be awarded in accordance with the powers conferred by rule 161.
(3) When a police office is convicted judicially and dismissed, or dismissed as a result of a departmental enquiry, in consequence of corrupt practices, the conviction and dismissal and its cause shall be published in the Police Gazette.
In other cases of dismissal when it is desired to ensure that the officer dismissed shall not be re-employed elsewhere, a full descriptive roll, with particulars of the punishments, shall be sent for publication in the Police Gazette."
It was submitted that this rule was not taken note of by the Disciplinary Authority while dismissing him from service.
Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable to Haryana provides that in making an order of dismissal, regard should be made to the length of service put in by the delinquent and his claim to pension.
It was submitted that the Punishing authority or the Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority did not advert to this aspect of the matter at all.
It was submitted that it was a single act of misconduct which should not have entailed his dismissal from service.
It is true that it was a single act of indiscipline on his part but single act of indiscipline, if it is grave, can entail one's dismissal from service.
The appellant was a member of the disciplined force.
He was required to answer the call of duty.
He was put on temporary duty at Police Station City, Sirsa.
Instead of reporting there, he slipped and absented and participated in the Dharna staged by other members of the police force who had formed themselves into an association known as Sarv Karamchari Sangh in front of the office-cum- residence of Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa on 11101991.
It was the height of indiscipline on his part to have absented from duty and then participated in the Dharna and he thus committed breach of discipline of the police force.
A single act of indiscipline on his part to have absented from duty and then participated in the Dharna and he thus committed breach of discipline of the police force.
A single act of indiscipline can be viewed as the gravest act of misconduct on the part of the delinquent entailing his dismissal from service.
It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appllant that the punishment imposed upon him is highly excessive and dis-proportionate to the misconduct alleged and, therefore, some other punishment could have been imposed upon him commensurate with his misconduct.
As to whether a particular misconduct can be viewed as misconduct simplicitor or as grave misconduct varies froms service to service.
What is serious misconduct in one service may not be viewed with that seriousness so far as other service is concerned.
Absence from duty for a few days may not be viewed that serious a misconduct as to entail dismissal in one service but it may be viewed as a grave misconduct entailing dismissal from service in some other service.
As to whether misconduct should be viewed seriously entailing dismissal from service, that depends upon how the punishing authority views that misconduct.
It was held in Bhagwat Parsad v. Inspector General of Police 1967 S.L.R.
807 as follows :-  "In this case, the Superintendent of Police, the Deputy Inspector General, and finally the Inspector General of Police, assessed the conduct of the petitioner to be of the requisite gravity so as to merit the imposition of the punishment of dismissal.
The officers of the police Department are charged with the duty of maintaining and observing discipline.
As to standard of discipline required to be enforced in their case the judgment of their superior officers deserves to be respected and should not be lightly interfered with.
The police force is required to discharge highly responsible and onerous duties for maintenance of law and order, and for other purposes essential to the life of the Community.
These duties from their very nature.
They have to be of an exacting nature result of laxity in conduct, or infringement of rules of discipline can undermine the optimum usefulness of the force.
16.
Moreover, it was for the police officers who judged the infraction of the police rules to determine the seriousness of the misconduct and to decide upon the suitability of the punishment.
It will not be within the ambit of the powers of this Court, when petitioned to issue the extraordinary writs of certiorari, mandamus etc., to interfere with the discretion of the Heads of the Departments when it has not been exercised wantonly or arbitrarily."
5.
In this case, the punishment meted to the delinquent by the Superintendent of Police cannot be said to be excessive or disproportionate to the misconduct imputed to him.
It was not absence alone which entailed his dismissal from service but absence coupled with his participation in dharna in front of the office-cum-residence of Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa.
Absence from duty and then staging dharna by a member of the disciplined force was rightly viewed as the gravest act of misconduct entailing his dismissal from service.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 17430 of 1995, dismissal from service was converted into pre-mature retirement from service because when disciplinary action had been initiated against him, he had put in more than 22 years of service.
In this case, however, there is no evidence that he had put in service which qualified him for pension when disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him.
6.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.