GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing the direction issued by the Government of Punjab vide letter dated 13111997 and the orders passed by the concerned authorities of the Education Department on 17111997 terminating the services of the petitioners.
2.
The averments made in the writ petition show that the petitioners were appointed as temporary/ad hoc JBT Teachers for fixed period and they were holding the posts in that capacity in November, 1997 when in the purported compliance of the directions given by the government, their services were terminated.
3.
The main ground on which the petitioners have challenged the impugned action is that the directions issued by the government for termination of the services of the ad hoc teachers related to those employed by the Directorate of Secondary Education and not Primary Education and therefore, there was no logic or justification to terminate the services of JBT Teachers like the petitioners.
4.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, on the basis of instructions given by the competent authority, made a statement that the order terminating the services of the petitioner and other JBT Teachers were issued by mistake and the department will reinstate them in service.
5.
In our opinion, the stands taken by the respondents is quite appropriate and just because the instructions issued by the government in the wake of the judgment of this Court in Yashwinder Singh Rana and others v. State of Punjab and others, CWP No. 5985 of 1994 decided on 2891994 : 1995(2) SCT 38 (P&H)(DB) and the decision of the Supreme Court in Surinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1997(7) SC 537 : 1997(4) SCT 395 (P&H)(DB), resulting in the termination of the services of those who were appointed in excess of the advertised posts by the department in the year 1992 and has nothing to do with ad hoc JBT Teachers.
6.
Hence, the writ petition is disposed of as infructuous subject to the direction that the petitioners and other similarly situated persons shall be reinstated within a period of 15 days.
If the posts against which they were working are lying vacant in the schools in which they were posted at the time of termination of their services, then they shall be adjusted in those very schools.
In case, the posts have already been filled by appointing other persons (by fresh recruitment or by transfer), then the petitioners and other similarly situated persons shall be adjusted agasint other vacant posts within the same district.
They shall be entitled to pay and allowances for the intervening period i.e. from the date of termination of the services and their re-joining.
7.
It is, however, made clear that the reinstatement of the petitioners and similarly situated persons in pursuance of the undertaking given before the Court will not entitle them to be regularly appointed in the service to claim regularisation of their services and the respondents shall not be obliged to regularise their services de hors the rules.
It is also made clear that if the posts of JBT Teaches are abolished, the services of the petitioners and other persons may be terminated by following the rule of last come first go.
It is further clarified that in case, any of the petitioners or other similarly situated persons is found guilty of misconduct, the employer shall be entitled to dispense with his/her service in accordance with law.
The same will hold true for termination of service of ad hoc appointee due to unsatisfactory performance.
A copy of this order be given dasti on payment of fee prescribed for urgent applications.
Order accordingly.