VK Bali, J (Oral) - Brij Lal Chadha, who superannuated on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer on March 31, 1991, having been initially appointed as Junior Engineer through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated September 9, 1994.
Annexure P-2 whereby pursuant to a departmental enquiry, a cut of pension to the extent of 5% has been imposed and further it has been ordered that an amount of Rs. 44,640/- shall be recovered from him.
The facts, as may be necessary to decide the controversy in hand, need a brief mention.
2.
Petitioner joined the Public Works Department (Public Health) on February 19, 1972 on the post of Junior Engineer.
In due course of time he was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer.
On attaining the age of 58 years, he superannuated on March, 31, 1991.
Prior to his retirement, however, he was issued a charge-sheet on December 5, 1986 under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1952.
An enquiry officer, in the rank of Superintending Engineer was appointed and it is the positive case of petitioner that he was exonerated of all the charges that were framed against him.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report on March 28, 1990.
Despite this, when the petitioner was not paid his retiral dues, he filed Civil Writ Petition No 16227 of 1992 which came to be decided on October 6, 1993 by the Divisional Bench of this Court.
It quite clearly emerges from the order passed by this Court that the respondents had provisionally fixed pension of the petitioner @ Rs. 1,500/- per month which has since been refused from the date of his retirement.
Writ was, thus, allowed directing the respondents to finalise all the pending claims of the petitioner, including full pension, provident fund, leave encashment etc. within four months.
When the directions contained in the order, referred to above, were not complied with, petitioner was constrained to file contempt petition in this Court.
It is during the pendency of contempt petition that order, Annexure P-2 imposing a cut of pension to the extent of 5% and recovery of amount, as referred to above, came to be passed.
As mentioned above, it is this order, Annexure P-2, that has been challenged in the present petition.
3.
Without going into the details of the charges and evidence led by the department on the said charges, at this stage, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that the impugned order, Annexure P-2 is bereft of any reasons which is a sine-qua-non of any judicial or quasi-judicial order.
4.
A reading of order, Annexure P-2 does support the contention of learned counsel.
In the earlier part of order, Annexure P-2 charges have been set out.
It has then been mentioned that the Enquiry Officer was appointed who submitted his report.
It is then mentioned that on careful consideration of the enquiry report, the Government had provisionally decided that, besides penalty of recovery of Rs. 58,693/- out of total loss of Rs. 1,17,38785, 5% cut of pension may be imposed upon the petitioner.
Operative part of the order reads thus :-  "Shri B.L.
Chadha, SDE (Retd.)
has submitted his defence reply to the 2nd show cause notice, which has been carefully examined on merit.
Charge No. 8 which relates to issue of material i.e. GI Pipes amounting to Rs. 18,187.85 to JE has been dropped against him as the material was given to concerned JE after obtaining proper receipt from him.
Furthermore security amount of Rs. 9,920/- from the first is still lying in the miscellaneous deposit of the firm in the Public Health Division, Narwana.
His reply to the other charges in the show cause notice has been considered but found unsatisfactory and the charges stand proved against him.
Thus, the total amount of loss to Govt. stands reduced to Rs. 89,280/- only.
However, taking a lenient view in the matter, it has been decided by the Govt. that besides penalty of recovery of loss of Rs. 44,640/- which is 50% of the total loss of Rs. 89,290/-, 5% cut in pension be imposed upon Shri BS Chadha (retd.)"
5.
Operative part of the order, extracted above, would manifest that besides agreeing with some of the charges of which petitioner was exonerated, the Disciplinary Authority simply mentioned that the reply of the petitioner with regard to other charges was not satisfactory and, therefore, the charges stood proved against him.
Immediately, thereafter, penalties, as referred to above, were imposed upon the petitioner.
This Court is of the clear view that the order that may adversely affect a citizen must contain reasons and inasmuch as the impugned order lacks very requisites of proper and valid order, the same needs to be set aside.
So ordered.
6.
Before I part with this order, I would like to mention that it shall be open to the Government to reconsider the matter and pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
If the petitioner might like to be heard in the matter, proper and effective hearing shall be given to him.
Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances of this case, it is further ordered that till such time fresh order is passed, petitioner shall be paid his full pension.
The department may, however, not release the amount of Rs. 44,640/- and return thereof shall depend upon the ultimate order, to be passed in the matter.
In other words, if the petitioner is exonerated of the charges, i.e. Disciplinary Authority agrees with the conclusion arrived at by the Enquiry Officer, the amount, referred to above, shall be paid to the petitioner forthwith.
It shall be at that stage open to the respondents to impose a cut in the pension of the petitioner.
But, as mentioned above, till such time, an order adverse to the petitioner is passed, he shall be paid full pension.
7.
Disposed of accordingly.