K Ramamoorthy, J - The writ petitioner is now claiming his right to be considered for the upgraduation as Technical Officer in the Zoology Department.
The third respondent who belongs to schedule caste claims that the post must be given to a schedule caste candidate and being a schedule caste candidate his case should be considered and the petitioner's case cannot be considered for the said post.
The petitioner became Senior Technical Assistant on 1351977.
The third respondent became the Senior Technical Assistant in October, 1991.
Upon considering his appointment as Senior Technical Assistant the Executive Council in its resolution dated 5101999 had noticed.
"The resolution be re-written to read as follows : 60/ Resolved that : 1 to 2 xxxxxxx the following recommendations of the Committee constituted by the Vice- Chancellor in pursuance of the decision of the Executive Council (vide EC Resolution No. 62 dated 861991) for examining the case of S/Sh.
Laxmi Chand and Bishalmani Thapliyal for promotion to Senior Technical Assistant and Technical Assistant respectively in the Department of Zoology by relaxing the requirement of minimum academic qualification (viz. Hr.
Sec. or equivalent examination with Science) and the case of Shri SN Sidhwani, Projectionist of the Department of Social Work for his placement in the pay scale of Rs. 2000- 3500 (personal to him), be accepted : Keeping in view the facts and after going through the qualification and length of service of S/Shri Laxmi Chand and Bishalmani Thapliyal the Committee recommended that in their cases also the academic qualifications be relaxed as recommended by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The Committee did not, however, feel very happy about the large scale of relaxation of educational qualifications for these Technical posts.
The Committee considered all aspects and decided to recommend the following guidelines for future."
2.
On 2.7.1990 the University of Delhi wrote to the Head of the Department of Zoology in the following terms :  "I am to inform you that the Executive Council vide its Resolution No. 15 dated 25.5.1990, on the recommendations of the Committee, constituted by the Council, at its meeting held on 2811990 resolved as under : (i) that the following posts of Senior Laboratory Attendants be upgraded to those of Junior Laboratory Assistants in the following Departments : Name of the Department  No. of posts Chemistry 6 Physics 6 Zoology 4 Anthropology 2 Geology 2 Kindly note that no new additional posts will be created at any level as a result of upgradation of above posts.
The Department should evolve suitable work norms, to ensure that the existing work-load was distributed and carried on amongst the existing staff.
It has also been decided that the upgraded posts of Junior Laboratory Assistants would be filled up, by following the existing procedures prescribed for filling up such posts of Junior Laboratory Assistants.
(ii) that all the Senior Technical Assistants or equivalent cadres in the Science Departments and in the Departments other than Science, whether in the core scale or in the selection grade be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 700- 1600 (pre-revised) revised to Rs. 2200-4000 under One Time Upward Movement Scheme w.e.f.
111986, after completion of 8 years of continuous regular satisfactory service till 141989, if otherwise eligible.
The pay of the concerned employees will be fixed at the same stage in the higher scale, as in the lower scale, provided the two stages are identical.
In case of those, who are drawing pay in the lower scale, at the stage, which is not a stage in the higher scale, the pay will be fixed in the stage, immediately next above in the higher scale.
The employee(s) concerned will have the option to opt for the next higher scale under One Time Upward Movement from the date of their eligibility or on the date of earning their next increment in the existing scale, within a month from the date of issue of this letter.
All concerned, may kindly be informed accordingly.
(iii) that the two posts of Technical Officer in each of the Science Departments, which have Centres of Advance Studies (i.e. Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology) and one post of Technical Officer in the remaining Science Departments (i.e. Anthropology and Geology) be created by upgrading the post of Senior Technical Assistants.
For purpose of upgradation of the posts of Senior Technical Assistants, other posts in the Science Department having the same grade would also the included.
Furthermore, the seniority list for the said purpose of promotion to the upgraded post would comprise of all the Senior Technical Assistants and other cadres having equivalent scale of pay prepared on the basis of their entry in the said scale of pay (the seniority list would be prepared for each Department separately).
The upgraded posts of Technical Officers shall be filled up by following the usual screening procedure.
No additional post of Senior Technical Assistant or equivalent cadres will be created at any level, as a result of the upgradation of the post of Senior Technical Assistant or equivalent cadres to that of Technical Officer."
3.
From this it is clear that two posts of Technical Officers were to be upgraded and that upgradation was to be done following usual screening procedure.
The post fell vacant on 1.7.1993 but no promotion was given to the petitioner.
Subsequently, the case of the petitioner was also recommended for promotion by the authorities concerned.
Ultimately, on 29101996 the Selection Committee of the Department of Zoology met and while considering other matters considered the case of the petitioner and had said :  "The Committee unanimously endorsed the decision of the Head of the Department for recommending the case of Shri RL Chawla for promotion as Technical Officer with retrospective effect of July 1, 1993."
4.
On 27121996 the Deputy Registrar (Estab.)
University of Delhi wrote the Head of the Department of Zoology in the following terms :  "Sub : Promotion of Shri Laxmi Chand, Senior Technical Assistant as Technical Officer.
Please refer to your letter No. Z/Estab(NT)PF-4/3 dated 10121996, on the subject above.
The matter has been considered and I am directed to inform you as under : (1) Shri KR Sharma was promoted as Technical Officer w.e.f.
15.10.1993.
He was granted antedation as Technical Officer (under Resolution No. 65 dated 2341994 of the Executive Council) on completion of his 20 years' service as Senior Technical Assistant.
On his retirement on 31101996, the substantive post of Technical Officer held by him has fallen vacant in your department.
(2) Shri RP Joshi completed 20 years of his service as Senior Technical Assistant on 20.5.1989 and therefore he was given promotion as personal to him under Executive Council Reso.
No. 65 dated 2341994 w.e.f.
111993 as Technical Officer.
The post of Senior Technical Assistant has fallen vacant on his retirement on 31111995 against which Mrs. Arun Bala has been promoted.
(3) The Executive Council has laid down : (a) Under Resolution No. 178(2) dated 9111991 circulated vide this office letter dated 11121991 that for promotion to the post of Technical Officer an employee must have 8 years experience as Senior Technical Assistant, and (b) under Resolution No. 200 dated 24.3.1983 The Committee considered the question of reservation @ 15% for Scheduled Castes and 7-1/2% for Scheduled Tribes both at the level of initial recruitment and promotion to the non-teaching posts.
After considering the matter from all its aspects, the Committee recommended that instructions of the Government of India with regard to posts which are filled by promotion could be accepted with the stipulation that an employee with at least five yeas' service in a cadre will be considered for promotion provided he has good confidential reports for the last three years as laid down by the Estab Committee of the University.
The Committee further recommended that the instructions of the Government of India be followed in respect of all non- teaching positions which are filled by open selection."
As the post of Technical Officer as per the roster is reserved for Scheduled Caste category, Shri Laxmi Chand, Senior Technical Assistant who belongs to Scheduled Caste category has therefore become eligible for consideration for promotion.
4.
As regards the roster position in respect of the persons who were promoted as Technical Officer in the past, it is stated as under :  "40-Point Roster :  Point in the Roster Category Name of the Official promoted Date of promotion 1.
Scheduled Caste C/F  2.
Un-reserved Sh. Prem Chand 26111990 3.
Ex-servicema Sh. OP Vishnoi 26.11.1990 4.
Scheduled Tribe C/F 5.
Un-reserved Sh. R.P.
Arora 411991 6.
Un-reserved Sh. KR Sharma 15.10.1993 I shall, therefore, be grateful if you kindly arrange to send your specific recommendations in respect of Shri Laxmi Chand, Senior Technical Assistant regarding his promotion to the post of Technical Officer for consideration of the Screening/Evaluation Committee at its next meeting."
The petitioner has presented the petition on 2211997 apprehending that the third respondent might be appointed and, therefore, prayed for the following reliefs :  "(i) a writ of prohibition or any other appropriate writ, order or direction may kindly be issued in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents directing the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 not to promote respondent No. 3 to the upgraded post of Technical Officer by superseding or by-passing the claim of the petitioner to the present available upgraded post of Technical Officer in the Department of Zoology, University of Delhi and further operation of letter dated 27/31.12.1996 No. Estab.III/Zool/TD/96/50421 may kindly be stayed; (ii) a writ of mandamus or any other order or direction or writ may kindly be issued in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents directing respondents No. 1 and 2 to promote the petitioner to the upgraded post of Technical officer w.e.f.
1.7.1993.
Or In the Alternative may direct the respondents No. 1 and 2 to give promotion to the petitioner w.e.f.
1.7.1993 by following the procedure of referring the case of the petitioner to the Screening/Evaluation Committee and then to the Executive Council, with consequential benefit including arrears of pay so arrived at accordingly, w.e.f.
1.7.1993; (iii) a writ of certiorari may kindly be issued in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents quashing 40-point roster insofar as, if the same is, applicable to the upgraded post of Technical Officer, being violative, discriminatory, arbitrary and whimsical of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India."
5.
The question that should be established by the University of Delhi i.e. the Appointing Authority having control over the affairs is whether the post should be given to a Scheduled Caste candidate.
Except stating that it is to be filled up by the Scheduled Caste candidate in the counter affidavit nothing has been mentioned.
Though in the letter dated 27121996 reference is made to 40-point roster, the University had not considered whether that could apply to a case of upgradation.
The University must be aware of the difference between the promotion and upgradation.
Promotion involves a candidate being appointed from the lower cadre to a higher cadre and by that process vacancy is created in the lower cadre but in the case of upgradation no vacancy is created.
The person serving in the lower cadre is given benefits of the upgradation and that is what has been done by the University in this case.
To such a situation, there is no question of applying of 40-point roster.
That is the mistake committed by the Deputy Registrar (Estab.)
while writing a letter dated 27121996.
The third respondent asserts that the Deputy Registrar had taken the correct view and since the upgradation of the post in 1990 no Scheduled Caste candidate can be appointed as Senior Technical Officer and the claim of the Scheduled Caste candidate has been ignored and now the chance of the third respondent is sought to be defeated by the claim of the petitioner.
According to the learned Counsel for the third respondent in law the claim of the third respondent alone shall be considered.
The learned Counsel for the third respondent referred to the judgments of the Supreme Court in T. Devadasan v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 179 and SS Sharma v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 588.
Having regard to the circumstances in which the two posts have been upgraded by the University in 1990 and the qualification of the third respondent the claim of the third respondent cannot at all be accepted.
The Supreme Court in Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Faculty Association, JT 1998(3) SC 233 : 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC), had considered the scope of the 40-point roster.
However, when we are concerned with the case of upgradation the ratio decidendi in the judgments of the Supreme Court would not at all apply and, therefore, I am of the view that it is not necessary to dilate of the facts and circumstances under which those cases had arisen.
The petitioner alone is entitled to be considered for the post of Technical Officer.
6.
The learned Counsel for the third respondent brought to my notice an Office Memorandum No.
36012/18/95-Estt.(Reg.)Pt.
II dated 1381997 from Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of Personnel and Training, which reads as under :  Sub : Reservation for the SCs/STs in promotion.
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to this Department's O.M.
No.
36012/37/93-Estt.
(SCT) dated 19.8.1993 clarifying that the Supreme Court had, in the Indira Sawhney case, permitted the reservation, for the Schedule Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in promotion, to continue for a period of five years from 16111992.
2.
Consequent to the judgment in Indira Sawhney's case, the Constitution was amended by the Constitution (Seventy-Seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 and Article 16(4A) was incorporated in the Constitution.
This Article enables the State to provide for reservation, in matters of promotion in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, which in the opinion of the State are not adequately represented in the services under the State.
3.
In pursuance of Article 16(4A), it has been decided to continue the reservation in promotion, as at present, for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the services/Posts under the Central Govt. beyond 16111997 till such time as the representation of each of the above two categories in each cadre reaches the prescribed percentage of reservation whereafter, the reservation in promotion shall continue to maintain the representation to the extent of the prescribed percentages for the respective categories.
4.
All Ministers/Departments are requested to urgently bring these instructions to the notice of all their attached/subordinate offices as also the Public Sector Undertaking and Statutory Bodies etc." 7.
The learned Counsel also referred to Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India.
There can be no exception to the view taken by the Government of India and the object enshrined in the Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India has to be enforced.
And that would depend upon the number of posts, the nature of appointment and other considerations.
Therefore, the Office Memorandum dated 1381997 is not relevant for the present discussion.
8.
Accordingly, I am of the view of the Departmental Promotion Committee should consider the case of the petitioner for upgradation w.e.f.
1.7.1993 having regard to his qualification and having regard to the recommendations already made on 29101996.
The University shall consider and pass appropriate orders on or before 3041999.
9.
The writ petition stands allowed to the above extent.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.