Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The Guru Nanak Dev University-respondent No. 5 issued a Prospectus inviting applications for admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses i.e. MD/MS Dental in the Government Medical Colleges situated in the State of Punjab.
The Prospectus provided that of the total available seats, 60% would be filed in on the basis of the result of an Entrance Test from amongst the eligible non-PCMS/PCMS, MS (Dental)/PDES in-service candidates, whereas the remaining 40% seats were to be filled in the like manner from amongst fresh MBBS graduates.
The petitioner took the Entrance Test held on May 24, 1998 and on the declaration of the result on Ist June, 1998 was declared successful on having received the requisite qualifying marks.
The interview for the 60% in-service candidates and the 40% fresh graduates had been fixed for 22nd June, 1998 and 23rd June, 1998 respectively but on account of some litigation in this Court, the dates were changed to 22nd September, 1998 and 23rd September, 1998 instead.
The petitioner being a fresh graduate was, accordingly, interviewed on 23rd September, 1998 and being at merit position No. 50 opted for and was granted admission in the MD course in the speciality of Dermatology.
He, thereafter, represented to the respondents vide Annexure P-2 dated 6th October, 1998 that he had been compelled to join the MD course in Dermatology as the details with regard to the unfilled seats in the reserved categories which would have been transferred to the General Category, would have increased the number of seats available in MD (Medicine) course which was his first choice, had not been released prior to the interview on 23rd September, 1998.
On finding no redressal from the University, the petitioner has come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, respondent Nos. 1 to 3, 4, 5 and 6 have filed their respective written statements.
In the written statement filed by the first three respondents, it has been pleaded that the petitioner had accepted admission in Dermatology as per the seat offered to him on his merit and in this view of the matter, he could not claim a seat in any other discipline as stipulated in Clause 6 (iii) of the prospectus pertaining to the choice of Subject and College to be made by a candidate.
It has been admitted that a number of seats in the 40% quota from amongst the reserved categories had remained vacant as qualified candidates were not available but it has been explained that the offer of the seat had been made to the petitioner as per the joint merit list of all the available seats including those left unfilled.
This fact has been highlighted even more emphatically in the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
3.
Mr. Chetan Mittal, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner was at serial No. 50 in the combined merit list for fresh graduates, whereas candidates lower to him in merit had been given admission to the M.D.
(Medicine) (which was the petitioner's first choice) and as such he ought to have been adjusted against that speciality.
It has also been urged that a large number of seats which had fallen to the share of the in-service candidates ha also remained vacant after the interviews for that category on 22nd September, 1998 and those seats had been transferred to be filled in from amongst the 40% quota of fresh graduates (the interviews for which had been held on 23rd September, 1998) and against which the petitioner's case had also to be considered.
It has, nevertheless, been argued that had the Scheduled Caste candidates from amongst the fresh graduates been interviewed first of all under the 40% quota as had been done in the case of the 60% quota, the petitioner could have waited for his chance in the MD (Medicine) Course.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents has, however relied upon their written statement and have urged that as per the written statement, the petitioner had been offered admission in the speciality of his choice as per his merit of the combined merit list of all the candidates and that in any case, no candidate from the general category had been awarded admission in the discipline MD (Medicine) nor had been made as a party to the present proceedings.
5.
It would be evident that the petitioner's case would rest on the relevant provisions of the Prospectus.
In sub-clause (ii) of Clause 6, it has been clearly provided that allotment of Subjects and Colleges would be made on the basis of merit obtained by the candidate in the Entrance Test whereas Sub- clause (iii) provides that once admission has been made, no change of Speciality/Institution would be allowed though the candidate may choose to remain on the waiting list for a particular speciality after forgoing selection.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner having opted for MD (Dermatology) on 23rd September, 1998 was precluded from changing the speciality or college subsequently.
A Full Bench of this Court in Anil Jain v. The Controller of Examinations, M.D.U.
Rohtak, 1997(6) S.L.R.
98 has dealt with the question posed herein.
The Bench was called upon to construe a similar provision for admission to the Post Graduate course and it was observed that "this provision enables a candidate to choose one of the available courses at the time of interview.
He can at the same time, get himself included in the waiting list in any other discipline.
If a candidate is not getting a seat in the discipline of his choice, he may refuse to join any other discipline and prefer to be wait-listed for admission to the discipline of his choice.
A candidate included in the waiting list can get admission in the subject depending on the inter-se merit of candidates included in the waiting list.
Many of the petitioners while securing admission to one of the disciplines depending on the availability, could opt to any other discipline of their choice.
Subject-wise wait list in order of merit was displayed.
When vacancies arise in the subjects opted by them, they were given admission to the course of their choice.
After having secured admission in the discipline of their choice they now state that additional seats or vacancies which arose in better disciples should have been offered to all the candidates on the basis of merit.
Such a procedure is not borne out from the prospectus".
The Full Bench relied upon the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anand S Biji v. State of Kerala, 1993(2) S.L.R.
547 : 1993(3) SCT 268 (SC) in support of its decision.
6.
Mr. Mittal has, nevertheless, attempted to distinguish the aforesaid decisions on the ground that as per note 1 to Clause 5 dealing with reservations, it had been provided that the seats left vacant from the All India Quota and released by the Director General Health Services, New Delhi, were to be filled in strictly on merit from the combined merit list and has argued that the same principle should apply to seats left vacant in one quota which were shifted to the other as per Rules.
This argument lacks merit for the reason that the note refers only to those seats which were to be released by the DG HS, New Delhi, as these seats had not been offered to any candidate at the very initial stage and would become available only after they had been released.
7.
Mr. Mittal's argument with regard to the filling up of seats which had remained vacant on account of the non-availability of the Scheduled Candidates must also be rejected.
The respondents have clearly stated that all the seats which had remained vacant from the 60% in-service candidates and the reserved categories had been offered to all candidates including the petitioner as per the combined merit list.
In the light of the above discussion, the petitioner cannot be allowed to change his choice of speciality on seats which might become available subsequently.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in this merit petition.
Dismissed.
No order to costs.
Petition dismissed.