Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined service as a Beldar on workcharge basis in the respondent-department on 11th June, 1973.
At the time of his recruitment in service he had given his Date of Birth as 20th August, 1949, which fact had been duly verified by the Lambardar of his village.
His services were regularised w.e.f.
Ist April, 1978 vide order dated 23rd February, 1982, subject to medical fitness.
The petitioner, accordingly, appeared before the Civil Surgeon, Jalandhar and he recorded his opinion Annexure R-2/1 dated 31st May, 1982 that as per the petitioner's statement, he was 33 years of age but by appearance, he looked to be 45 years of age on that date.
The Executive Engineer concerned assessed his age at 45 years vide Annexure P-2 dated 24th April, 1997 as on 31st May, 1982 and, accordingly, directed that he be retired on 31st May, 1997.
The petitioner has now approached this Court by way of the present writ petition on the ground that as his service book indicated his Date of Birth as 20th August, 1949, he could not be retired before the 31st August, 2009.
2.
While issuing notice of motion on 15th May, 1997, this Court had directed that the petitioner was not to be retired from service till further orders and as a consequence of this order, the petitioner continues to be in service even today.
3.
A reply has been filed by the respondents and by way of preliminary objection, it has been urged that as disputed questions of fact were involved with regard to the petitioner's age, the writ petition was not a proper remedy for the redressal of his grievance.
It has also been pleaded that the Medical Certificate Annexure R-2/1 had been thumb marked by the petitioner in token of its acceptance and as such, he could not now urge that he was unaware of its contents.
4.
I have gone through the record with the help of the learned counsel for the parties.
Admittedly, the Date of Birth with respect to the petitioner entered in the Service Book on the basis of the certificate issued by the Lambardar of the village is 20th August, 1949.
The respondents have changed this date on the basis of the Certificate Annexure R-2/1 dated 31st May, 1982 which admittedly had determined his age on the basis of his appearance.
To my mind, the decision aforesaid cannot be relied upon as appearances are often deceptive.
A person may be prematurely gray, a fact very visible to a doctor, but he may have a spring in his step, which belies his age.
It is not the respondents' case in the written statement that any medical examination with regard to the determination of the petitioner's age had been performed and all that is evident from Annexures R-2/1 ad R-2/2 is that the petitioner looked to be 45 years old but was medically fit.
5.
It is true that the respondents have questioned the maintainability of the writ petition in the preliminary objection.
In the present writ petition, however, I do not propose to go into the question posed and to determine the petitioner's age.
I am, however, of the opinion that the writ petition is to be allowed on a short ground that the order Annexure P-2 is based on no evidence as the attempt to retire the petitioner is based only on his appearance.
It will, therefore, be open to the respondents, should it be necessary for the petitioner to approach this Court again to raise all relevant points.
6.
This writ petition is allowed, the order Annexure P-2 is quashed and a direction is issued that the petitioner will be re-examined by the Civil Surgeon, Jalandhar, who after a proper medical examination which may include ossification Test, would determine his age and convey the same to the department.
It is further directed that the aforesaid examination will be made within a period of one month from the date, that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
No order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.