SB Sinha, J - The appellant who was the writ petitioner has preferred the appeal being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by a learned single Judge of this Court in Writ Petition No. 2212 of 1997 whereby and whereunder the same was allowed in part.
2.
The appellant holds a substantive post of Deputy General Manager under the first respondent.
On 1194 he was entrusted with the job of General Manager (Works) (Acting).
He was also appointed as part-time Chief Vigilance Officer on 16596.
Allegedly while he was acting in the later capacity submitted a report to the Chairman-cum-Managing Director as regard the reasons for sufferance of losses by the company in terms whereof a committee was constituted.
3.
It is evident from the said appointment letter of the petitioner as Chief Vigilance Officer that such offer was made upon obtaining the approval of the Central Vigilance Commission.
It is also alleged that a discussion was held between the CMD and the petitioner on 14797 but as the decision taken in the meeting was not implemented, the petitioner by a letter dated 22797 requested the CMD to implement the same.
4.
The petitioner was directed by the CMD to hand over the charge of Chief Vigilance Officer which was complied with.
An office order was circulated by the General Manager (Material & Personnel) informing the writ petitioner that he had been lieived of his the then assignment of General Manager (Works) (Acting) and redesignated as Officer on Special Duty.
Thereafter the writ petition was filed.
The Ld.
Trial Judge disposed of the writ petition by means of the impugned order.
(sic)  5.
From a perusal of the order passed by a learned Single Judge it appears that the only contention raised before him was as to whether the appellant who held a substantive rank of Deputy General Manager could not be designated as O.S.D.
as was sought to be done by the impugned order dated 24.10.97.
6.
Mr. Mazumdar, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that a plea of malice in fact has been raised by the appellant.
Our attention has been drawn to the statements made in the writ application as also the affidavit-in-opposition to show that the petitioner had been relieved of his duties on certain charges which had not been proved.
According to the learned Counsel, the petitioner had made out a clear case of victimisation as also arbitrary and mala fide acts on the part of the respondent No. 2 but despite the same, the learned trial Judge had not addressed himself to the said question, and merely granted him the relief that he should be posted as Deputy Manager, to which he was entitled to.
The learned Counsel submits that for the purpose of considering as to whether acts of mala fide on the part of the respondents has been proved or not, the attending circumstances can be looked into.
The learned Counsel submitted that the preliminary enquiry report which turned out to be a CBI report but as the same was withdrawn, mala fide on the part of the respondents stood proved.
The impugned order, according to the learned Counsel, was passed by the respondents with an ill motive.
It has been submitted that as the petitioner was appointed as Chief Vigilance Officer with the approval of the Vigilance Commission, he could not have been stripped of that office without obtaining any consent from the said Commission.
He further submitted that although the petitioner was appointed on an ad-hoc basis in the post of General Manager, one ad-hoc employee could not have been replaced by another ad-hoc employee.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on State of Haryana v. Piara Singh & Ors. reported in AIR 1992 SC 2130 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC).
7.
Mr. Mazumdar has also placed strong reliance on M Sankaranarayanan, IAS v. State of Karnataka reported in AIR 1993 SC 763 : 1993(2) SCT 424 (SC), NK Singh v. Union of India reported in AIR 1995 SC 423 : 1995(1) SCT 269 (SC)., The Manager, Govt Branch Press and Anr. v. DB Belliappa reported in AIR 1979 SC 429 and Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and Anr. reported in AIR 1978 SC 597.
8.
Mr. Basu, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents, on the other hand, submitted that the petitioner holds a substantive post in the rank of Deputy General Manager, and, thus, he cannot have any legal right to hold the post of Acting General Manager.
It has been submitted that the plea of mala fide had been abandoned before the learned Single Judge and, the same cannot be permitted to be raised in this appeal.
9.
It is admitted that the First Respondent is a sick industry and as such no post can now be filled up on a permanent basis.
It is true that the petitioner in his writ application has made certain allegations against the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Respondent No. 1 but unfortunately, he had not been impleaded as a party in the writ application in his personal capacity.
As the incumbent for the post of Chairman-cum-Managing Director was not impleaded in the personal capacity, he could not file any affidavit-in- opposition.
A plea of malice of fact, if disputed, may have been tried on evidence.
The parties in such a situation may be relegated to a suit.
See The Regional Manager v. Pawan Kumar Dubey reported in 1976(3) SCC 334, wherein it has been stated :-  "We repeat, that before any such case of `malice in law' can be accepted the person who alleges it must satisfactorily establish it on proved or admitted facts as it was in Kulkarni's case.
Where the allegations are of malice in fact, which are generally seriously disputed and the case cannot be satisfactorily decided without a detailed adduction of evidence or cross- examination of witnesses, Courts will leave the party aggrieved to an ordinary civil suit.
The rule, relating to exercise of discretionary power under Article 226, is also well settled."
10.
It is now a well settled principle of law that a plea of mala fide must be alleged and strictly proved.
A finding on mala fide cannot be arrived at on vague allegations and un-supported by cogent materials.
With a view to allow the person against whom such allegations have been made, it is necessary to implead him as a party in the proceeding in his personal capacity.
Reference (Reliance ?)
in this connection has been placed on All India State Bank Officers' Federation and Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. reported in 1997(9) SCC 151 : 1997(1) SCT 91 (SC).
Admittedly, the petitioner had no legal right to hold the post of Acting General Manager.
It is not the case of the appellant that an order of reversion has been passed against him by way of punishment.
Thus, the legality of the impugned order could not be questioned on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
11.
In the instant case, the petitioner has not impleaded the incumbent of respondent No. 2 in his personal capacity, no malice of fact against him, thus could be adjudicated upon.
12.
In I K Mishra v Union of India & Ors. reported in 1997(6) SCC 228 : 1997(4) SCT 163 (SC), it has been held :-  "Lastly it was urged that the order compulsorily retiring the appellant was a mala fide order as the same was passed at the instance of Shri Manazure Muastafa Siddiqui, Accountant General, M.P. who bore grudge against the appellant.
This argument is being noted only to be rejected.
It may be noticed that the record before us does not show that Shri Manazure Muastafa Siddiqui was party to the suit.
In fact he was not impleaded by name in the suit.
Further, the allegations against Shri Siddiqui were totally vague.
No inference of mala fide could be drawn from such allegations.
In the absence of full facts and particulars in the plaint in respect of allegation of mala fides the order compulsorily retiring the appellant cannot be held to be a mala fide order."
13.
The petitioner might have a valid reason to feel aggrieved but in absence of a legal right, he cannot be granted the reliefs prayed for by him.
In any event, in absence of a legal right the nature of job to be performed by the concerned officer should be left to the discretion of the competent authority.
14.
In NK Singh v. Union of India reported in AIR 1995 SC 423, the Apex Court observed :-  "Assessment of the quality of men is to be made by the superiors taking into account several factors including suitability of the person for a particular post and exigencies of administration.
Several imponderables requiring formation of a subjective opinion in that sphere may be involved, at times.
The only realistic approach is to leave it to the wisdom of the hierachical superiors to make that decision.
Unless the decisions is vitiated by mala fides or infraction of any professed norm of principle governing the transfer, which can be scrutinised judicially there are no judicially manageable standards for scrutinising all transfers and the Courts lack the necessary expertise for personnel management of all government departments.
This must be left, in public interest, to the departmental heads subject to the limited judicial scrutiny indicated."
15.
In this view of the matter, we are not in a position to consider the question as to whether the impugned order should have been passed at all or not.
To the extent, the impugned order visited the petitioner with civil consequences the same has been set aside by the learned trial Judge.
16.
It is not a case where a malice in law has been pleaded.
In the Manager, Government Branch Press & Anr. v. DB Belliappa reported in 1979(1) SCC 477, the Apex Court was dealing with a case of temporary Government servant wherein an order of termination of service was passeed.
In the instant case it has not been stated that the power has been exercised for unauthorised purpose.
The Court in such a situation, in our opinion, cannot grant any relief to the appellant.
It is also not a case where the decision of Piara Singh (supra) is applicable.
As indicated herein before, it is for the employer to see as to what job should be taken from a particular employee.
17.
We, however, having regard to a peculiar facts and circumstances of this case would observe that it would be open to the petitioner to file an appropriate representation which may be considered on its own merits by the competent authority and we are sure that the same would be considered strictly in accordance with law and without any bias or prejudice against him.
18.
For the reasons aforementioned, this appeal fails and dismissed accordingly.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.