GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to declare the result of the selection held for recruitment of Head Teachers/Central Head Teachers.
He has also prayed that the respondents may be directed to hold interview for recruitment on the posts of Block Primary Education Officers.
2.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner and other JBT Teachers, who applied for recruitment as Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P.1, were interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee on 981996 and 1381996 but the result of selection has not been notified so far.
The petitioner's grievance is that by withholding the result of selection, the respondents have deprived him and other similarly situated persons of their legitimate right to be considered for appointment as Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers.
3.
In the written statement filed by them through Smt. Daljit Kaur Chadha, Director of Public Instructions (Primary), Punjab, respondent No. 1 to 3 have made an attempt to justify the withholding of the result of selection by stating that the advertisement Annexure P.1 was issued due to inadvertence.
According to them, the Punjab Educational Services Class-III Rules, 1995 do not provide for appointment of Head Teachers, Central Head Teachers and Block Primary Education Officers by direct recruitment and, therefore, the selection process was not completed.
They have further averred that under the Punjab Educational Services Class-III Rules, 1997 (notified on 1161998), 25% posts of Head Teachers are required to be filled by direct recruitment and the petitioner can be considered as and when fresh recruitment is notified.
4.
Yesterday, when the case was heard, we had expressed our apprehension that the written statement of the respondents does not contain a correct statement of facts regarding the method of appointment on the posts of Head Teachers, Central Head Teachers and Block Primary Education Officers.
Upon this, Shri Khosla sought a day's adjournment.
Today, he placed before us a photostat copy of the circular dated 1161992 issued by the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Education which lays down the method of recruitment of Head Teachers etc.
He also categorically stated that there does not exist anything like the Punjab Educational Services Class-III Rules, 1995, as mentioned on page 2 of the written statement and further that the Punjab State Education Class-III (School Cadre) Rules (as they stand after amendment made by the notification No. GSR-81 Const./Article 309/Administration (1) 79/dated 23.6.1979) prescribe the mode of recruitment only on the post of Block Primary Education Officer and they do not deal with the recruitment of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers.
5.
At this stage, we may make reference to the decision of this Court in Nirmal Prabhakar v. State of Punjab, 1997(1) R.S.J.
374 : 1996(4) SCT 163 (P&H).
In that case, the court had, after taking cognizance of the instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide circular dated 1161992, held that recruitment on the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers can be made in accordance with those instructions but the post of Block Primary Education Officer will have to be filled in accordance with the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
6.
In our opinion the stand of the respondents that advertisement Annexure PI was issued by inadvertence and the result of selection cannot be declared because the Punjab Educational Services Class-III Rules, 1995 do not provide for appointment of Head Teachers etc. by direct recruitment will have to be regarded as totally erroneous and contrary to the instructions issued by the government as well as the decision of this Court in Nirmal Prabhakar's case (supra).
As a logicaly corollary, it will have to be held that the process of selection initiated with the issuance of advertisement Annexure P.1 did not suffer from any legal or constitutional infirmity which could justify withholding of the declaration of final result.
Indeed, the respondents have not put forward any other reason to justify the withholding of declaration of result of the interviews held in August, 1996.
Therefore, we consider it just and proper to direct the respondents to declare the result of the selection and make appointment on the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers by direct recruitment.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to declare the result of selection held in pursuance of advertisement Annexure P.1 and make appointment of suitable candidates keeping in view the ratio of direct recruitment and promotion enumerated in Appendix 'B' annexed with the circular dated 1161992.
This shall be done within 4 months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
It is, however, made clear that this direction of ours shall be treated as confined to the posts of Head Teachers and Central Head Teachers and recruitment to the posts of Block Primary Education Officers shall be made keeping in view the judgment of this Court in Nirmal Prabhakar v. State of Punjab (supra).
Petition allowed.