Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The Guru Nanak Dev University (hereinafter called "the University") issued on advertisement for filling in 30 seats to the B.Pharmacy Course.
The petitioner who had passed her 10+2 examination which made her eligible for the Entrance Test, applied for the same and was declared as having passed on the notification of the result on 1471998.
The interview was, thereafter, held and the merit list of successful candidates belonging to the General Category was displayed by the University on 2171997.
The petitioner's name figured at serial No. 4 in the waiting list.
The thirty seats that had been advertised were sub-divided into block of 10 seats each to be filled in from General Category students, SC/ST/BSC/Rural Area and from amongst NRI/NRI sponsored candidates.
The University, however, took a decision on 14.7.1997, whereby it created 5 additional payment seat for the course in question.
As some candidates did not join the course, the petitioner being a candidate on the waiting list, was granted admission against one of the payment seats and she, accordingly, deposited a sum of Rs. 25,000/- on 3071997 which was the last date for admissions.
It is the petitioner's case that after she had taken admission four students from the merit list namely Arvind Bhardwaj, Reepudaman Singh, Ruchi Grover and Tarsem Singh either did not join the course or left midway, whereas two students who had been on the waiting list namely Pardip Bhatia and Worsana Pangassa also did not accept admission though it had been offered to them.
The petitioner, thereupon, submitted a representation Annexure P-3 dated 2811998 to the University that some free seats had fallen vacant in the General Category and that she be adjusted against one of them.
This representation was forwarded by the Head of the Department of the University.
The petitioner's representation was, however, rejected on the ground under order dated 421998 that as per the University Rules, a category could not be changed after admission had been accepted.
The petitioner, thereafter, submitted another representation Annexure P-4 dated 2021998 requesting the Registrar of the University to identify the rule under which her request had been declined and on receiving no response, has filed the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents and it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been granted admission specifically against one of the 5 additional payment seats that had been created and she had also attended classes under the category.
It has also been pleaded that the last date for admission to the course with the special permission of the Vice Chancellor was 30.7.1998 and as the petitioner had made a request vide Annexure P-3 dated 2811998 about six months after the completion of the admission process, her request could not be acceded to.
It has, however, been pleaded that though, there was no specific provision in the University Calendar or in the Prospectus with regard to the order dated 421998, yet the Vice Chancellor was fully competent to pass such order in public interest and it was therefore proper that once a candidate had been admitted to a particular category, no change from that category to any other category was permissible after the process of admission was over.
3.
Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the University has put on record a communication dated 9.10.1998 from the Head of the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, in which it has been pointed out that Arvind Bhardwaj had not attended any class after depositing the fee, whereas Reepudaman Singh had stopped attending classes after 2181997, Ruchi Grover after 29.9.1998 whereas Tarsem Singh who had been in the list of selected candidates, had not turned up and had informed the department that he was not interested in joining the course and that the seat thus left vacant had been offered to the next eligible candidate in the waiting list.
An additional affidavit has also been filed today in Court by Dr. MP Mahajan, Head of the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, to aver that of the 10 candidates belonging to the general category, nine had deposited their fee within the stipulated period and Tarsem Singh who was at serial No. 10 had failed to do so and had informed the University that he was not interested in joining the course and, as such, this seat had been offered to Harpreet Singh Bhasin, who was at serial No. 1 in the waiting list and he too had deposited his fee on 24th July, 1997, with the result that all the 10 general category seats had been filled in by 30th July, 1997, which was the last date for admission with the special permission of the Vice Chancellor.
4.
Mr. RS Bajaj, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has raised primarily one argument in the course of the hearing.
He has pointed out that though the petitioner had taken admission against one of the additional payment seats created by the University yet on account of the fact that some candidates had been allowed to shift their category from payment to free seats even after the last date of admission i.e. 30th July, 1997, the petitioner should also be accorded the same treatment.
He has also pointed out that the respondent had taken an ambivalent stand as was evident in the contents of the statement filed earlier and the additional affidavit filed today in Court.
Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent University has however argued that there was no departure between the two replies/affidavits as the one filed in Court today was only clarificatory in nature to settle the issue beyond doubt.
He has pointed out that though in the first affidavit it did find mention that all 10 candidates of the general category had deposited their fee within the stipulated period, whereas in the additional affidavit it had been pointed out that nine of the ten had done so, yet even accepting the latter position, the petitioner was still not entitled to change her category from payment to the free seat in the light of the fact that Harpreet Singh Bhasin who was at serial No. 1 had deposited his fee on 24th July, 1997.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition must fail.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner had sought and obtained admission specifically against one of the additional payment seats that had been created and that no attempt has been made by the University to deprive her of this seat.
The question now arises as to whether the petitioner should be entitled to change her category from a payment seat to a free seat in the light of the facts that have come on record.
In the additional affidavit filed today in Court, it has been pointed out that nine of the 10 general category seats that had been initially offered had been filled in within the stipulated date as the students had deposited their fee within that time, whereas Tarsem Singh who was at serial No. 10 in the merit list had declined to do so and Harpreet Singh Bhasin who was at serial No. 1 in the waiting list had been offered this seat and he had deposited his fee on 24th July, 1997.
To my mind, the seat vacated by Tarsem Singh could not be offered to the petitioner and that any seat which fell vacant after 30.1.1997, which was the last date for admission could not be filled in under any circumstances.
6.
Mr. Bajaj has, however, argued that on account of the discordance between the two affidavits it was appropriate that the record be summoned to ascertain as to the actual date on which Harpreet Singh Bhasin had deposited his fee.
To my mind, this exercise is not required for the reason that both the affidavits do show that all 10 seats had been filled up by 30th July, 1997, with the result that on that date no free seat in the general category was available against which the petitioner could seek admission.
Moreover, it is clear that the petitioner had been granted admission specifically against an additional payment seat, and she can therefore make no grievance against the University on the plea that some right has been infringed.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.