VK Bali, J (Oral) - Petitioner, who retired as member of the Punjab Public Service Commission, through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-State to pay him his post retiral benefits with 18% interest from the date the same became due till their actual realisation.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner became a member of the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short PPSC) on December 1, 1990 from which post he retired on November 30, 1996.
For conditions of his service that concededly contained provisions with regard to pension as well, he was governed by the rules known as Punjab Public Service Commission (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1958.
Regulation 8(3)(i)(ii) and 8(4) which are relevant for the purpose of adjudicating this matter, read as under :-  "8(3)(i) : A member, who at the date of his appointment as such was not in the service of the Central or a State Government, shall on his ceasing to hold office as such member be paid a pension of six hundred rupees per month in the case of Chairman and five hundred rupees per month in the case of a member : Provided that no such pension shall be payable to a member - (a) unless he has completed not less than three years of service for pension as such member; or (b) he has been removed from office as such member.
(ii) pension under this sub-regulation shall be payable to a member for life : Provided that no such pension shall be payable during any period for which such member may, after his retirement as such, hold office as the Chairman or member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of the Punjab Public Service Commission or of any other State Public Service Commission.
Explanation : Where a member, who has completed not less than three years of service for pension, resigns from his post and such resignation is accepted by the Governor, pension shall be payable to such member in accordance with these regulations.
8(4) The Chairman or member, who is entitled for pension under clause (3) shall also be entitled to graded relief in pension at the rates admissible to Punjab Government pensioners."
These rules were amended vide notification, Annexure P-2 dated February 14, 1992.
The case of the petitioner is that by virtue of notifications, Annexure P-2, his post retiral benefits have been reduced.
3.
Mr. Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner, on the basis of proviso to Article 318 of the Constitution of India, contends that conditions of service of a member of the PPSC cannot be varied to his dis-advantage after his appointment.
Article 318 along with proviso reads as under :-  "318.
In the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, the President and, in the case of a State Commission, the Governor of the State may by regulations - (a) determine the number of members of Commission and their conditions of service; and (b) make provisions with respect to the number of members of the staff of the Commission and their conditions of service : Provided that the conditions of service of a member of Public Service Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment."
4.
During the course of arguments, it could not be disputed that by virtue of notification, Annexure P-2 post retiral benefits of the petitioner have been reduced.
In other words, the service conditions of the petitioner with regard to pension, as envisaged under Regulations 8(3) and (4) have been varied to his clear disadvantage vide notification, Annexure P-2.
Mr. Sivia, learned counsel for the State, in his endeavour to oppose this petition, only urges that notification, Annexure P-2, has not been specifically challenged and that in itself is enough to disentitle the petitioner to any relief.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, this Court is of the view that proviso to Article 318 does not permit change in conditions of service of a member of the Public Service Commission to his disadvantage after his appointment.
In view of clear mandate of law, as envisaged in proviso to Article 318 of the Constitution of India, notification, Annexure P-2 cannot possibly apply to those who had since already been appointed prior to the said notification.
As mentioned above, petitioner was appointed as member of the PPSC on December 1, 1990.
Thus, notification, Annexure P-2, dated February 14, 1992, cannot apply with regard to conditions of service retrospectively.
This notification shall apply only to those who were appointed on the date of notification, Annexure P-2 or thereafter.
The contention of learned State counsel that this petition should be dismissed simply because Annexure P-2 has not been challenged, needs to be summarily rejected.
The petitioner is simply basing his claim on the proviso contained in Article 318 of the Constitution of India.
He is not styling notification, Annexure P-2 to be illegal or against the Constitution.
His only contention is that notification, Annexure P-2 will not apply in his case by virtue of proviso to Article 318.
In these circumstances, it was not at all necessary for the petitioner to challenge notification, Annexure P-2.
6.
For the reasons stated above, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondent-State to calculate the pension of the petitioner in view of provisions contained in Regulations of 1958 and make over the arrears of all post retiral benefits, admissible under the rules, to the petitioner within one month from today.
Inasmuch as post retiral benefits have been denied to the petitioner against the mandate of the Constitution of India, this Court is of the clear view that he is entitled to interest calculated at the rate of 12% per annum.
Let the arrears of interest be also calculated and made over to the petitioner along with other post retiral benefits.
7.
At this stage Mr. Kumar has informed this Court that the petitioner has also claimed gratuity.
The court is not inclined to go into this question at this stage.
Let the petitioner make representation for grant of gratuity under the rules to the Government and if the same is rejected, the petitioner shall be at liberty to file a fresh petition for grant of gratuity.
Petition allowed.