VK Bali, J (Oral) - CB Sarot, a Lecturer in Mathematics through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, calls in question his transfer order dated June 26, 1998, Annexure P-6, received by him on July 9, 1998 and, thus, prays that the said order of his transfer be quashed by issuing a writ in the nature of certiorari.
2.
Brief facts, on which the relief aforesaid is sought to rest, reveal that in a span of about two years ie 1971996 to 26.6.1998, petitioner had been transferred six times.
His transfer orders, as reflected in paragraph 3 of the petition, read as follows :-  Sr. No. From To Dated 1.
Govt. College Hodal Distt.
Faridabad Govt. College, Nalwa District Hisar.
1571996 2.
Govt. College, Nalwa District Hisar Govt. College, Tauru District Gurgaon.
30.8.1996 3.
Govt. College, Tauru Distt.
Gurgaon Govt. College, Tigaon Distt.
Faridabad 1961997 4.
Govt. College, Tigaon Distt.
Faridabad Govt. College, Tauru Distt.
Gurgaon 1261997 5.
Govt. College, Tauru (Gurgaon) Govt. College, Hodal (Faridabad) 111998 6.
Govt. College, Hodal (Faridabad) Govt. College, Loharu (Bhiwani) 26.6.1998 3.
It is the positive case of the petitioner that he has been transferred in a period of less than two years at the instance of local M.L.A., Hathin Constituency, who is residing at Hodal from where the petitioner was recently transfered.
It is further pleaded that petitioner has been transfered with mala fide intentions of respondent No. 3 as the family members of the petitioner supported the candidate belonging to Congress Party during the elections held in 1996 and immediately thereafter the process of transfer of petitioner started.
Vide last transfer order, referred to above, petitioner was transferred at a distance of more than 300 kms.
It is further the positive case of petitioner that respondent No. 3 had given a note in writing regarding the transfer of the petitioner.
It is further pleaded that these transfers were made without any administrative exigencies and no public interest at all was involved.
4.
Without disputing the transfer orders, referred to above, cause of petitioner has still been opposed by pleading that in transfer matters the court should not interfere as the transfer is a matter of administrative discretion.
Insofar as respondent No. 3 is concerned, it has been stated in the written statement filed by him that he was residing at Hodal.
In July, 1996 when he visited his residence at Hodal, the people of Hodal met him and requested for the transfer of the petitioner from Hodal to other place.
Respecting the opinion of the people he requested the Hon'ble Education Minister, Haryana, for his transfer from Hodal.
The petitioner was transferred from Hodal in July, 1996 after a longer stay.
Thereafter, in the month of June, 1998, respondent No. 3 sent a note for the transfer of petitioner to the Hon'ble Education Minister, Haryana.
The remaining four transfers, i.e., Sr. No. 2 to 5, as mentioned above, were never requested by him.
He had no grudge against the petitioner or his family.
Mr. Sham, real brother of the petitioner, who is employed in PWD (Public Health) Department, Haryana, is still posted and working at Hodal.
Had respondent No. 3 had any grudge against the petitioner and his family, he would have got Shri Sham also transferred from Hodal to other place.
5.
While issuing rule on 1211999, the Division Bench consisting of the Chief Justice and HS Bedi, J, passed the following order :  "Rule.
On the plea of mala fides, we have perused the written statement of respondent No. 3.
The record to show nature of grievance of local people to show nature of grievance of local people of Hodal, if any, is not forthcoming.
In these circumstances, operation of the impugned order dated 26th June, 1998, Annexure P-6, in respect of the petitioner, is hereby stayed.
The records shall be produced at the time of the hearing.
List the case for directions on July 8, 1999.
The matter came up for hearing before me on 8.7.1999 when following order was passed :- "Despite specific direction contained in the order passed by the Division Bench admitting this petition to regular hearing records have not been made available to the Court.
Mr. Balwinder Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Haryana State seeks time to comply with the direction contained in order dated 1211999.
On his request, adjourned to 1571999.
Records must be produced on the date fixed."
6.
It is unfortunate that neither someone has put in appearance on behalf of the respondent-State or for that matter, respondent No. 3 nor records of this case have been produced.
The records were called, as would be suggestive from the Bench order dated 1211999 to find out if there was any complaint made by the people of Hodal preceding the transfer of the petitioner as is the case of respondent No. 3.
The respondents, by remaining absent and not producing the relevant records, it appears to me, are making an endeavour so as not to show the records to this Court.
Obviously, an adverse inference has to be drawn against the respondents.
The stark fact that the petitioner was made a shuttle cock transferring him for as many as six times within less than two years and at least two orders out of six, having been managed by respondent No. 3, last one being at a distance of about 300 kms., this Court is left with no choice but for to quash transfer order of the petitioner.
Annexure P-6.
So ordered.
This petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 3000/-.
Petition allowed.