Harjit Singh Bedi, J - Respondent No. 2 - The Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training issued a prospectus for the filling up of 60 seats in the Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
The College, respondent No. 3 received a communication Annexure P-1 dated 6121997 from the Board that private Institutions (such as the College) were to be allowed to fill in 5% of the sanctioned strength from amongst NRI/NRI sponsored seats and on this basis three seats were earmarked for this category.
The petitioner applied for admission, as per Annexure P-1, within time for one of the seats.
The respondents, however, admitted the petitioner and four other candidates against this category.
As per the prescribed procedure, the College was to forward the names of the selected candidates to the Board for the purpose of their registration.
The College accordingly vide its communication Annexure R-2/1 dated 3111998 submitted a list of these 5 additional students to the Board.
As the category under which the admission had been made had not been disclosed in this document, the Board vide its letter dated 2341998, Annexure R-2/2, issued a show cause notice for dis- affiliation of the College on the assumption that these 5 students had been admitted contrary to the directions issued by the Board with regard to the process of admission.
The College in its reply dated 25.4.1998, Annexure R- 2/3, then informed the Board that three students, namely, Laksh Deep, Rana Iqbal Singh and Rajive Gandotra had been granted admission against the NRI quota whereas the petitioner and one Veeresh Kumar Gupta had been granted admission as per past practice against the general seats that had remained vacant.
It is the petitioner's case that he remained unaware of the communications between the College and the Board but as the Roll Number for the 1st year examination that was to commence in May, 1998 had not been received by any of the 5 candidates, they approached the College for the issuance of Roll Numbers and were, in the meanwhile, allowed to take the examination by the College itself.
The College also wrote a letter dated 851998, Annexure R-3/3, to the Board pointing out that there had been an error in the communication dated 25.4.1998, Annexure R-2/3 inasmuch as the 3rd candidate admitted under the NRI quota was not Rajive Gandotra but the present petitioner, Sukhdeep Singh.
The Board nevertheless issued Roll Numbers to the three candidates mentioned in Annexure R-2/3 but declined to issue the Roll Number to the petitioner on the plea that he had not been admitted under the NRI category.
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed by the respondents.
The State of Punjab, respondent No. 1 has filed a short reply merely stating that it had nothing to do with the admissions as this was an issue between the other two respondents.
3.
The Board, respondent No. 2 has, however, filed a comprehensive reply in which it has been pointed out that the College had apparently admitted 5 students against the NRI quota instead of 3 that stood reserved and also contrary to the express instructions issued by the Board pursuant to the directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan J.P. and others v. State of AP and others, AIR 1993 SC 2178 : 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) and it was in that situation that the Board had issued a show cause notice for dis-affiliation of the College.
It has also been pointed out that the College had initially forwarded the names of Lakshdeep Singh, Rana Iqbal Singh and Rajive Gandotra as having been granted admission against the NRI quota seats and as such the admission granted to the petitioner and Veeresh Kumar Gupta being beyond the sanctioned strength of three seats was contrary to the spirit of Unni Krishnan's case (supra) and as such these two seats had to be treated as belonging to the general category.
Reliance has also been placed by the respondent on the Full Bench decision of this Court in Rupinder Singh and others v. The Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh and others, 2001(2) SCT 726 (P&H).
Civil Writ Petition No. 14903 of 1996, decided on March 5, 1997, in which it had been held, while dealing with a similar matter, that no right accrued to a candidate, who had been granted admission wrongly and the only remedy available was by way of damages against the college.
4.
A separate reply has been filed by the College, respondent No. 3 in which it has been admitted that a mistake had occurred while sending the names of three students (which did not include the petitioner) as being in the NRI category and as per the merit, the name of the petitioner should have been included in place of Rajive Gandotra and as the mistake was detected on receipt of letter dated 451998 from the Board, the necessary rectification had been made and the petitioner Sukhdeep Singh had subsequently been shown in the NRI category.
5.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the conditions for admission had been laid down in Annexure P-1 dated 6121997 and this communication provided that 5% (3 seats) were to be filled in by NRI/NRI sponsored candidates from amongst the students, strictly as per merit of the candidates and that each individual institution was to finalise the admissions on that basis.
He has accordingly pointed out that it was the admitted case that the petitioner was at Sr. No. 1 in the merit in the NRI quota and that he had also got admission on 21121997 whereas the other four candidates allegedly belonging to the same quota were lower in merit and had got admission in January, 1998.
He has accordingly urged that in the given facts, the petitioner could not be penalised on account of a mistake committed by the College inasmuch as it had ignored the petitioner's case as an NRI candidate while addressing the communication Annexure R-2/3 dated 25.4.1998 and that it was only when a show cause notice for the dis-affiliation of the college had been issued by the Board that the College had become wiser and shown the petitioner as an NRI quota candidate.
6.
As against this, Mr. Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for the Board, has argued that there appears to have been some improper dealing between the College and the petitioner and that admission had been granted to the petitioner ignoring the Rules for admission and it was only when penal action was threatened that the College had cooked up a story about the mistake having been committed.
He has also argued that this connivance was evident from the fact that the petitioner and the four other candidates, who had not even received registration and Roll Numbers for the examination held in May, 1998 had nevertheless been permitted to take the examination by the College.
He has also urged that the petitioner was in fact not even an NRI candidate and belonged to the general category who had been masquerading as an NRI.
7.
Mr. MS Ratta, the learned counsel appearing for the College, while admitting that a mistake had occurred in not showing the petitioner as an NRI candidate at the initial stage has, however, argued that as per Unni Krishnan's case (supra), the College was entitled to fill up all vacant seats at its own level and the Board could not interfere with that process.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
It will be seen that the petitioner had not taken the Joint Entrance Test and his application form was accordingly entertained under the NRI/NRI sponsored category, and he had also deposited his fee on that account on 21121997.
As per the admission notice, Annexure P-1, the admissions were to be made strictly as per the relative merit of the candidates.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner had 63% marks whereas the other four candidates, who had been granted admission, in January, 1998 were far lower in merit.
Mr. Patwalia's argument that the petitioner was not an NRI candidate and in fact had been granted admission in the general category is to no avail for the reason that this is not the stand taken by the Board in its written statement.
As already mentioned above, the respondent-College has taken a clear stand that the petitioner's name as an NRI candidate had not been forwarded to the Board in the first list of such candidates and it was only on a notice received from the Board that it was found that the petitioner ought to have been placed at Sr. No. 1 in the list of NRI candidates, with the result that Rajive Gandotra was to be left out.
It has also been stated at the Bar that Rajive Gandotra as also Veeresh Kumar Gupta afore-mentioned had since left the Course.
It is, therefore, evident that as of now two candidates, namely Lakshdeep and Rana Iqbal Singh are presently undergoing instructions as NRI candidates as a consequence of their selection by the College whereas the petitioner has been left out.
9.
Mr. Ratta, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-College, has, however, argued that even the admission of five candidates from the general category was in order, in the light of the liberty granted by the Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan's case, that seats still remaining vacant after the counselling could be filled up by the College itself at its own level.
This argument has been opposed by Mr. Patwalia on the plea that this question does no arise in the present proceedings and that in any case even the argument made by Mr. Ratta is contrary to the judgment afore-cited.
I am, however, of the opinion that as this issue does not arise in the present proceedings, no opinion needs to be expressed thereon.
10.
In the interim order dated December 14, 1998, it has been noted as under:  "Mr. PS Patwalia states that the Board has not even marked the answer books of the petitioner as it does not consider him eligible for taking the examination that was held in May, 1998; and further that in the event of the petitioner finally succeeding in the writ petition, if he gets reappear in any of the papers written by him, the respondent Board will permit him to take the re-appear examination together with the 2nd year examination next year."
It is apparent that the petitioner had taken the Ist year examination in question held in May, 1998 under the auspices of the College though no roll number had been issued by the Board.
In the light of what has been held above, the eligibility of the petitioner must now be taken as established and his answer books must be evaluated so that he can take the benefit of the undertaking given by Mr. Patwalia.
11.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the petitioner's admission as a NRI candidate and to declare his result of the 1st year examination held in May, 1998 within three weeks and to permit him to undertake a further course of action as per the undertaking given by Mr. Patwalia.
As the petitioner has been burdened for no fault on his part, it is directed that he will have his costs from respondent No. 3-College, which are assessed at Rs. 10,000/-.
Order dasti.
Petition allowed.