JS Khehar, J - Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the same question of law arises for consideration in the instant C.W.P.
No. 12055/1995 as well as in C.W.P.
No. 12665 of 1995 and the said writ petitions can be disposed of by a single order.
Learned counsel have accordingly referred to the factual position from the records of C.W.P.
No. 12055/1995.
2.
Petitioner Beant Ram Kanda was inducted into the service of Education Department against the post of Master in the year 1964.
From the post of Master, the channel of promotion is to the post of Headmaster and Principal (since Masters are eligible for promotion to both the aforesaid posts).
On November 10, 1987, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Headmaster.
Since pay scale of the post of Headmaster is inferior to the post of Lecturer, when persons junior to the petitioner from the cadre of Master were promoted to the post of Lecturer, the petitioner aired his grievances to the Authorities.
When the Authorities declined to consider the grievances of the petitioner, he approached this Court by filing C.W.P.
No. 2180 of 1991 titled as Kashmir Chand and others v. State of Punjab and others.
In the aforesaid writ petition, the name of the petitioner figured at serial No. 5.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of on February 13, 1991 with directions to the authorities to consider and decide the representation preferred by the petitioner claiming promotion to the post of Lecturer.
It is not in dispute before me that on the basis of the orders passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 2180 of 1991, the petitioner was granted promotion to the cadre of Lecturer w.e.f.
November 1, 1966.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was released the salary in the pay scale of the post of Lecturer w.e.f.
November 1, 1966.
3.
Prior to the promotion of the petitioner in the cadre of Lecturer, in the seniority list of Masters, the name of the petitioner figured at serial No. 1248 after his promotion to the cadre of Lecturer in the seniority list of lecturers, the name of the petitioner was ordered to be placed at serial No. 603-A.
4.
In the instant petition, the petitioner is claiming onward promotion from the post of Lecturer to the post of Principal.
The petitioner's case is that in the same manner in which the Authorities had earlier ignored his claim for promotion from the post of Master to the post of Lecturer, he has again been ignored for promotion to the post of Principal.
5.
In the first instance, the petitioner made some representations to the Authorities.
When the same were not considered by the Authorities, the petitioner addressed a legal notice dated June 27, 1995.
Still the Authorities did not determine either the claim addressed by him through the representations or through the legal notice.
Feeling helpless, the petitioner approaches this Court through the present writ petition.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents Mrs. Charu Tuli did not deny the fact that the seven persons whose names have been depicted by the petitioner in paragraph No. 14 of the writ petition were promoted to the post of Principal from the post of Lecturers.
She also does not dispute the fact that the names of these seven persons figured in the seniority list of Lecturers between serial No. 611 to 621.
She, however, denied the claim of the petitioner that his position in the seniority list of Lecturers figures at serial No. 603-A.
7.
The aforesaid denial that the name of the petitioner is not figuring in the seniority list of Lecturers at serial No. 603-A emerges from the order dated April 25, 1995 on the basis of which learned counsel for the respondents states that the name of the petitioner has ceased to exist in the cadre of Lecturers and consequently his name appearing at serial No. 603-A in the seniority list of the Lecturers has been deleted.
The order dated April 25, 1995 relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents has admittedly not been issued with the consent of the petitioner.
It is also admitted that the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of hearing before the said order was passed.
The aforesaid order has the effect of deleting the lien of the petitioner from the cadre of Lecturers.
The said order, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, adversly effects his civil rights and, therefore, cannot have been issued without following the principles of natural justice.
The counsel for the petitioner seeks to challenge the order dated April 25, 1995 vide which his lien from the post of lecturer has been terminated and his name from the seniority list of Lecturers has been removed.
For the aforesaid facts, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment rendered by this Court in Baldev Raj Preenja v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(1) RSJ 571.
My attention was invited to the conclusion drawn in the aforesaid case in paragraph 6 and the same is being extracted hereunder:-  "Change of cadre is a decision which has to be taken by the concerned Authorities either with the consent of the employee concerned or upon giving a hearing to the petitionr.
It is the settled principles of law that change of cadre without the consent of the employee is not permissible.
In this case, it is established before us that the change of cadre or transfer to another cadre was neither with the consent of the petitioner, nor the concerned Authorities passed an appropriate order in consonance with the principles of natural justice."
As stated earlier, it is not in dispute that the consent of the petitioner was not obtained before the order dated April 25, 1995 was issued.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was not given an opportunity of hearing before issuance of the aforesaid order.
Since the order dated April 25, 1995 has the effect of deleting the name of the petitioner from the cadre of the Lecturers and further since the aforesaid order has the effect of deleting the name of the petitioner from the seniority list of Lecturers where his name figured at Serial No. 603-A, I have no hesitation to hold that the order dated April 25, 1995 is liable to be set aside as the same had not been issued either with the consent of the petitioner or by affording him an opportunity of hearing as envisaged by the principles of natural justice.
8.
The order dated April 25, 1995 was the only impediment in the path of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Principal on the basis of his seniority in the cadre of Lecturers.
Since the aforesaid order has been set aside, I consider it appropriate to allow the writ petition by directing the respondents to consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Principal from the cadre of Lecturers and in doing so, the claim of the petitioner would be considered for promotion to the post of Principal by ignoring the order dated April 25, 1995.
In other words, the petitioner would be considered for promotion to the post of Principal on the basis that he belongs to the cadre of Lecturers where his position in the seniority list figures at serial No. 603-A.
The aforesaid consideration would relate back to the date when the persons junior to the petitioner were promoted from the cadre of Lecturers to the post of Principal.
If the petitioner is promoted as Principal as a consequence of the aforesaid consideration, he would be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
9.
The writ petition is, therefore, allowed not without any order as to costs.
Petition allowed.