Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner obtained admission in the MA English (Previous) Course in the Distance Education Programme of the Maharshi Dayanand University-respondent No. 1 at the Post Graduate Regional Centre, Rewari in the Session 1997-98 and also appeared for the said examination under Roll Number 81145 in four papers held in May, 1998.
The result of the examination was declared on 27th July, 1998 which was notified to the students on 4th August, 1998.
In the Gazette, it was shown that the petitioner was called upon to "Re-appear" in Papers I, III and IV, but on the supply of the Result-cum-Detailed Marks Card on 1781998, she was shown as absent in Paper-III.
As the petitioner had, in fact, appeared in all the four papers of the examination, she submitted a representation to the Vice Chancellor, respondent No. 1, on 2481998 pointing out that there had been a mistake in the declaration of her result and on a visit to the office of the said respondent No. 1, on 2581998, it was revealed that though the Detailed Marks Card had shown her absent in Paper-III, she had, in fact, obtained 55 marks in the said paper and had successfully cleared the same.
The petitioner was, accordingly, declared as "Pass" in the MA (Previous) English examination held in May 1998 and a duly rectified Detailed Marks Card Annexure P-2 dated 2581998 was issued to her on that very date by respondent No. 1.
It appears that in the meanwhile, respondent No. 1 took a decision to fill up the vacant seats in the MA English (Final) course in the regular department of the University (that is the Regional Centre, Rewari) from amongst those candidates who had cleared their MA (Previous) Examination under the Distance Education Programme.
The petitioner, accordingly, having now obtained the eligibility for admission to the 2nd year of the MA Course, approached respondent No. 2 the Director, Post Graduate Regional Centre, Rewari and requested for admissions.
Respondent No. 2, however, refused to grant admission to her on the plea that as per the instructions issued by respondent No. 1, no further admissions could be made to the MA English (Final) Regular Course.
The petitioner, accordingly, prepared a representation on 2781998 and presented it to respondent No. 2, who refused to entertain the same.
She, thereafter, visited the office of respondent No. 1 on 191998 and submitted her representation.
This representation was however, rejected with the remarks "Too late.
No.
Rejected".
A copy of the said representation dated 2781998 and the order dated 191998 rejecting it endorsed thereon have been appended as Annexure P-3 to the petition.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner has come to this Court by way of the present petition, praying that as there was no fault on her part and it was the University that had been responsible for having created the confusion by showing her absent in Paper III whereas she had, in fact, cleared the paper with 55 marks, she could not be penalised and denied admission.
It has also been pleaded in paragraph 10 of the writ petition that of the 40 seats that were to be filled in the MA English (Final) Regular Courses for the academic session 1998-99, 17 still remained vacant.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been admitted that the Detailed Marks Card issued to the petitioner was found to be wrong as the details with regard to some other candidate had been notified as being those of the petitioner.
It has also been admitted that the petitioner had approached the authorities on the 24th/25th August, 1998 and that the revised Detailed Marks Card had been issued to her immediately.
The respondents have, however, sought to fall back on the plea that the petitioner could not be admitted at this stage as the last date for admission even with late fee and the permission of the Vice Chancellor i.e. 2771998 had expired.
It has also been pleaded that as the petitioner had done her MA (Previous) Course from Regional Centre, Rewari, under the Distance Education Programme, she could have sought admission in the second year of the said programme up to 1591998 with late fee and as she had omitted to do so, she could not be now granted admission for the Regular Programme.
The respondents have also placed reliance on Clause 4 of Chapter I of the Admission Brochure and the Regulation in support of their plea.
The fact that 17 seats still remained vacant, has not been denied.
3.
Mr. Ashok Gupta, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has raised one basic argument in the course of the hearing.
He has pointed out that it was the admitted case that the Detailed Marks Card issued to the petitioner initially was wrong and it was for the first time on 2581998 that a Detailed Marks Card duly rectified and corrected, had been released to her and in this eventuality, it was not open to the respondents to contend that as the last date for admission to the Regular Programme had expired on 2771998, the petitioner could not be granted admission on the ground of delay.
He has also urged that clause 4 on which the respondents had placed reliance to deny the petitioner's claim had on its clear terminology to be read in her favour rather than against her.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
5.
It is the admitted case that the original Detailed Marks Card Annexure P-1 issued to the petitioner shows her as absent in paper III.
This was a mistake committed by the University and was corrected and a rectified Detailed Marks Card Annexure P-2 dated 2581998 was issued to her on that very date.
The petitionr represented to the Vice Chancellor within two days, thereafter, vide Annexure P-3 and her candidature was rejected by the Vice Chancellor on 191998, as being belated.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner was not at fault.
Respondent No. 1-the University cannot be permitted to take a plea of delay, the more so as the classes for the MA (Final) Regular Course had started only a short while earlier.
The respondents' argument which flows from Clause 4 of Chapter 1 of the Admission Brochure on which the respondents have placed reliance must now be examined.
This clause reads as under:-  "A candidate whose result is published late by this University though no fault of his/her or on the part of the college concerned, may be admitted by the Principal, if he has applied by the stipulated date and seat is available without payment of late fee within 10 working days from the date of despatch mentioned on the back side of the D.M.C."
A bare reading of this clause makes it apparent that it deals with a late declaration of a result at the initial stage and not where the result that has been declared is wrong.
Moreover, even if it is held to be applicable to a case of a wrong declaration of the result as well, the petitioner would be fully entitled to take benefit thereunder as the conditions of its applicability are fully available in this case.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and the order of the Vice Chancellor dated Ist September, 1998, endorsed on the representation Annexure P-3 is quashed.
Under the interim directions of this court dated 23.11.1998, the petitioner had been granted admission to the course in question subject to final orders of this Court.
Under these circumstances, it is directed that the petitioner's admission will be regularised by the University and she will be permitted to sit in the MA (Final) examination as and when called upon to do so.
It is also directed that the petitioner's lectures would be computed from the date that she actually got admission under the interim orders aforesaid.
Dasti order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.