Bhawani Singh, CJ.
- Petitioner was posted as Junior Assistant in Igo Phey Division, Leh (Ladakh) Public Works Department.
He left for Bombay on 1291990 for undergoing treatment, since he was suffering from Tuberculosis.
He informed his Officers that he would be dispatching leave application afterwards.
Meanwhile, respondents conducted physical verification of Divisional Stores which included those which were under the charge of petitioner.
Committee appointed by the Department to look into the Store shortage submitted report pointing out shortages in the stores.
Petitioner was arrested by the Police at Bombay and brought to Leh, later released on bail by the Judicial Magistrate.
On release, he reported for duty on 2871995, but was not allowed to join and was informed by communication dated 2971995 that he could not be permitted to join, since he was absconding for the past three years and had failed to resume duty despite repeated notices.
Ultimately, a notice was published in Government Gazette on 22111990 informing him to resume duty within 15 days from the publication thereof, otherwise his services would stand terminated in terms of Article 128 of Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulation.
2.
Petitioner submits that at no stage, he received any communication from the respondents till 1994 to resume duty.
Of course, he received letter dated 1281995 which he replied and explained the position.
But he was prevented from joining duty under Article 128 of Jammu and Kashmir CSR which, as a matter of fact, did not empower them to prevent him from doing so.
At the most, they could proceed against the petitioner in accordance with the procedure established by law and they failed to do so.
Apart from facts stated hereinabove, respondents submit that physical verification of the Stores under the charge of petitioner disclosed huge bungling and misappropriation of Government money to the tune of Rs. 23,92,23478 and sensing action, he left the post of his own and remained absconded for five years till he was arrested by the Police at Bombay and brought to Leh to face action.
Notice published in Government Gazette dated 22111990 gave him clear message to resume duty within the stipulated time, otherwise his services would be terminated without requirement of passing any other formal order.
3.
Petition has been dismissed by the Single Judge, hence this Letters Patent Appeal challenging the order.
In the opinion of the Single Judge, petitioner was not entitled to claim inquiry into the matter before termination of his services, as he abandoned his post of his own without permission or authorisation under the Rules and stayed away from duty for five years or more, therefore, there was no logic in the claim for inquiry under J&K Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.
No inquiry is required to be held where it is impracticable to do so in circumstances brought about by the employee, who has surrendered his employment intentionally throwing at winds all canons of service.
Learned Judge also said that;  "I accordingly hold that where a Government servant abandons his post without any permission or authorisation by the Competent Authority and stays away from duty for years on and fails to remain in contract with the Authority and to take steps to seek proper sanction for his remaining away and displays a conduct to defy the service discipline, he shall be treated to have surrendered his employment of his own volition and that he would have no right to claim benefit of any constitutional safeguards or any procedure established by law envisaging an inquiry into his absence."
Finally, it was concluded that;  "Applying this to the present case, it defies all logic that the petitioner should be allowed to return to the post in the facts and circumstances of the case.
It is evident from the record that he abandoned his post fearing action because of his alleged involvement in some misappropriation of government money and had stayed away of his own and failed to establish any contact with the Competent Authority and in all probability may not have returned but for his arrest by the Police.
It does not lie in his mouth now to claim the benefit of inquiry into his alleged absence.
Nor can he invoke the ratio of Qamar Ali's case (supra) to demand a formal order of termination from the authority because the gazette notification dated 22111990 by itself partakes the character of such order when it informs him that his failure to resume duty would lead to his termination from service.
Nothing more was required to be done by the disciplinary authority in the matter.
In the circumstances I find no merit in this petition which is dismissed."
4.
Shri ZA Qureshi contended that no order of termination has been passed in this case and in case Gazette Notification dated 22111990 has the effect of terminating the service of petitioner, that was passed under Article 128 of Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations, the same is illegal since no inquiry has been held against the petitioner affording him opportunity of being heard in terms of Rule 33 of Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.
It may be true that holding of inquiry as envisaged in Article 311 of Constitution of India, Section 126 J&K Constitution and Rule 33(1) of J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 is necessary before service of an employee is terminated for absence without leave or absence after expiry of leave, as held in Dr. IP Kohli v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, 1990 KLJ 374, Syed Zaffar Mehdi v. State, 1992 SLJ 143 and Qamar Ali, 1994 SLJ 372.
But this principle of law has no universal application.
In case facts disclose that that employee had absconded or where it is for other reasons impracticable to communicate with him or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him, Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 33, J&K CS (CCA) Rules, 1956 is attracted.
5.
Single Judge has rightly found that petitioner abandoned the employment, therefore, he lost it.
Facts demonstrate that petitioner was incharge of Stores at Leh.
While Stores shortages were being investigated, he left the job and was later arrested from Bombay by the Police after three years and brought back to Leh for investigation into the criminal case registered against him for huge shortages in Stores worth lacs of rupees.
Otherwise, he had no intention to return and resume duty, despite notices issued by the respondents.
Contention that he left after informing the Superiors about his leave is not borne out from record.
As a matter of fact, petitioner had neither applied for leave, sought sanction thereof or informed any one before fleeing to Bombay.
Statement that he had gone to Bombay for treatment of Tuberculosis is patently false.
This treatment does not require such a long time.
Petitioner has not supported it by any documentary evidence, therefore, this claim is without any basis and put up by way of after-thought.
Found on facts, he abandoned the job without any intention of resuming it.
Therefore, this case does not require holding of inquiry in terms of Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 33 of J&KCS (CCA) Rules, 1956.
It is squarely covered under Sub-Rule (2) thereof.
Therefore, holding of inquiry and giving of opportunity to the petitioner was not necessary nor practicable.
Similar view has been taken by the Apex Court in Dr. (Mrs.) Shashi Chaudhury v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, reported in Supreme Court Service Rulings, 1950-1992 Volume I, page 145.
In para 9, it has been said that :  "9.
In answer, she only sent her resignation or rather referred to her earlier resignation and stated that that may be accepted.
Her statement that she was willing to serve the Jammu and Kashmir State Government meant nothing.
This is an odd kind of service when the person remains absent without taking leave for a year.
It appears to us that being faced with domestic life and also the problem of having to return the money with penalty she wished to steer a middle course, namely, to remain with the family and also to pretend to be in service.
This is not one of those cases in which the requirements of the Constitution compel the appointing authority to hold a full dress enquiry with witnesses and opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses which have been the foundation of the rulings given by this Court.
This is an exceptional case of complete dereliction of duty and a pretense of serving without even attending a day on duty.
In these circumstances, the charge sent to her sufficiently communicated to her what was to happen to her and she was also adequately given an opportunity of showing cause against the loss of appointment.
She chose to make no representation on this point and merely sent her resignation and asked it to be accepted.
In our opinion, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, in these circumstances, was justified in terminating her services.
It is true that they passed an order of dismissal which made a stigma and it is probable that if this had remained so, she would have been entitled to plead that she should be given an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed as indeed S. 126 of the Jammu and Kashmir Constitution also required.
But this was corrected later by a currigadum to which we have referred.
In other words, she was treated as discharged from service when she had loss of appointment and that in our opinion is the end of the matter."
6.
Whatever was necessary, in the facts and circumstances of this case, has been done by the respondents.
The Gazette Notification dated 22111990 has the effect of terminating the services and no separate order of termination is necessary.
The decisions brought to our notice by the learned counsel for the Appellant turn on their own facts and have no application to the facts of this case.
Single Judge her decided the matter quite appropriately and we find no justification to set aside the same.
7.
What emerges out of the aforesaid discussion is that, there is no merit in this Appeal and the same is dismissed.
8.
Parties are, however, left to bear their respective costs.
Appeal dismissed.