GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 on the posts of Laboratory Attendants.
2.
Perusal of the record shows that the petitioner, the respondents No. 4 to 7 (the name of respondents No. 8 was deleted vide Court's order dated 2051998 on the ground that she has left the service) and 66 other candidates were considered by a selection committee constituted by the respondent No. 3 for recruitment on the posts of Laboratory Attendants which were advertised on 1591996.
The committee recommended the names of respondents Nos. 4 to 8 by making the following assessment of the educational qualifications, experience and performance of the candidates in interview and technical knowledge in the field :-  S. No. Name of Candidate Educational qualification Experience in interview Performance and Technical knowledge of the field Total  1.
Gurjit Singh (petitioner) 5+1 2-1/2 1+1/2 10 2.
Harvinder Singh (respondent No. 5) 3+1 8-1/2 3+2 17-1/2 3.
Ms. Madhu Bala (respondent No. 8) 5+1+2 0 3-1/2+4 15-1/2 4.
Hardial Singh (respondent No. 7) 5+1+2 3 2+2 15 5.
Tarlok Kumar (respondent No. 6) 3 7 2+2-1/2 14-1/2 6.
Malkit Singh (respondent No. 4) 4+1 5 2+2 14 3.
The petitioner has challenged the selection of non-official respondents on the following grounds :  (i) The qualifications enumerated in the advertisement issued on 2821996 contemplated consideration of those only who passed Matric with first division but with a view to select favoured candidates, the respondents diluted this qualification and even those who have passed Matric simplicitor have been treated eligible for recruitment in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P2.
(ii) The selection is vitiated due to excessive allocation of marks for viva voce.
(iii) The recommendations made by the selection committee are vitiated due to arbitrariness, bias and mala fides.
4.
The respondents have pleaded that after having taken part in the process of selection, the petitioner is estopped from challenging the recommendations made by the selection committee.
They have also pleaded that the selection was made by award of marks in accordance with the criteria evolved by the official respondents and those who were adjudged suitable on the basis of merit have been given appointment.
The respondent No. 3 has also averred that the qualifications specified in the advertisement Annexure P2 are in accordance with the guidelines issued by the All India Council for Technical Education.
5.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the petitioners and the respondents and perusing the record, we are convinced that the writ partition is liable to be dismissed.
6.
The argument of Shri NK Gupta that the respondent No. 3 could not have made appointments by considering those who have not passed Matric with first division is founded on the contents of advertisement Annexure P.1.
However, the fact of the matter is that the impugned selection and appointments have been made in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P2 and not the advertisement Annexure P.1.
The qualification for the post of Laboratory Attendant in the Engineering Colleges has been laid down by the All India Council for Technical Education.
The norms and standards laid down by the Council, a photostat copy of which was placed before us, show that the essential qualification for recruitment of Laboratory Attendant is "Pass in SSLC or equivalent".
The petitioner has not challenged the vires of the advertisement Annexure P2 nor the learned Counsel could show that the prescription of such qualification is contrary to an Act of the Parliament or the State Legislature or it is otherwise unconstitutional.
Therefore, we do not find any substance in the argument of Shri Gupta that the recommendations made by the selection committee should be quashed due to consideration of the candidature of those who have passed Matric simplicitor.
7.
The other two submissions made by the learned Counsel can be disposed of simultaneously.
A look at Annexure R3/1 shows that for the purpose of adjudging the comparative merit of the candidates, the selection committee had devised the following criteria :  "The selection committee for the posts of Lab.
Attendant met today i.e. 2491996 at 1000 am in the office of the Principal and decided the following criteria for selection based on marks for educational qualifications, experience and performance in interview and Technical knowledge in the field :-  1.
Matriculation Ist Class 05 Marks -do- 2nd Class 04 Marks -do- 3rd Class 03 Marks 2.
10+2 (Any Division) 01 Mark 3.
B.A./B.Sc.
(Any Division) 01 Mark 4.
N.T.C.
(or equivalent) -do- 01 Mark 5.
Diploma (Three years) -do- 02 Marks 6.
Experience 10 Marks 7.
Performance in the interview 05 Marks 8.
Technical knowledge of the field 05 Marks The merit shall be drawn on the basis of above."
8.
If we read this criteria in conjunction with the marks awarded to the candidates, it is not possible to hold that the recommendations made by the committee are vitiated due to arbitrariness or violation of the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
9.
The argument of Shri Gupta that the criteria adopted by the committee should be declared unconstitutional because of excessive allocation of marks for viva voce also merits rejection in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar, 1994(1) SCT 483 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 141.
In that case, the Apex Court upheld the prescription of 50% marks for selection of Unani Medical Officers.
Their Lordships distinguished the earlier judgments rendered in Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1987 SC 454 and Mohinder Sain Garg v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 647 (SC) : 1991(1) SCC 662 by observing that the yard-stick to be followed for allocation of marks in cases where selection is made on the basis of written test and viva voce cannot be applied to the cases in which selection is made exclusively on the basis of interview.
The ratio of this decision has been applied, followed and reiterate in the following cases :  (i) Subhash Chander Verma v. State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1995 SC 904; and (ii) Harjinder Singh Sodhi v. State of Punjab, JT 1996(9) SC 443.
10.
In view of the later pronouncements of the Supreme Court, we cannot invalidate the selection on the basis of the ratio of the decisions relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
11.
The allegation of bias and mala fides levelled by the petitioner deserves to be rejected summarily because he has not impleaded the members of the selection committee and the appointing authority as party respondents and without giving opportunity of hearing, we cannot record any adverse finding against them.
12.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the writ petition is without substance and it is liable to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition dismissed.