GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the order Annexure P-5 dated 1861998 issued by the Commissioner, Faridkot Division, Faridkot (hereinafter described as the respondent No. 2) and a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to pay salary to the petitioner from February, 1998.
2.
Perusal of the record shows that while holding the post of Naib Tehsildar in the pay scale of his substantive post of Sadar Kanoongo the petitioner was promoted as Naib Tehsildar on 29111994 upon acceptance of his name in Register `D' of Punjab Naib Tehsildars Class III Service Rules, 1984 (hereinafter referred to `as the Rules of 1984').
On 221998, the respondent No. 2 issued order Annexure P-1 relieving the petitioner from Sardulgarh where he was posted at the relevant time.
For next four months he was neither given posting nor the pay.
On 1861998 the respondent No. 2 issued the impugned order and placed the petitioner's services at the disposal of the Director, Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab for appointment as Assistant Consolidation Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 6400-10640.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the ground that the respondent No. 2 does not have the authority to transfer his services outside the cadre.
He has also pleaded that non-payment of monthly salary is violative of his fundamental right to livelihood which is guaranteed to him under Article 21 of the Constitution.
4.
While issuing the notice of motion on 891998, the Court asked the learned Deputy Advocate General to contact the respondents No. 2 and 3 to find out as to why the petitioner was not being allowed to join duty and why he was not being paid monthly salary.
The next date was fixed as 1091998.
However, the case could not be taken up on that day and it was adjourned to 2091998.
In the meantime the petitioner filed C.M.
No. 21545 of 1998 for seeking stay of the order of his placement at the disposal of the respondent No. 3.
When that application was listed for hearing on 29.9.1998, the learned Deputy Advocate General sought time to disclose the reasons for petitioner's transfer outside the cadre and non-payment of salary.
On that we had directed the respondents to pay salary to the petitioner.
5.
Today, an application has been made on behalf of the respondents for adjournment on the ground that Shri K.S.
Ahluwalia, Additional Advocate General, Punjab who is to argue the case is on leave.
However, we are not inclined to accept this request in view of the statement made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that inspite of the directions given by the Court on 29.9.1998, the respondents have not paid salary to the petitioner.
6.
We have heard Shri Rajesh Garg, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Rupinder Khosla, learned Deputy Advocate General for the respondents.
7.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner is a member of the cadre of Naib Tehsildars and recruitment to that cadre as well as conditions of service of persons appointed on the posts of Naib Tehsildars are regulated by Rules of 1984.
If he had been transferred or posted within the service, the petitioner could not have made any grievance.
However, we find considerable merit in his plea that neither respondent No. 2 nor any other authority of the department has the jurisdiction to transfer him outside the cadre without his consent because in law, such transfer amounts to termination of his services from the cadre of Naib Tehsildars.
We, therefore, hold that the order dated 1861998 passed by the respondent No. 2 placing the services of the petitioner at the disposal of respondent No. 3 is liable to be quashed on the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
8.
We are also of the opinion that the impugned order suffers from the vice of arbitrariness because no explanation has been offered by the respondents as to why he was picked up for being sent out of the cadre when as many as 11 persons, namely, Sarvshri Gurtej Singh, Darshan Singh, Ravinder Kumar, Subhraj Singh, Pushpinder Kaur, Karnail Singh, Gurmail Singh, Kuldeep Singh, Baljinder Kaur, Hans Raj and Ramesh K. Jain, who are junior to the petitioner in the cadre of the Naib Tehsildars have been retained in revenue division of Faridkot.
We, therefore, hold that the impugned order is vitiated by arbitrariness and consequential violation of the fundamental right to equality guaranteed to the petitioner under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
On the issue of non-payment of salary to the petitioner also, no explanation worth the name has been offered by the respondents.
Shri Khosla did make a half hearted attempt to justify this lapse by stating that the delay has been caused due to inter-departmental correspondence and non- availability of vacant posts and the inability of the Finance Department to sanction the payment of salary to the petitioner because the total number of persons holding the posts of Naib Tehsildars is in excess of the sanctioned strength.
However, on being persistently questioned by the Court, he had to concede that the petitioner is not one of the persons who can be treated to have been appointed in excess of the sanctioned strength of the cadre.
Thus, there is no rhyme or reasons or valid ground to withhold salary which is otherwise payable to the petitioner in accordance with the relevant pay rules and the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
It is unfortunate that the departmental authorities have become totally oblivious of the misery and the light of the petitioner and the members of his family, who have been deprived of the only source of livelihood for a long period of 9 months.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P-5 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to give appropriate posting to the petitioner of October, 1998 within 7 days from today.
The arrears of salary shall be paid to him with next three weeks failing which he shall get interest on the amount of arrears at the rate of 18% per annum.
In case the directions given in this order are not complied with, the petitioner shall be free to move a miscellaneous application to bring this facts to the notice of the Court.
Copy of the order be given dasti on payment of fee prescribed for urgent applications.
Petition allowed.