Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner - a Principal in a Government School - underwent heart surgery at Batra Hospital in New Delhi in August 1993.
He submitted a bill for an amount of Rs. 1,18,000/-.
When the amount was not reimbursed, he approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 9292 of 1995.
It was disposed of vide orders dated October 18, 1995 with a direction that the claim shall be decided within 30 days.
The State Government paid an amount of Rs. 82,000/- to the petitioner.
He has now approached this Court with a prayer that a direction for payment of the remaining amount of Rs. 36,000/- incurred on account of surgery and Rs. 10,780/- on account of the other expenses be ordered to be paid.
The petitioner further claims interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
2.
The State of Punjab contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed out that the Batra Hospital and Research Centre, New Delhi, has not been recognised as a hospital by the State Government.
The petitioner has been paid the amount which he would have been required to spend if he had undergone surgery at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
So far as the petitioner's claim for the total amount is concerned, the matter has to be decided in the light of the instructions which were prevalent in the year 1993.
The rule in this behalf has been laid down in State of Punjab and others v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga etc., JT 1998(2) SC 136 : 1998(1) SCT 716 (SC).
The State has not placed the instructions on record.
Thus the matter shall have to be decided afresh by the Government.
It shall be so done within two months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
4.
So far as the petitioner's claim for interest is concerned, the matter is concluded against him by the decision of the Supreme Court in Om Parkash Gargi v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1996(10) SC 36.
5.
In view of the above, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction that the petitioner's claim shall be considered afresh by the Government in the light of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Om Parkash Gargi's case (supra).
6.
So far as the claim for interest is concerned, the petition is dismissed.
7.
In the circumstances there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.