OP Sharma, J - The case of the petitioners is that they were initially appointed teachers on ad hoc basis for a period of three months by order dated 2631985.
Their ad hoc appointments were however extended from time to time with usual breaks.
Subsequently Govt. Order No. 1220-GAD of 1989 dated 1191989 was issued and all the ad hoc appointments made upto 29121988 were directed to be regularised with effect from 1191989.
It is admitted by the petitioners that their services stand regularised with effect from the aforesaid date.
Their grievance however is that they should be regularised from the date of their initial appointment.
The other relief claimed by them is the payment of salary for the vacation period.
The relief claimed by the petitioner is that by a writ of certiorari the Govt. Order No. 1220-GAD of 1989 dated 1191989 be quashed to the extent it does not permit regularisation retrospectively and further the respondents be directed to regularise themselves retrospectively for the purpose of seniority.
Another relief is payment of salary for the vacation period.
So far as the first relief is concerned, regularisation on ad hoc appointments is itself bad as pointed out by the Apex Court in J&K Public Service Commission v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others, 1994(1) SCT 626 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 1808, holding that :  "Therefore, ad hoc employee should be replaced as expeditiously as possible by direct recruits.
A little leeway to make ad hoc appointment due to emergent exigencies does not clothe the executive government with power to relax the recruitment or to regularise such appointment nor to claim such appointments to be regular or in accordance with rules.
Back door ad hoc appointments at the behest of power source or otherwise and recruitment according to rules are mutually antagonistic and strange bed partners.
They cannot co-exist in the same sheath.
The former is in negation of fair play.
The latter are the products of order and regularity.
Every eligible person not necessarily be fit to be appointed to a post or office under the State, selection according to rules by a properly constituted commission and fitment for appointment assures fairness in selection and inhibits arbitrariness in appointments."
3.
The Govt. order regularising ad hoc appointments being prospective its effect cannot be made retrospective.
Moreover by giving them seniority, those appointed regularly through recruitment board will be adversely affected.
Even a rule which permits regularisation of ad hoc employee in a manner which affects the seniority of a regularly recruited person is liable to be struck down as held by the Apex Court in Ram Ganesh Tripathi and others v. State of UP and others, 1997 SCC 621 : 1997(1) SCT 494 (SC), which reads :  "8.
In spite of this clear position, the Government by its letter dated 2331993 informed the Director of Local Bodies, UP, Lucknow, that the Government, in exercise of powers under Rule 40(2) of the Rules, has passed an order to the effect that the date of confirmation of the employees working in the UP Palika (Central) Service since before the year 1977 and who have not been selected through PSC and who have not been regularised on the posts but are continuously working, shall be determined as under : "(i) The employees appointed on ad hoc basis and working continuously shall be made permanent on that post just 2 years after the date of joining on which post the employee joined his duty after being appointed."
9.
The Government thereby has tried to give seniority to the respondents and those other ad hoc employees by treating them as permanently appointed promotees since 2 years after the date of their joining the posts as Sahayak Nagar Adhikaris.
Thus the respondents and other ad hoc employees who had been appointed temporarily and whose services were not regular and were regularised only on 1751985, will have to be treated as permanently appointed in 1974, as they were for the first time appointed on those posts in 1972.
The said order was not challenged in the writ petition as it had not come to the notice of the appellants.
It has been filed in this Court along with the counter- affidavit of Respondents 3, 7, 8 and 9 and is relied upon by all the respondents.
This order also deserves to be quashed as it is not consistent with the statutory Rules.
It appears to have been passed by the Government to oblige the respondents and similarly situated ad hoc appointees.
10.
We, therefore, allow this appeal and direct the Government not to treat any ad hoc Sahayak Nagar Adhikari who was originally appointed on ad hoc basis and whose service was regularised only on 1751985 as senior to the direct recruits who were appointed before that date.
We also quash and set aside the order passed by the Government under Rule 40(2) of the Rules whereby the employees appointed on ad hoc basis and working continuously have been made permanent on those posts with effect from 2 years after the date of joining on those posts.
The Government is directed to consider the seniority of the appellants and respondents as stated above and further consider the case of the appellants for selection grade accordingly and also in accordance with the government order dated 2971986.
The Government shall complete the whole exercise within a period of two months from today.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs."
This government order is also against the recruitment rules but it has not been challenged and, therefore, petitioners should be satisfied.
4.
With regard to the salary for the vacation period, the petitioners' ad hoc appointment pertain to the period between March, 1985 and November, 1989.
They never claimed it even after regularisation.
Moreover, there is no order of appointment placed on record indicating that they were disengaged before vacation and re-engaged thereafter.
So even the facts have not been clearly pleaded, the delay of 8 to 12 years in seeking the relief for payment of salary is by itself sufficient to deny the relief as held in Jagdish Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 19997 SC 2366 : 1998(1) SCT 26 (SC), which reads :  "That apart, as this Court has repeatedly held, the delay disentitles the party to the discretionary relief under Article 226 or 32 of the Constitution.
It is not necessary to reiterate all catena of precedents in this behalf."
5.
In view of the above there is no merit in the petition which is liable to be dismissed.
It is dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.