Harjit Singh Bedi, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 14136, 14256, 14893, 15478, 15964, 161199, 16850, 17740 of 1998.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 14136 of 1998.
2.
The petitioner did her matriculation in 1984 and passed her 10+2 Examination from the Punjab School Education Board in 1991 and got married the following year.
She applied for and obtained admission to the Kurukshetra University one sitting programme for the BA Course and in April 1996 appeared in all 12 papers which constituted the course.
A detailed marks-sheet Annexure P/1-A dated August 28, 1996 was also issued to her indicating that she had cleared the examination successfully.
The validity of the programme was, however, called into question in this Court and it was held that the course could not be recognised as a regular one.
The matter was thereafter taken to the Supreme Court and was disposed of with a direction that recognition be granted to the BA one sitting examination held in the year 1996 only and not to any subsequent examination.
Pursuant to this decision, the University Grants Commission issued a circular in March, 1997 (Annexure P-2 with C.W.P.
No. 15964 of 1998) that the degrees granted to candidates enrolled for the one time Bachelor's degree programme upto the year 1995-96 be treated as valid and that the aforesaid degree be treated as valid and that the aforesaid degree be treated at par with other degrees of the same university for all purposes including admission to higher degrees and employment.
A similar precognition was granted to the programme by the Vice Chancellor of the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, vide Annexure P-3 dated 491997 (Annexed with C.W.P.
No. 15964 of 1998) and by the Panjab University, Chandigarh, vide Annexure P-3 dated 2561997 (appended with C.W.P.
No. 16850 of 1998).
3.
Respondent No. 1 i.e.
The Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar issued a Prospectus for the Joint Entrance Test for admission to the B.Ed.
Course 1998-99 in the various colleges of Education situated in the State of Punjab and affiliated to the Universities in the State.
The petitioner, who belonged to the Border Area, applied under that category and also gave her choice preference-wise to the various colleges to which admissions were to be made.
This application was accepted and on the declaration of the result thereof, she was shown at rank 712.
She thereafter made a fresh application for admission to a college affiliated to the Panjab University, Chandigarh- Respondent No. 2 in accordance with the terms of the information Brochure-cum-application form and also appeared for counselling before the Interview Board on September 1, 1998.
Her application was, however, rejected for the reason that she had obtained her BA degree in one sitting instead of having undergone a regular BA course of three years duration.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner has come to this Court claiming that as the BA one sitting programme had been recognised as being equivalent on the regular BA degree course by the University Grants Commission and respondent Nos. 1 and 2 as well, the rejection of her candidature by the first respondent at the time of counselling was not justified.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 only and it has been pointed out that from a perusal of Clause 12 given in the Information Brochure it was evident that a candidate could be considered for admission to the B.Ed.
Course only against such subjects that had been studied at the graduate level for at least two years and had also passed the University Examination thereafter.
Support for this argument has also been sought from Annexure R-1/1 dated 12th August, 1998, a communication from the Research Officer of the National Council for Teachers Education (hereinafter called `the NCTE'), to the said respondent.
It has accordingly been pleaded that as the petitioner had got her degree under the one-sitting programme, she was not eligible for admission.
4.
Mr. Girish Agnihotri, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has raised one basic argument in the course of the hearing.
He has urged that the eligibility conditions for taking the entrance test had been laid down in the Prospectus issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, and it had been provided, inter alia, that a person was eligible to seek admission to the entrance test if he had a BA degree of the University or any other qualification recognized as being equivalent therewith.
He has pointed out that this clause has been incorporated verbatim in the Information Brochure- cum-application form which had to be utilized for admission to the course.
Reliance has also been placed by the learned counsel on Annexure P-2 and P-3 (appended with C.W.P.
No. 15964 of 1998), the recognition and equivalence granted to the aforesaid examination by the University Grants Commission and subsequently by the Guru Nanak Dev University, respondent No. 1 and to Annexure P-3 (appended with C.W.P.
No. 16850 of 1998), whereby a similar recognition had been granted by the Panjab University-respondent No. 2.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1, has however controverted the petitioner's stand by asserting that the Prospectus as also the Information Brochure specifically provided that admission to the colleges would be made as per the norms laid down by the NCTE and Clause 12 on page 6 of the latter postulated that while choosing a subject combination the candidate concerned was required to fill in only those subjects which he/she had studied for at least two years in Part-I, Part-II and Part-III at graduate level and had passed the university examination thereafter.
He has accordingly urged that as this qualification had been laid down by the NCTE as was also evident from Annexure R-1/1, the petitioner was not eligible for admission to the B.Ed Course.
6.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard and the record has also been examined with their assistance.
Clause 2 of the Prospectus deals with the Eligibility for the Entrance Test and as the petitioner's case is for admission to a college affiliated to the Panjab University, Chandigarh, the clause relevant is reproduced below :  26 Educational qualifications for the Entrance Examination for admission to the affiliated Colleges of Education of the three universities, namely Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Panjab University, Chandigarh and Punjabi University, Patiala shall be as per prevailing ordinances of the three Universities respectively.
EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS FOR ADMISSION TO COLLEGES OF EDUCATION AFFILIATED TO PANJAB UNIVERSITY, CHANDIGARH.
a) A first degree in any Faculty of the University obtaining not less than 45 per cent marks in the aggregate.
OR  b) MA or MSc.
(Hons.
School) or MCom.
degree of the University.
OR  c) BA degree of the University through Modern Indian Languages and English only examinations in which case the aggregate of 45 per cent marks shall be calculated by taking into account the marks obtained in English and elective subjects taken together.
OR  d) Diploma in Rural Service (3 years course) awarded by National Council for Rural Higher Education, Ministry of Education, with not less than 45 per cent marks in the aggregate;  OR  e) Any other qualification recognised as equivalent to (a), (b) and (c) above.
The eligibility conditions for admission to the Joint Entrance Test, quoted aforesaid, have been made applicable for admission to the colleges concerned by virtue of clause 21 at page 4 when read along with Appendix-VI of the Information Brochure.
Mr. Agnihotri has also relied on Annexures P-2 and P-3, appended with C.W.P.
No. 15964 of 1998.
These Annexures are reproduced below in extenso:  Annexure P-2 Dr. R.P.
Gangurde Additional Secretary Phone No. 3239659(O) University Grants Commission Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi.
DO No. F.11-4/92(OPP-II) March, 1997.
Dear Dr. Ranga,  In contention of this office letter of even number dated 24th April, 1996 regarding validity of one sitting degree from the recognised universities, this is to inform you that the Commission considered the matter in its meeting held on 10th September, 1996 and decided as follows :  "In its previous meeting dated 29th March, 1996, the commission had decided that in view of the 1986 regulations for the minimum requirements for the degree, no university is allowed to enrol candidates for one sitting BA degree course from the year 1996-97 onwards.
Representations were received from many candidates.
It was decided that the candidates already enrolled should complete their degree by the year 1998-99.
The universities violating this decision may be debarred from receiving plan assistance from the Commission.
The degrees of the candidates enrolled for the one time bachelor's degree programme upto the year 1995-96 may be treated as valid.
The degree of the candidates declared valid may be treated at par with other degrees of the same university for all purposes including admission to higher degrees and employment."
The above decision is applicable to all the universities who are running one sitting degree course.
This is for your information and necessary action.
With regards,  Yours sincerely, Sd/- R.P.
Gangurde Dr. ML Ranga,  Vice Chancellor,  Kurukshetra University,  Kurukshetra - 132 119.
.......  Annexure P-3  GURU NANAK DEV UNIVERSITY : AMRITSAR  No. 8034-8184/Misc  Date: 491997  1.
The Heads of Teaching Depts.
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
2.
The Principals of All the Colleges affiliated to this University.
3.
Director, Regional Centre,  Jalandhar.
Subject: Recognition of one sitting BA degree of all the Accredited Universities in India as equivalent to BA degree of Guru Nanak Dev University.
..........  Dear Sir/Madam  In the light of the decision taken by the University Grants Commission, New Delhi, the Vice Chancellor has accorded recognition to one sitting BA degree of all accredited universities in India as equivalent to BA degree of this University provided the candidates concerned are otherwise eligible under the relevant ordinances.
It is made clear that the students who were enrolled after the year 1995-56 and obtained one sitting BA degree shall not be considered equivalent to BA degree of this university.
Sd/- J.S.
Gulati  Asstt.
Registrar (General)".
7.
Mr. Patwalia has nevertheless placed reliance on the stipulation given in the Prospectus that the admission would be made as per the norms laid down by the NCTE which form a part of the important instructions as also stand reproduced in clauses 82 and 83 given at page 13 thereof, as also in Note: 1 and 2 given at page 3 of the Information Brochure.
Primary reliance has, however, been placed on Clause 12 printed at page 6 of the Information Brochure.
This clause is reproduced below :  "12.
The candidate should fill in only those subjects which he/she has studied for at least two years in Part-I, Part-II and Part-III at graduate level and passed the university examination.
For instance, if a candidate has studied at the graduate level for at least two years the subjects English, Punjabi, Economics, History & Political Science and passed the University examination, then he/she should mention these subjects only."
Annexure R-1/1, on which reliance has also been placed, is also reproduced hereunder :  ANNEXURE R-1/1  NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TEACHERS EDUCATION  (A statutory body of the Government of India)  Northern Regional Committee  NRC/NCTE/Act.
AG/98/2668 Dated: 12th Aug 1998.
Dr. Om Avasthi, Co-Ordinator,  Office of the Co-ordinator,  B.Ed.
Joint Entrance Test,  Guru Nanak Dev University,  Amritsar - 143005  Sub : Teaching subjects in B.Ed.
Joint Entrance Test 1998-99.
Sir, with reference to your telephone conversation with our worthy Regional Director, I am directed to clarify the following points regarding Teaching subjects for B.Ed.
Joint Entrance Test 1998-99 to you :-  1.
Teaching subject means a subject offered by the candidate at his Bchelor's level Examination as an optional or compulsory subject, provided that the candidate studied it for at least two years and also took university examination for two years.
Thus the qualifying subjects like General English, General Hindi, General Education, General Elementary Mathematics, dropped by a candidate after 1st year of graduation, shall not be treated as a teaching subject.
2.
In the case of Honours graduates besides the honours subject, the subsidiary subjects would also be taken into account provided the candidate studied the same for at least two academic sessions and also took university examination each year.
For example  A.
To opt Social Studies as one of the teaching subject for B.Ed.
exam, students must have taken any two out of History, Political Science, Public Administration, Geography, Philosophy, Psychology and Sociology.
B Agriculture graduate can be allowed to opt General Science and Biology for B.Ed.
exam.
C. H.Sc.
(Home Science) graduates can be allowed to take any two out of General Science, Biology, Chemistry, Life Science etc. for B.Ed.
Exam.
D Commerce graduates can be allowed to opt Economics and Maths for B.Ed.
Examination.
I hope, now with the clarification of above points, the problem of subject combinations for B.Ed.
Exam will be solved easily and the admission method of subject combination-wise will be followed in your region.
The number of teachers subject-wise present in each college, may be collected by the admission agency before the distribution of students to each college for the session 1998-99.
Sd/- Dr. Abha Bhatnagar,  Research Officer."
8.
It is to be noted that the Prospectus as also the Information Brochure have the force of law and the University Grants Commission as and the Guru Nanak Dev University and the Panjab University have accorded an equivalent status to the BA one sitting degree programme with the regular one, it must be taken that both are equally placed, more particularly as the course of instruction for both the programmes is identical.
To my mind, therefore, the petitioner was fully entitled to seek admission on the basis of her BA one siting degree.
Mr. Patwalia's reliance on clause 12 and Annexure R-1/1 with the reply, is, to my mind, misplaced.
It may be noted that Clause 12 stands incorporated in the Chapter dealing with "Important Instructions for filling in the Interview-cum-Admission Form - 1998".
Clause 12 read together with Annexure R-1/1, clearly reveals that they pertained only to the subject combinations that could be taken for admission to the B.Ed Course and can, by no stench of imagination, be read to mean that they would govern the clauses dealing with the eligibility to take the entrance test or to seek admission to the B.Ed.
Course.
It is equally significant that the petitioner had been given admission to the respondent No. 2-University, in MA (Punjabi), in the year 1997 on the basis of her BA one sitting degree.
9.
It also needs to be highlighted that the BA one sitting program was introduced by the Kurukshetra University to meet a particular situation and its validity has been limited up to the examination of the year 1996 by the Supreme Court as also by the Universities themselves.
In the preamble to the prospectus for the year 1995-96 the objectives behind the introduction of the course have been laid down and they have been identified as being an opportunity for those persons who could not continue their higher education after 10+2 or equivalent examination due to various reasons, for example, women shouldering family responsibilities, workers on rotating shifts, military personnel, teachers, people employed at various levels, and that the major attraction/benefit of the course was that instead of taking an examination annually over three years for obtaining a BA Deere, such candidates could obtain the same by appearing at one time.
It has also pointed out that this was particularly beneficial for persons whose promotions had been stalled for want of a graduate degree and as such, the course would broaden and diversify a candidate's scope for career advancement and other related activities, as the course of study, mode of examination and the degree awarded would be the same as of regular students of the colleges affiliated to the University.
To my mind, the laudable object behind and the limited duration of the programme is yet another factor which tilts the balance in the petitioner's favour.
10.
This petition is accordingly allowed and direction is issued that the petitioner's candidature would be considered for admission to the B.Ed.
Course on the basis of her ranking in the Joint Entrance Test-1998 provided she fulfils the other conditions of eligibility and is otherwise entitled to admission.
It is further directed that the petitioner's lectures would be computed from the date that she actually gets admission to the Course and all efforts would be made by the College concerned to ensure that she is given full and complete instruction within the shortened span of the course available to her.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.