VK Bali, J - Challenge herein is to order Annexure P-5 dated 1121997 whereby approval of appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer has been declined by Guru Nanak Dev University respondent No. 1 herein.
The petitioner in wake of setting aside of order Annexure P-5 further seeks writ in the nature of mandamus so as to direct respondents to further grant approval to the appointment as Lecturer.
2.
Brief facts of the case giving rise to the present petition need a necessary mention.
It is the case of the petitioner that she along with one Kulwinder Kaur cleared her written examination of MPhil.
in June 1991.
The petitioner passed the examination with 473 grade points out of total of 6 points.
Along with Kulwinder Kaur petitioner appeared for viva voce examination on 641993.
Result of MPhil.
of Kulwinder Kaur was notified on 171993.
However, the result of the petitioner Rajinder Kaur was notified on 21.3.1994.
Petitioner joined as Lecturer in S.D.
College for Women, Sultanpur Lodhi and thereafter the case of the petitioner was sent to respondent No. 1 Guru Nanak Dev University by the Principal of S.D.
College for Women, Sultanpur Lodhi for grant of approval of appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in Punjabi.
On 2161995 the University Grants Commission introduced a test by which all candidates who had not cleared their MPhil.
by 31121993 had to clear the test for becoming eligible to be appointed as Lecturer.
On 1121997 respondent No. 1 refused to grant approval to the appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in Punjabi.
On representation of the petitioner, the Controller of Examination of the University prepared a case for notification of result of MPhil.
of the petitioner with effect from 1993 on 311998.
The case for renotification of the result of the petitioner with effect from 1993 was dealt with but for some reason or the other, it is the case of the petitioner that no final decision has been taken.
3.
On the facts as have been mentioned above, the Counsel representing the petitioner vehemently contends that withholding of the result of MPhil.
of the petitioner without any rhyme and reason is discriminatory and arbitrary and refusal on the part of respondent No. 1 to grant approval to the appointment of petitioner as Lecturer in Punjabi and delaying the result is illegal and discriminatory and thus, violative of the provisions of the Constitution.
4.
Pursuant to the notice issued by this Court, respondents have entered defence and contested the cause of the petitioner.
It has inter alia been pleaded in the written statement that the approval has been declined to the appointment of the petitioner as she had not passed U.G.C.
examination and cleared MPhil.
examination in March 1984 i.e. after the cut off date i.e. 31121993.
Thereafter, the petitioner was required to pass U.G.C.
test and hence the approval had since rightly been declined to the appointment of the petitioner.
In so far as declaration of result of MPhil.
of the petitioner is concerned, it is the case of the respondents that the result of MPhil.
Punjabi of the petitioner of 1st and 2nd year was later (RL) as she had mentioned the wrong registration number in her admission form.
Neither the petitioner nor the department made any attempt to get the result of second semester declared after completing the formalities.
The petitioner completed the formalities in March, 1994 and immediately thereafter her result was declared on 21.3.1994.
As her result of MPhil.
was declared on 21.3.1994, she was required to pass U.G.C.
test and as she had not passed the same, the approval has rightly been declined to the appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in S.D.
College for Women, Sultanpur Lodhi.
It has then been pleaded that the petition suffers from delay and laches.
The petitioner has approached this Hon'ble Court after more than 4 and half years whereas her result was declared in March, 1994, even though there was no delay on their part.
Result was declared in March 1994 as the petitioner failed to get the formalities completed for the declaration of her second semester MPhil.
result.
More so, the result was declared in March 1994 and the petitioner did not make any grievance at that stage.
Now after a lapse of more than 4 years the petitioner has approached this Court when the petitioner cannot even file a civil suit that her result declared in March 1994 should relate back to 1993 instead of March, 1994.
It has then been pleaded that the petitioner appeared in MPhil.
Punjabi I and II Semester Examination held in June, 1991 and her result of Ist Semester was declared on 2461993 as RL as she had mentioned wrong registration number in her admission form.
Accordingly, her result of 2nd Semester was also declared as RL (Lower) due to non-declaration of her result of Ist Semester.
Her result of first semester was declared on 12.7.1993 after completing the required formalities regarding verification of her registration number.
It is further the case of respondents that neither the petitioner nor the Department concerned made any efforts to get her result of 2nd semester declared by completing all the required formalities.
The formalities were completed later on in March, 1994 and her result of MPhil.
IInd Semester was declared on 21.3.1994.
Insofar as Kulwinder Kaur is concerned, it is the case of the respondents, that no formalities were required to be completed in her case.
Result of the petitioner, as referred to above, could not be declared as she had given wrong registration number.
It has been specifically denied that her result was withheld on account of negligence on the part of the officials of the University.
The delay occurred due to inaction on the part of the petitioner and, therefore, her request that the requisite notification for declaration of result may be moved and should be done prior to 31121993, was not acceded to.
5.
The facts, as have been disclosed in the written statement, could not be refuted.
No replication controverting the said facts has been filed nor the facts, as detailed above, have been denied during the course of arguments.
In view of the contents of written statement as fully detailed above, we find that it is on account of fault of the petitioner herself that her result was declared late.
The declaration of result cannot be preponed and if for that reason approval to her appointment as Lecturer has been denied, there is nothing that this Court can do.
The petitioner is to be blamed herself for the delay caused in the matter.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.