TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
Petition admitted.
With the consent of the parties, it is taken up for final disposal.
The petitioners who are working as Surveyors in the Salal Hydro-electric Project, are seeking parity in the matter of scales of pay, which the National Hydro Electric Corporation is giving to other projects.
It is the case of the petitioners that the Salal, Sawalkote, Chamera and Dhouliganga Projects under the National Hydro Electric Power Corporation are similarly situated and there is no justification to treat them differently.
It is submitted that the nature of job which is being performed in the Salal Project is the same as in the other projects.
Objections have been filed.
It is stated that this is a matter which should be agitated under the Industrial Disputes Act.
On merits it is submitted that the petitioners were appointed as Surveyors in a specified pay grade.
Having accepted the offer they cannot turn around and ask for higher grades.
It is further stated that the projects to which the reference is made, are located in different States.
Reliance is also being placed on some settlement which is arrived at between the Management and the employees.
The basic issue which is involved in this petition is as to whether the petitioners can claim the benefit of the concept of equal pay for equal work.
This aspect of the matter was considered in number of decisions.
These are being noticed as under :  (i) The claim for equal pay for equal work is not to be decided as an abstract doctrine.
Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association of India v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1990 SC 334.
(ii) Aggrieved employee must demonstrate discrimination.
V Markendeye v. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1989 SC 1308.
(iii) Equality claim would be attracted where classification is unreasonable or is not based on any principle.
PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India and Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1990 SC 334.
(iv) Equal pay must depend upon the nature of work done.
It cannot be judged by the mere volume of work.
Differentiation despite similarity of functional work but due to dissimilarity of the responsibility, confidentiality is not discriminatory.
Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1988 SC 1291.
(v) Payment of higher salary on the basis of higher qualification is permissible.
Dr. C Cirijambal v. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. (sic) SC 1537.
(vi) Employees working in one institution cannot claim parity with other institutions.
All India Sainik Schools Employees Association v. The Defence Minister-cum-Chairman Board of Governors, Sainik School Society, New Delhi, A.I.R. 1989 SC 88.
(vii) In the matter of revision of pay scales two groups were formed not on the basis of merit-cum-seniority but on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness though they were performing the same duties would be bad.
P Savita v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1985 SC 1124 and Delhi Veterinary Association v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1984 SC 1211, and (viii) Part time employees doing work for same or more work hours are to get the same pay as regular employees.
Vijay Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1992(3) SCT 371 (P&H) : A.I.R. 1994 SC 265."
In view of the above, a case has been made out for interference.
The petitioners are held entitled to claim parity.
The respondent-Corporation which is a public authority cannot resort to discriminatory treatment in the matter of granting benefits.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
Petitoin allowed.