HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners had obtained admission to the MBBS Course in the Dr MGR University Madras, in Guru Gobind College, Faridkot and in the Assam Medical College, Dibrugarh, respectively.
They all cleared the first MBBS professional 18 months course in their very first attempts.
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar respondent No. 3 issued an Information Brochure Annxure P-1 in which the instructions of the State Government dated 1541996, prescribing the guidelines for migration from one Medical College to another both within and outside the State, were set out.
The petitioners made an application for the purpose, seeking migration to the 2nd professional MBBS in some other institution and also sat in the Joint Test for migration held on 1951996, and on declaration of the result two days thereafter, were shown at Merit Nos. 13, 14 and 19 respectively, and being meritorious enough, were granted migration to the Medical College, Amritsar on 2851996 and joined classes therein, on 361996.
It is the admitted position that the Medical Counsel of India-respondent No. 5 also approved the migration granted to the petitioners being in accordance with the rules.
The final examination for the second professional was to be held some time in July, 1997 and the petitioners filled in the application form within the due date.
They were, however, told that as certain queries had been raised by respondent No. 5 on their eligibility to take the examination, they could not be permitted to do so.
It is the petitioners', case that this action was being taken on account of Annexures P-4/A and P-4/B dated 247 1996 and 28111996 respectively in which Migration Sub Committee of the Medical Council of India, had taken a decision that those students who had got migration after the lapse of three months from the passing of the first MBBS professional examination were required to complete a course of study of 18 month in the receiving college before they could be allowed to take the 2nd professional examination.
The petitioners, aggrieved by the proposed action which had rendered them ineligible to take the examination addressed various representations to the Medical Council of India, but to no avail.
Frustrated thereby, the petitioners have come to this court.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case on 1141997 and in response thereto two separate replies have been filed one on behalf of the State of Punjab respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and second by respondent No. 5, the MCI The reply filed by respondent No. 4 i.e.
Principal of the Gove.
Medical College, Amritsar relies primarily on the stand taken by respondent No. 5.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 5 the statutory functions enjoined on the MCI by virtue of the provisions of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 have been set out amongst them being a duty to prescribe the minimum standards of medical education required for the grant of recognised qualifications by the Universities or Medical Institutes.
It has also been pointed out that one of the important functions of the Medical Council pertained to the admissions in medical colleges, duration of the courses and migration from one medical college to another.
Reference has also been made to clauses (iii) and (v) of the Regulations framed under the Act (hereinafter called the Regulations) and it has been highlighted that Regulation (iii) dealing with the duration of courses provided that the first professional course would consist of 18 months of study.
Specific attention has also then drawn to Regulation (v) and it has been pointed out that as the petitioners had been allowed migration more than three months of their passing the first professional examination, they had to undergo a course of instructions of 18 months in the receiving college in order to make them eligible to sit in the second professional examination.
3.
Mr. JS Khehar, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has argued that the reliance by respondent No. 5 the Medical Council of India, on Regulation (v) was misplaced inasmuch as that the said Regulation only placed an embargo on the grant of migration after the expiry of three months from the first professional examination and the additional condition placed by the respondent with regard to a course of instruction of 18 months in the receiving college before appearance in the 2nd professional examination was not warranted as the petitioners had admittedly undergone a period of 18 months of study partly in the first and partly in the receiving colleges.
He has, in this connection, referred to the various clauses of the Brochure Annexure P-1 with special emphasis on paragraph 7 thereof which provided that the number of lectures attended in the first college would be counted in the receiving college, and if this condition stood satisfied admission to the 2nd professional examination could not be denied.
He has, accordingly, urged that the additional condition imposed which was now under challenge, had absolutely no basis.
4.
As against this, Mr. HS Gill.
the learned D.A.G.
Punjab, appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4 has pointed out that it was the statutory duty imposed on the MCI to lay down the minimum standards of medical education and to provide rules governing migration and as such, it was open to respondent No. 5 to impose such conditions that it found necessary.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
Regulation V(b) is reproduced below :-  "Migration/transfer can be allowed by the University concerned within three months after passing the 1st professional examination, as a rule".
The position that emerges on its bare perusal is that it does not postulate a period of 18 months of study in the receving college that had been imposed by MCI and it only refers to an embargo on migration being placed after the expiy of a period of three months from the date of the passing of the first professional examination.
Paragraph 7 of the Information Brochure Annexure P-1 specifically provides that the number of lectures attended by the candidate in the previous college would be counted in the receiving college, the implication being that not only the number of lectures but the duration of study in the previous college, must count towards the duration of study and the number of lectures attended in the receiving college.
The MCI having itself allowed migration to the petitioners more than three months after the passing of the Ist professional examination, could not now make a volte face and restrain them from taking the examination for the 2nd professional course as they had completed a course of study of eighteen months cumulatively in the previous and the receiving college, and fulfilled the other conditions of eligibility such as having attended the requisite number of lectures etc.  6.
There is yet another circumstance pointed out by Mr. Khehar.
He has referred to this Court's order dated 2851997, in which it had been noted by the Division Bench that though 39 students in all, had been granted migration to various Medical Colleges in Punjab and had joined therein in June, 1996, nine students who too had admittedly not completed a course 18 months of study in the receiving college had been allowed to take the examination for the 2nd professional course, whereas the petitioners had been treated otherwise on the ground that they had got migration after the expiry of three months from the date of the passing the first professional course.
The Division Bench was prima facie of the view that the distinction made by the MCI was, perhaps, arbitrary and as such, a fresh look needed to be taken by it in the light of the observations made by the Bench.
While this matter was yet pending, the petitioners moved CM No. 12652 of 1997, seeking a direction from this Court so as to enable them to appear in the 2nd professional examination.
The Division Bench in its order dated 1361997, took note of the order of 2851997 alluded to above and recorded that vide its order of 961997 Annexure-B, the MCI had now rejected the candidature of all 19 students who had joined the course in June, 1996.
The Division Bench, accordingly, in its order of 1361997 allowed the petitioners to appear in the 2nd professional examination in July, 1997 though on a provisional basis.
It is also significant that despite the order Annexure-B 11 out of the 19 students referred to above have, nevertheless, been allowed to take the 2nd professional examination in July, 1997.
A bare look at the facts given in this paragraph would indicate that the MCI has acted in an arbitrary and unbecoming manner in denying the petitioners their rightful claim.
It will be noticed further that the order Annexure B was addressed to the petitioners alone and had not been endorsed to any one else which again creates a suspicions of bias against the MCI  7 This petition is, accordingly, allowed, the orders Annexures P-4/A and P-4/B are quashed in so far as they deny the petitioners' claim to appear in the 2nd professional examination, and it is directed that the result of the said examination taken by the petitioners under the orders of this Court shall be declared forthwith.
It is further ordered that all other consequential benefits that may flow from this judgment will be made available to the petitioner.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.