GR Bhattacharjee, J - The contention of the writ petitioners, in substance is that they were appointed by the Calcutta Municipal Corporation Authorities as casual guards under the Health Department in January 1986 on the basis of `no work no pay' initially for a period of six months and thereafter their term was extended from time to time but ultimately the Municipal Corporation going to discontinue the services of the petitioners and that is why they have come before this Court for absorption and regularisation of their services.
On the other hand, it is the contention of the respondent Corporation Authorities that there cannot be any absorption of the writ petitioners because their engagement was on casual basis and they have not been selected or appointed by following the normal procedure of appointment.
It is further submitted on behalf of the Calcutta Municipal Corporation that ultimately on the basis of the names forwarded by the Employment Exchange a panel was prepared and appointments were given from that panel and since the petitioners were not in the panel there is no scope of their absorption or regularisation in service.
Evidently, the petitioners were engaged not following any normal procedure of appointment or engagement, and without taking recourse to any selection procedure from amongst Employment Exchange-sponsored candidates or candidates coming in response to any advertisement for engagement.
It is however submitted by the learned advocate for the petitioners that in the affidavit-in-opposition there has not been any averment that subsequently names of candidates were called for from the Employment Exchange or any panel was prepared from amongst such candidates.
Be that as it may, definitely the petitioners did not go through any selection process and that being so, it cannot be said that their engagement fulfilled the requirements of a normally expected selection procedure either by calling names of the candidates from the Employment Exchange or by inviting applications through advertisement.
That being so, any such casual engagement cannot have the status and stature of engagement of appointment through regular process which would have given equal opportunity to other candidates also similarly situated or having similar qualification or selection criteria.
Therefore one thing is certain that the petitioner engagement was not in accordance with any proper procedure of appointment.
In recent times the Apex Court has deprecated such appointments.
In this connection, one may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Ashwani Kumar v. State of Bihar, AIR 1997 SC 1628 : 1997(1) SCT 573 (SC) and State of HP v. Suresh Kumar Verma and another 1996(7) SCC 562 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
359.
Since the original engagement of the petitioners is not based on any proper procedure of engagement or appointment, any direction for regularisation or absorption of the petitioner in services will not be consistent with the law laid down by the Apex Court and accordingly the petitioners cannot be granted the relief of absorption or regularisation, as prayed for in this writ petition.
2.
The writ petition accordingly stands disposed of without any relief being granted to the petitioners.
The respondent authorities will however be at liberty to fill up the available vacancies in their establishment in the equivalent category as that of the engagement of the petitioners in accordance with law and while filling up such vacancies the petitioners may also be considered for appointment in such vacancies along with the other candidates coming up for consideration in the normal procedure and in that case the respondent-authorities may give some weightage in favour of the petitioners for the experience they have gained in discharge the works for which they were engaged under the respondents.
If the petitioners become age barred under the normal rules for considering them in such vacancies the respondent-authorities may consider necessary relaxation of their age to the extent of their period of services on daily wages and consider their cases according to the rules, if they are otherwise eligible.
The interim order which has been passed in this writ petition cease to be in operation with the disposal of this writ petition but the authorities concerned will be at liberty to keep them in engagement for temporary period or temporary purpose, if they consider it necessary so to do.
3.
All parties are to act on a signed xerox copy of this dictated order on usual undertaking.
Petition dismissed.