THB Chalapathi, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner is seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to give him the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 with effect from 151989 and time-bound promotional scale of pay of Rs. 3000-4500 with effect from 151994.
2.
The petitioner has been working as an Editor on regular basis under the National Family Welfare Programme since July 1969.
Admittedly, there are no avenues of promotion available to the post of Editor and he reached the maximum scale of Rs. 3500/-.
The National Family Welfare Programme is a centrally sponsored programme.
The staffing pattern has been provided by the Government of India and the post of Editor and other posts in the Programme have been created according to the instructions of the Government of India.
According to the petitioner, the Government of India recommended the upgradation of the post of Editor to that of Assistant Director (Media) and that the post of the petitioner continued to be non-cadre isolated post and has not been upgraded.
According to him, neither the post of Editor has been upgraded in the higher pay scale, nor he has been assigned the designation of Assistant Director (Media) as per instructions of the Government of India and he is stagnating on the said post for the last 24 years and has to continue as such throughout his service.
Further, according to him, in spite of the recommendations of the Government of India, no benefit has been given to the petitioner and no rules have been framed.
The petitioner, therefore, seeks issuance of a writ of mandamus.
3.
In the written statement filed by respondents 1 to 3, it has been contended inter alia that there was no specific communication of Government of India for promoting the persons working as Editors in the Media Wing as Assistant Director.
The matter regarding upgradation of the post of Editor to that of Assistant Director was considered by the Finance Department and the same was rejected by the Government, but the petitioner and other similarly situated persons have been granted the benefit of five biennial increments on reaching the maximum scale of pay.
It is further averred that it is for the Government either to upgrade the post or not and the Government after considering various aspects of the matter has taken a decision not to upgrade the post of Editor and the case of the petitioner was also considered, but the Government did not find it worth to be accepted and therefore it is prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
There is no dispute of the fact that the rules do not provide any promotional avenues for the post of Editor or to give any higher pay scale.
The Government has placed on record a communication dated 3031998 enclosing with a brief note containing reasons for not upgrading the post of Editor to that of Assistant Director.
The same reads as follows :  (i) "The Government vide circular No. 1/8/3[D(FD)-88 dated 731988 allowed biennial increments to the incumbents of such posts who have reached the maximum of their corresponding scale of the post held by him.
(ii) It was not considered a solid ground for the upgradation of the post that the incumbent is stagnate because of the fact that there will be repercussions in the other departments also.
Moreover, this is not a solution of the problem because in the event of upgradation of the post of petitioner, the similar situation will arise to the future incumbent after the retirement of the petitioner."
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of the Supreme court in Mohan Lal v. Jai Bhagwan, AIR 1988 SC 1033 wherein it has been held that "reasonable promotional opportunities should be available in every wing of Public Service.
That generates efficiency in service and fosters the appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service.
In the absence of promotional prospects, the service is bound to degenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve properly."
6.
A reading of the judgment of the Apex Court clearly shows that the Supreme Court gave a direction to the State of Bihar to provide atleast two promotional opportunities to the officers of State Police.
It is to be noted that the claim of the petitioner in the above said case for being absorbed in the regular Police Force was rejected.
7.
It is no doubt true that for the benefit of service, there should be promotional avenues, but it is for the State Government to take a policy decision in this regard.
8.
It is further to be noticed that during the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner retired from service and any direction, if given to the State Government to create promotional avenues, will be of no use of the petitioner.
At the time of joining the service, the petitioner knew very well that there are no promotional chances for the post he applied for.
The Government has taken a conscious decision not to upgrade the post as it will have repercussions in the other Departments.
In this view of the matter, this Court is not in a position to grant any relief to the petitioner.
9.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.