Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases were recruited as constables in the Punjab Police in October 1987.
In January 1989, the petitioners were posted to guard Sukhdev Singh, accused who was admitted to the Medical College, Faridkot for treatment.
The accused escaped.
On January 12, 1989, a case under Section 223 IPC was registered against the petitioners.
While the case was still pending, the petitioners were discharged from service vide order dated December 29, 1989.
The petitioners submitted a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
It was rejected.
Even their mercy petition having been turned down by the Inspector General of Police, the petitioners approached this court through two writ petitions.
After the filing of the petitions, the petitioners were acquitted in the criminal case by the Sessions Judge, Faridkot vide judgment dated November 22, 1994.
It is alleged that the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioners and in rejecting their petition is arbitrary and unfair.
It has been further alleged that the petitioners have been discriminated against.
While Hardev Singh and Parminder Singh who were also discharged along with the petitioners and were members of the guard party have been reinstated, the request made by them has been turned down.
2.
The claim made by the petitioners has been controverted in the reply filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioners had gone away from duty.
The accused had taken advantage of their absence and fled away from the hospital.
With regard to the charge of discrimination, it has been averred that "Constables Hardev Singh and Parminder Singh were never discharged from service under Punjab rule 1221 since they were not covered under the said rule."
On this basis, it is prayed that the writ petitions be dismissed.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Admittedly, the two petitioners along with S/Shri Hardev Singh and Parminder Singh had been posted on guard duty.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners have been acquitted of the charge which had been levelled against them.
It is further admitted that S/Shri Hardev Singh and Parminder Singh were also discharged along with the petitioners but subsequently, vide orders passed in May 1990, both of them were reinstated in service.
It is in the background of this admitted position that the contentions raised by the parties have to be considered.
5.
What deserves notice at the outset is that there was nothing against the petitioners except the allegation that accused Sukhdev Singh had escaped from their custody.
It has not been even suggested that the petitioners were found wanting in any other respect.
So far as the escape of the accused is concerned, it has been admitted that the appeal filed by the petitioners was allowed by the Sessions Judge, Faridkot.
Still further, nothing has been pointed out to show that there is any basis for treating the petitioners differently from S/Shri Hardev Singh and Parminder Singh.
The only reason mentioned in the written statement is that they had not been discharged under Rule 1221.
However, it has been conceded that they had not completed three years of service and as such, the only provision under which their services could have been terminated was Rule 1221.
Thus, the averment in the written statement that the provisions of the rule was not applicable to them is not accurate.
In fact, it is false.
The result is that the petitioners were discharged from service only on account of the pendency of the criminal case in which they have been acquitted.
Further, the case of the petitioners is in no way distinguishable from that of their two colleagues mentioned above.
In this situation, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that the action was violative of the rules of natural justice as also the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution, has to be sustained.
6.
Mr. Chhinna, counsel for the respondents has pointed out that the order of discharge was challenged by the petitioners after an inordinately long delay in the year 1993.
Mr. Aggarwal, counsel for the petitioners has pointed out that they had submitted representation followed by a mercy petition.
The decision had been conveyed only in the year 1991.
The petitioners had approached this court in the year 1993.
If such an objection had been raised at that time, they could have sought their remedy before the civil court.
Still further, Mr. Aggarwal has placed on record the affidavits of both the petitioners separately to the effect that in case, the order of discharge is set aside, they will not claim arrears of salary from December 29, 1989 till the date of the decision by this Court.
7.
Admittedly, the decision on the mercy petition submitted by the petitioners was conveyed to them in January 1991.
On the date of the filing of the writ petitions, the limitation for filing a civil suit had not expired.
If the objection of delay is sustained at this stage, when the writ petitions have remained pending for more than five years, it would result in miscarriage of justice.
However, keeping in view the fact that the petitioners had not actually performed the duties of the post of Constable, it is only fair that they have themselves given up the claim in respect of the arrears of salary.
Taking the circumstances cumulatively, the objection of delay cannot be sustained.
8.
In view of the above, both the writ petitions are allowed.
The impugned orders of termination are set aside.
The petitioners are ordered to be reinstated within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
They will not be entitled to any arrears of salary if they are reinstated within one month.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.