THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner joined Haryana Police on December 14, 1988.
According to him, he applied for 7 days' casual leave on July 1, 1991 and went to his village where he fell ill and he remained under treatment in a Government Hospital from 371991 to 2771991.
According to him, he also produced a medical certificate but the fourth respondent i.e.
Superintendent of Police, Jind, discharged the petitioner from service in exercise of his powers under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules without holding any enquiry.
2.
The petitioner in this writ petition challenges the order of his discharge.
The order of discharge has been annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P- 1.
A reading of Annexure P-1 clearly shows that the petitioner was discharged from service on the ground that he is a habitual and wilful absentee from duty without leave and he was unlikely to be proved an efficient police officer.
It contains five instances when the petitioner absented himself.
3.
In the reply filed by the respondents, it is admitted that the petitioner was granted one Commendation Certificate of Class-III.
It has also been admitted that the petitioner has been discharged because of his habitual absence from duty.
The point that is to be considered in this writ petition is whether the order of discharge can be said to be a discharge simpliciter as envisaged under Rule 1221 of the Rules.
There cannot be any doubt that the wilful and habitual (sic) cannot be said that the order-Annexure P.1 is made in accordance with Rule 1221 of the Rules.
In this context it is useful to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Smt. Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State and another, A.I.R. 1986 Supreme Court 1790, wherein it has been held where the impugned order of discharge was made on the basis of the misconduct, it amounts to an order of dismissal from service on the ground of misconduct and, therefore, the order is in contravention of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and is liable to be quashed and set aside.
In fact, in the case before the Supreme Court, the order of discharge did not contain any acts of misconduct, whereas in the case on hand, the order of discharge- Annexure P-1 clearly shows that the petitioner was absenting himself from duty habitually.
Admittedly, no charge-sheet has been served and no explanation was called for and no opportunity was given and no enquiry has been conducted.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the writ petition is to be allowed.
4.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the order of discharge dated August 20, 1991 (Annexure P.1) is hereby set aside.
The petitioner is entitled to be reinstated in service with all service benefits.
However, this order will not preclude the department to take such action as is open to it under the law.
Petition allowed.