HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed the MBBS Course in the year 1984 and joined the PCMS Class II on ad hoc basis on 301987.
His Services were regularised on 2561992.
The petitioner took the entrance test for admission to the M.D./M.S.
3 years Post Graduate Course, 1994, held by the respondents against the 60% seats reserved for in-service candidates and on the declaration of the result, the petitioner was shown at serial No. 35 on the merit list.
At the time of counselling, the petitioner expressed his preference firstly for the speciality of Orthopaedics and secondly, for that of Radio-Diagnosis but was informed that no seats were available in either of these specialities.
The petitioner, accordingly accepted admission on 8111997 against a seat in the speciality of General Surgery.
The petitioner, thereafter received information that a candidate who was at serial No. 52 (54) had got admission in the speciality of orthopaedics and as the petitioner was substantially higher in merit, he made a representation to the respondents for being given that speciality.
On receiving no redress from the respondents, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 1091 of 1995 and vide judgment dated 3151995 Annexure P-2, to the petition, this Court while allowing the writ petition directed that the petitioner be admitted to the MS Orthopaedics Course as at the time of his first interview, a seat in the Department of orthopaedics was, in fact, available and the same had been given to a candidate who was much lower in merit.
It is the admitted position that no further action has been taken by the respondents with regard in the judgment under reference and it had accordingly, attained finality.
The respondents accepting the judgment issued a No Objection Certificate.
Annexure P-3 dated 2961995 so as to enable the petitioner to join the Department of Orthopaedics and it is the admitted position that the petitioner joined the said course on 361995.
The petitioner is, however, aggrieved by the order Annexure P5 dated 23101997 whereby he has been ordered to be reverted to his posting the PCMS before the completion of three years from 3061995.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case on 4111997 and the operation of the order Annexure P-5 was directed to be stayed.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner continues to attend the Course as of now.
3.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel representing the petitioner has argued that as per Annexure R1 dated 2011993, a person joining the Post Graduate Course was given a maximum period of three years to complete the course with full pay and if the course was not completed within that period, the candidate could complete the same after taking leave of the kind due i.e. leave without pay.
It has, accordingly, been urged that the period of three years in the petitioner's case was to commence on 3061995 when he had obtained admission in the Orthopeadics Course on the basis of No Objection Certificate Annexure P-3 dated 2961995 and not from 8.11.1994 i.e. the date on which he had secured seat in the Department of General Surgery.
4.
As against this, Mr. HS Gill, the learned State Counsel has pointed out that as per instructions Annexures R-1 and 2, the petitioner who was taking the Post-graduate Course, was required to complete the same within three years from the initial admission on 8.11.1994 and as he had not done so, the order Annexure P-5 directing that the petitioner be reverted on the expiry of three years, was perfectly justified.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
6.
While disposing of the earlier writ petition vide judgment Annexure P-2, this Court clearly found that a seat in the Department of Orthopaedics had, in fact, been lying vacant at the time when the petitioner had first appeared for counselling, but in spite of this, the petitioner had been denied admission.
The Court, accordingly, observed that the action of the respondents was unfair and that the respondents could not be allowed to take advantage of their own wrong, and to deny the relief to the petitioner on the ground that he had accepted admission in the speciality of General Surgery.
In the light of the observations quoted above, it is apparent that the respondents were clearly remiss in denying the petitioner his rightful claim to seat in the Department of Orthopaedics.
The question that now arises in the circumstances is as to when the period of three years is to commence with regard to the petitioner.
In the Certificate Annexure P.3 dated 2961995, permitting the petitioner to join in the Department of Orthopaedics, there is a clear reference to the NOC Annexure P-1 dated 29101994 permitting the petitioner to join the course of General Surgery and in the former, there is no stipulation that the said NOC would be taken to be in substitution of the earlier one.
It is, therefore, obvious that the period of three years was to be determined independently on the basis of the date of admission as a consequence of the NOC Annexure P-3 dated 2961995.
Moreover, the petitioner cannot be faulted for the mistake committed by the respondents and he cannot be denied a period of three years to complete his course in the speciality of Orthopaedics, an admission which he had obtained as a result of the order of this Court.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the order Annexure P-5 cannot be sustained and is quashed.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to treat the petitioner as having been admitted to the speciality of Orthopaedics on 31.6.1995 and to grant him all benefits thereof.
The petitioner will also have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.