HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 2134 and 10606 of 1998.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 2134 of 1998.
2.
The petitioner as also respondent Nos. 6 to 9 appeared in the joint entrance test for admission to the MBBS/BDS Courses in the various institutions mentioned in the prospectus issued, that is, Pandit BD Sharma Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak; Dental College, Rohtak; Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha; DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar, and BRS Institute of Medical Sciences, (Dental College and Hospital), Village Kotbilla, Panchkula.
On the declaration of her result, the petitioner was shown at Serial No. 219 in the merit list whereas respondent Nos. 6 to 9 were shown at Serial Nos. 164, 176, 201 and 214, respectively therein.
The first counselling was held on 18th August, 1997 and the candidates up to the merit No. 211, which included respondent Nos. 6 to 8, were admitted against the free as well as the payment seats with these respondents getting admission in the B.D.S.
Course at the DAV Centenary College, Yamunanagar, against payment seats and the petitioner and respondent No. 9 along with some others remaining on the waiting list.
The second counselling was thereafter conducted on 29th September, 1997 and the petitioner was called for the counselling whereas respondent No. 9 who had not opted against a payment seat was once again ignored.
The petitioner and some other candidates were accordingly given admission against payment seats in the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar, whereas respondent No. 6 was offered a free seat in the BRS Dental College, Kotbilla and respondent Nos. 7 and 8 were offered admission to the MBBS course against a free and payment seat, respectively, in the Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha.
Intimation with regard to the offer made to the said respondents was duly conveyed to them by the respondent-University but was not accepted by them and they continued to study in the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar.
The petitioner as also the respondents were invited for the third counselling which took place on 5th December, 1997, and whereas the petitioner was admitted against one of the free seats in the DAV Centenary College Yamuna Nagar, while three other candidates junior to her in ranking were granted admission in the BRS Dental College, Kotbilla, Panchkula also against free seats, respondent Nos. 6 to 8 were ignored.
It is the petitioner's case that despite the order in her favour granting her admission against a free seat in the DAV Centenary College Yamuna Nagar, the Principal of the said College attempted to fore-stall her admission by instigating respondent Nos. 6 to 9 to file Civil Writ Petition Nos. 19412 of 1997 and 123 and 192 of 1998 praying that as they were higher in merit, they were entitled to a free seat in the DAV Centenary Dental College Yumuna Nagar in her place.
These petitions came up for hearing after notice of motion on 9th February, 1998 before a Division Bench and the following order was made :  "Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner has been given admission against a free seat.
The claim made in the petition stands satisfied.
He prays for permission to withdraw the writ petition.
Permission is granted.
The writ petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
Sd/- Judge Sd/- Chief Justice" The net result of the order of this Court was that the petitioner who had been granted a free seat in the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar was deprived of the same whereas respondent Nos. 6 to 9 were granted admission instead.
It is in this situation that the present writ petition has been filed impugning the action of the respondent-College in depriving her of a free seat which had already been granted to her.
3.
On notice of motion in the present case various replies have been put in on behalf of the respondents.
A short written statement has been filed by the Registrar of the MD University, Rohtak, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in which the petitioner's case, as set out, has virtually been admitted.
It has been pointed out that the offer made to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 on 5th December, 1997 granting them admission to the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar was not in order as they had refused to accept their admission in the institutions offered to them in the second counselling held on 29th September, 1997.
It has also been urged that the Principal of the DAV Centenary Dental College Yamunanagar (respondent Nos. 4 and 5) was not competent to grant admission to respondent Nos. 6 to 9 at Yamunanagar, at his own level, as that was a matter within the exclusive purview of the Admission Committee.
The respondent's case has, however, been seriously controverted by respondent Nos. 4 and 5, and 6 and 8 who have filed three separate written statements.
It has been pointed out by respondent Nos. 6 to 8 that they were higher in merit vis-a-vis the petitioner in the entrance test and as the admission was to be granted on the basis of merit as per the admission regulations of the University, the action of the respondents granting admission to them in preference to the petitioner was fully justified.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 4 and 5, the Principal of the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunangar, an attempt has been made to highlight yet further the points made by respondent Nos. 6 and 8 and it has, in addition, been pleaded that despite a number of communications to respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the University, with regard to the conflicting claims of the petitioner and the others with regard to admission, no satisfactory reply had been forthcoming and as the time for admission as fixed by the University was running out, he had no option but to grant admission at his own level.
4.
Mr. IS Balhara, the learned counsel for the petitioner has given up the challenge to the admission of respondent No. 9 and confined his attack to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 only.
He has raised three arguments before me.
He has first argued that if a candidate had been offered a seat in a particular institution and course at the time of counselling and such offer was not accepted by that candidate, the right to claim admission in any subsequent counselling stood forfeited.
He has also highlighted that as per the prospectus issued by the University, the admission was to be made by an Admission Committee headed by the Director of the Pandit BD Sharma Post Graduate Institution of Medical Sciences, Rohtak, as Chairman and consisting of the Principals of the other four institutions mentioned above as members of that committee and, as such, the admission granted to the respondents by respondent No. 4 was wholly unjustified.
He has finally pleaded that three candidates lower in merit had been offered and granted admission against free seats in the BRS Institute of Medical Sciences Kotbilla, Panchkula and had the petitioner been called for interview on 5th December, 1997, along with these three candidates, she would have accepted admission against one of these seats as there was an enormous difference in the fee that was payable against a free seat and a payment seat.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have gone through the record with their assistance.
The fate of the case would hinge on an analysis of Chapter-V of the information Brochure (1997) issued by the University dealing with the method of selection and admission to the MBBS/BDS courses.
Para 1 of the aforesaid Chapter provides that a merit list of candidates in excess of the number of seats available would be prepared.
Paragraph II deals with the method of admission and postulates that the candidates higher in merit list would be offered seats for the MBBS course and the others for the BDS Course in order of merit subject to the availability of seats unless a candidate opted exclusively for one of the courses only at the time of interview.
Sub-paras (2), (3) and (4) of paragraph II which are relevant, are reproduced below:  (2) In case of admissions against free seats and payment seats, the candidates higher in merit list will be considered/offered admission against the 50% FREE SEATS in order of merit and candidates of lower merit will be considered/offered admission against PAYMENT SEATS.
(3) Candidates who fail to attend the Medical Examination on the notified date are liable to forfeit the claim for admission and placement in the waiting list.
(4) On the failure of the selected candidates to report for admission, the vacancies caused would be filled by candidates from the waiting list in order of merit.
A resume of the aforesaid sub-paras would clearly reveal that the substantive portion, i.e. sub-para (2) postulates that free seats would be offered in order of merit to the better candidates whereas the candidates lower in merit would be considered/offered against payment seats.
It is evident that the sine qua non for determining admission against a free or a payment seat is the merit in the entrance test.
Sub-paras (3) and (4) lay down the procedure for admission and can, by no stretch of imagination, be read to supplant or whittle down the effect of sub-para (2).
Mr. Balhara's argument that as respondent Nos. 6 to 8 had not accepted the offer made to them at the time of the second counselling on 29th September, 1997 to get admission in Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Sciences, Kotbilla, Panchkula, their claim for admission on the third counselling on 5th December, 1997 stood forfeited has to be examined in the above noted situation.
Moreover, it is significant that sub-para (3) talks about the forfeiture of a claim for admission on the failure of the candidate to attend the medical examination on the date notified but there is no such forfeiture clause in sub-paragraph (4) and all that this provision postulates is that in case the selected candidates fails to report for admission, the vacancy so caused would be filled up from the waiting list in order of merit.
There also appears to be merit in the stand of the respondents' counsel that the words "admission" and "waiting list" afore-referred would pertain to an admission made at the time of the first counselling and not thereafter.
Viewed in this light and more particularly, in the light of the fact that the substantive sub-paragraph (2) provides that the candidates higher in merit would be offered a free seat in preference to the one lower in merit, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents in granting admission to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 in preference to the petitioner was not justified.
To my mind, it would be only just and fair that the Admission Committee should take into account the subsequent developments leading to the counselling after the first one and make a final admission on the basis of merit.
This appears to have been done in this case.
6.
Mr. Balhara's second argument must now be dealt with.
He has pointed out the admission granted to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 by respondent No. 4, the Principal of the DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar, at this own level, was wholly without authority and jurisdiction and for this reason their admission being void ab initio, should be quashed.
This argument to my mind does have merit but for reasons stated hereunder the inference drawn does not automatically flow.
In the introduction to the information brochure, reference has been made to the Haryana Government notification No. 16/11/04-34 B-IV dated 7.4.1997 in which the State Government had nominated the MD University, Rohtak, as the competent authority to conduct the entrance examination for admission to the MBBS/BDS and MD/MS/PG Diploma and MDS courses for the Institutions in the State of Haryana for the year 1997, and in the last two lines of the Introduction it had been clearly stipulated that the admission would be made in the Colleges/Institutions given in the information brochure (which are detailed in the earlier part of the judgment) strictly on merit on the basis of a common entrance test and that no college/institution was authorised to make admission, on its own, in any other manner.
It is the admitted position that the Admission Committee had been set up, as a consequence of the afore-noted notification, consisting of the Director of Pt. BD Sharma Post-graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak as its Chairman and the Principals of the five institutions as its members.
It is, therefore, evident that respondent No. 4 was wholly unjustified in granting admission to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 at his own level, a fact that he has, in a laboured written statement, sought to justify by pleading that the University was at fault in not providing proper inputs to him with regard to the seats that had fallen vacant for consideration at the time of the third counselling on 5th December, 1997.
To my mind, the action of respondent No. 4 was totally unjustified but having held as above, it must not, as a consequence necessarily follow, that the admission of respondent Nos. 6 to 8 is liable to be quashed.
As already held above, the admission was to be made against the vacant seats available on 5th December, 1997 at the time of the third counselling to have been followed by the Principal- respondent No. 4.
In this view of the matter, Mr. Balhara's argument that the admission granted to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 should be quashed is without merit.
7.
Mr. Balhara's final argument must also fail.
It is evident from Annexure P-4 that the payment seat had been granted to the petitioner at the time of the second counselling on 29th September, 1997, and she had accepted the same on that account.
If the petitioner was aggrieved by the grant of a free seat to candidate in the BRS Institute of Medical Sciences, Kotbilla, Panchkula, she was at liberty to have challenged the same and not having done so till now, she cannot succeed on that basis.
8.
The case had been partly heard on 19th August, 1998 at length when Mr. Balhara made a request that before the judgment was dictated the University be directed to inform the Court as to whether the petitioner could be adjusted against two seats that were lying vacant in the Government Dental College, Rohtak.
The case was accordingly adjourned and Mr. BL Gupta, the learned counsel for the University has today informed the Court that the University has expressed its inability to adjust the petitioners against those seats.
In the light of what has been held above, the writ petition is dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
9.
Vide order dated 9th July, 1998, made in CM No. 12224 of 1998, this Court had directed as an interim measure that the petitioner should not be called upon to deposit her fee on the payment seat though site she would deposit the fee due on the free seat as also the hostel charges.
As a consequence of the dismissal of the writ petition, the petitioner shall now deposit all the charges due on payment seat within a period of two months from today.
Dasti order.
Petition dismissed.