VK Bali, J - Miss Madhu Sharma, a humble school teacher who came to be appointed under the category of "Handicapped persons" in the year 1988 in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan through present petition filed by her clamours for proper medical reimbursement.
2.
The petitioner was selected against the reserved post as mentioned above for handicapped and appointed in Kendriya Vidyala Sangathan in 1988.
Unfortunately, she suffered an attack of paralysis on right side of body in 1995 and was treated by the PGI at Chandigarh.
She suffered yet another attack of paralysis and this time on left side of body and face.
The doctor opined that she was suffering from Hyper Trophic Obstruction Cardiomyopathi.
She moved an application supported by the Principal and the Assistant Commissioner to the Commissioner seeking sanction for implantation.
On 651996 she moved yet another application which was supported by an estimate given by the PGI to the Commissioner for sanctioning an advance of Rs. 1,20,000/- being 80% of the estimated cost.
The total estimate cost was Rs. 1,50,000/-.
In between 2751996 to 3151996 when the petitioner was admitted in the PGI, she was given dual chamber pacemaker implantation.
The Principal who was also the Drawing and Disbursing Officer on the petitioner's bill for reimbursement, sanctioned only Rs. 26,000/- towards the cost of the dual chamber pacemaker and demanded refund of the excess advance.
He also objected to some other items of expense at the PGI though countersigned by the specialist attending there.
Aggrieved, the petitioner moved the Assistant Commissioner who turned down her request and confirmed the order of the Principal.
Thereafter in March 1997, petitioner made detailed representation enclosing therewith Government of India Circular fixing the cost of dual chamber pacemaker at Rs. 1,15,000/-.
She repeated her request by yet another representation dated 2081997.
This time the Principal in view of the Goverment of India Circular dated 1261996 forwarded her case for early favourable consideration.
However, Principal still insisted upon refund of Rs. 83,674/-.
No final decision was taken on the representations made by the petitioner and for that reason the petitioner has come to this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India claiming proper medical reimbursement.
3.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court respondent have filed reply.
It is the case of the respondents that the petitioner is entitled to medical facilities as per the Central Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as 1944 Rules).
It is admitted that the petitioner had applied on 521996 for purchase of dual pace-maker amounting to Rs. 125 lacs which was forwarded to the Head Office by the Assistant Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, Chandigarh.
Thereafter Commissioner vide letter dated 13.3.1996 wrote to the Assistant Commissioner stating therein that the petitioner may submit her medical claim to the Principal as the Principal was to settle the further claim under the 1944 Rules.
The Government of India has taken a decision that the maximum amount to be reimbursed towards the pacemaker would be limited to a maximum of Rs. 26,000/- or the cost of pacemaker, whichever is less and the balance cost, if any, will be borne by the beneficiaries.
A decision has been taken by the Principal on the basis of the letter dated 19.8.1994.
All other medical claims of the petitioner have been accepted except room rent and diet charges.
It is further the case of the respondents that the petitioner is not entitled to private room as her total emoluments are less than Rs. 4500/- excluding house rent.
4.
Before we might proceed in the matter, we would like to mention that a Division Bench of this Court in Waryam Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(2) P.L.R.
339 : 1996(2) SCT 495 (P&H) (DB), in which several petitions were decided by a common order held that, "In fact providing of medical assistance to sick and disabled is an integral part of the obligations of the State to improve public health.
Therefore, every provision made by the State legislature or executive for providing medical assistance will be deemed to have their source in Articles 21, 41 and 47 of the Constitution and in appropriate case the citizen will be entitled to enforce such provisions and it will be no answer to such a claim that the provisions of Articles 41 and 47 are not enforceable by virtue of Article 37.
After having given effect to the provisions contained in Part IV of the Constitution, the State cannot back track and deny the benefit of legislative measure or executive orders passed by it for giving effect to the contents of the Directive Principles of the State Policy, which as already held above, form part of the right to life enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution."
5.
Having regard to the facts as have been mentioned above, the question that arises in this case and on which the petitionr demands adjudication is as to whether when a government servant is entitled to medical reimbursement, can it be so limited that in a given case it would be so inadequate that even by availing it the government servant may not be able to have desired treatment, and therefore, either live with the disease, if possibe, or die.
Surely the question posed by the petitioner has to be answered in favour of a citizen, be it tested on law, logic, rationale or compassion.
That being so, any orders or instructions that may come in the way in denying proper medical reimbursement, if not set aside, atleast deserves to be completely ignored.
6.
The fact that the petitioner was hospitalised has not been disputed.
The fact that the petitioner with a view to save her life was diagnosed as suffering from Hyper Trophic Obstruction Cardiomyopathi and was advised dual chamber pacemaker has also not been denied.
The fact that the petitioner was treated in the PGI a government recognised institution has also not been denied.
Further, the petitioner had to incur expenses for dual chamber implantation also could not be disputed.
What, however, the petitioner is confronted with is that according to 1944 Rules whatever medical facilities the petitioner is entitled to have been given to her as also that by Annexure R-1 dated 19.8.1994 which are instructions that have been received from the Department of Health maximum amount to be reimbursed towards purchase of pacemaker is limited to Rs. 26,000/- or the cost of pacemaker whichever is less and the balance cost, if any, has to be borne by the beneficiaries themselves.
It may be mentioned at this stage that the petitioner is relying upon Annexure P-8/1 which is office memo dated 1261996 and has been issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare wherein cost of pacemaker (Dual Chamber) has been fixed at Rs. 1,15,000/- as a ceiling.
The mention in Annexure P-8/1 is also of pacemaker (single chamber) without rate response and pacemaker (single chamber) with rate response, wherein the ceiling with regard to single chamber without rate response has been fixed at Rs. 37,500/-, the one fixed for pacemaker with rate response is Rs. 65,000/-.
As mentioned above, the pacemaker (dual chamber) ceiling is fixed at Rs. 1,15,500/-.
The petitioner as per the medical bill supported by proper evidence incurred an expense of Rs. 1,43,000/- as cost of dual chamber.
Certificate Annexure P-5 wherein the cost of pacemaker (Dual Chamber) at Rs. 1,43,000/- has been mentioned was issued by Dr. Jagmohan S Verma, Addl.
Professor, Department of Cardiology, PGI Chandigarh.
There is no dispute as mentioned above that the petitioner did incur an expense of Rs. 1,43,000/- for implantation of dual chamber permanent pacemaker.
It is significant to mention here that earlier in point of time when petitioner had represented that estimated cost of pacemaker (Dual Chamber) would be Rs. 1,50,000/-, the petitioner was given an advance to the extent of 80%.
Her case at that stage was considered favourably and according to ground realities.
However, as mentioned above, it is only after the petitioner submitted the bill after treatment that it has been thought over by the respondents that the petitioner is not entitled to more than Rs. 26,000/- for the cost of pacemaker.
In so far as order Annexure R-1 is concerned, it was issued in 1994 and it does not refer to different kinds of pacemakers.
All that has been mentioned is that the maximum amount to be reimbursed would be limited to Rs. 26,000/- or the cost of the pacemaker which would be less.
It is clear from the document Annexure P-8/1 that it is in 1996 only that it was realised by the Government of India that pacemakers are of different types and obviously the cost of different pacemakers is different.
As mentioned above, pacemaker (Single Chamber) without rate response is said to be costing Rs. 37,500/- whereas pacemaker (Single Chamber) with rate response costs Rs. 65,000/-.
Pacemaker (Dual Chamber) is said to have cost Rs. 1,15,000/-.
We are saying the costs of different pacemakers as have been mentioned in Annexure P-8/1, for the reason that if the price was less or more, the same should have been mentioned accordingly.
In so far as, therefore, Annexure R-1 is concerned the same cannot come in the way of the petitioner in denying her the proper medical reimbursement.
As referred to above, the instructions pertaining to year 1994 have taken into consideration only one kind of pacemaker.
In so far as Annexure P-8/1 is concerned, it is the case of the respondents that it came into being after the petitioner had undergone surgery and therefore, the petitioner cannot take advantage of the same.
It is true that there is mention in para 8 of Annexure P-8/1 that this will be applicable from the date of issue.
The petitioner had undergone surgery when she was admitted in the PGI from 2751996 to 3151996.
However, this Court is of the considered view that the cost of pacemaker (Dual Chamber) as on the date when the petitioner had undergone surgery was more than the one mentioned in order Annexure P-8/1.
The price mentioned therein could not have been made applicable from the date when it was issued.
The order Annexure P-8/1 having been made applicable from the date of issue appears to be totally unreasonable as that would result into depriving a government employee of medical reimbursement and again in a case where such an employee is unable to spend such a huge amount from his/her own pocket to deprive him, of his life.
Not only that para 8 of Annexure P-8/1 imposes unreasonable condition, even contents of para 5 reveal that the Government while issuing the said order had not given a serious thought to the matter under consideration.
It has been mentioned in para 5 that beneficiary will have to invite three quotations for purchase of requisite item and the reimbursement will be made to him on the basis of the lowest of the three quotations or the cost of ceiling fixed as mentioned above.
Surely when the patient is gasping for breath and loss of one minute can result into his death, he cannot be running around inviting quotations for purchase of requisite item.
That apart, as said above, when a government employee is entitled to reimbursement, then it cannot be limited where it may become wholly unrealistic.
If the facts of this case are examined as illustration, it would become amply clear that petitioner was only to get Rs. 26,000/- out of the amount of Rs. 1,50,000/- and if she could not cater for a gap of Rs. 1,24,000/- she would have survived only on the prayers made to God and by no other means.
Such instructions which trample justice in a given case resulting into deprivation of life, as mentioned above, if not struck down can be ignored with contempt.
We accordingly follow this principle and direct respondents to reimburse the petitioner with regard to cost of pacemaker (Dual Chamber).
Before we part with the judgment, we may mention that it is not a case where the petitioner had gone abroad for treatment or to a costly eminent hospital in the country itself.
She had chosen PGI Chandigarh where costs of treatment regarding all ailments is less than even Escorts and Appolo hospitals at Delhi.
The cost of pacemakers (Dual Chamber) as having been actually spent by the petitioner has been duly certified by the Additional Professor of Cardiology of PGI itself and as mentioned above, there is no dispute regarding this whatsoever.
In so far as the petitioner having spent the amount while taking a room in the private ward and not in a general ward is concerned, the Counsel has rightly withdrawn challenge made in that direction and we are also of the view that the status of the petitioner did not permit her to have a private ward, she would have better gone for general ward.
7.
In view of what has been said above, the respondents are directed to make over to the petitioner the balance amount i.e. difference between the amount that has already been paid to the petitioner towards the pacemaker (Dual Chamber) and the cost of the same that the petitioner has incurred while being treated in the PGI.
The payment be made to her within four weeks from today.
The petition is accordingly allowed leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.