THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner under the Ex-Gratia Grants Scheme to provide an employment to the petitioner as his father died while in service.
2.
The father of the petitioner was employed as a J.B.T.
Teacher and he was to retire on 2921993 on attaining the age of 58 years.
According to the petitioner, his father was relieved from service on 27th February, 1993 as 2921993 happened to be a holiday, but unfortunately he died on 2721993 itself after he was relieved.
The petitioner applied for employment under the Ex-Gratia Grants Scheme on the ground that his father died while in service.
The application of the petitioner was rejected by the authorities on the plea that the father of the petitioner was relieved from service before his death and the petitioner's father was not in service at the time of his death and the petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to be employed under the Ex-Gratia Grants Scheme.
According to the petitioner, though his father was relieved from service on 2721993 and he died on that very date itself after having been relieved, he was deemed to be in service as the last date of retirement was 28.2.1993.
Therefore, his father must be deemed to be in service at the time of his death.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to compassionate appointment.
3.
Admittedly, the petitioner's father had four sons, out of whom three are already in service and the petitioner has been cultivating his ancestral land.
He cannot claim a compassionate appointment as a matter of right.
As held by the Supreme Court, this provision is only intended to mitigate the financial hardship that has to be faced by the family of the deceased employee who was in service after his sudden demise.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in Jagdish Prasad v. The State of Bihar and another, JT 1995(9) SC 131 : 1996(2) SCT 207 that the very object of appointment of a dependent of the deceased employee who dies in harness is to relieve an unexpected immediate hardship and distress caused to the family by sudden demise of the earning member of the family.
4.
The petitioner has not placed any material on record to show that there is any hardship faced by the family due to death of the employee.
In fact, three of the sons of the deceased are already in Govt. Service.
Admittedly, the father of the petitioner died on 2721993, but the writ petition has been filed in the year 1995.
Therefore, on the facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief claimed in the writ petition.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in SLP No. 1050 of 1993 : 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) titled as Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana that the employment under Ex-Gratia Grants Scheme is not a matter of course, but to mitigate the hardship.
In The Managing Director, MMTC Ltd v. Parmoda Devi, 1977(11) SCC 390, the Apex Court held that mere death of the employee does not entitle his family to claim compassionate appointment.
In Haryana State Electricity Board and another v. Hakim Singh, 1997(8) SCC 85 : 1998(1) S.C.T.
511 it has been held that the object of the provision is to give succour to the family to tide over the sudden financial crisis befallen the dependents on account of the untimely demise of the sole earning member.
5.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed