TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
Petition, SSWP No. 314/94 already stands admitted.
Petition, SSWP 283/94 is admitted to hearing.
2.
With the consent of the parties, the petitions are taken up for disposal.
"Written examination assesses the man's intellect and the interview tests the man himself and the twain shall meet" for a proper selection.
If both written examination and interview test are to be essential features of proper selection, the question may arise as to the weight to be attached respectively to them."
3.
The above observations were made by O Chinnappa Reddy, J, while expressing the opinion of the Bench in the case reported as Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan and Ors., AIR 1981 SC 1777.
The grievance of the petitioners is that there was neither a written test nor any exercise by way of interview and the selection as per the petitioner is hit by equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The selection was to be made for class IV posts.
The minimum qualification which was fixed was middle pass.
The petitioners submit :-  i.
That the petitioners were never called either for participating in the written test or in oral interview.
ii.
No short list was prepared;  iii.
That the recruitment committee never assembled;  iv.
That the signatures of the members of the Selection Committee were obtained later on;  v. That no criteria was evolved eitherd at the time of shoret listing or at the time of final interview.
4.
The above is the sum and substance of the allegations in writ petition 314/94.
Oblique motives have been suggested.
5.
The stand of State is that on account of peculiar circumstances and also on account of prevalent militancy in the State, it was not possible to call all the 20,000 aspirants.
A bona fide decision was taken to prepare a short-list and the selections were made.
The precise stand taken is as under :  "That with the advent of militancy in the recent past the difficulty of commuting in the District has been further increased.
From the past experience it had been felt that interview of thousands of candidates for limited class IV posts was time consuming process in addition being a great burden on the candidates who were to come from great distances using their meagre sources for participating in the interview.
The District Recruitment Board considered all the aspects of the problem including the fact that a meagre sum of Rs. 42,864/- was available with the District Recruitment Board by virtue of Rs. 2/- per candidate and in fact the expensess of informing every candidate by Registered Post regarding the date of interview could not be made due to the meagie resources.
The members of the Board, therefore, decided to make selection on the basis of educational qualifications of the candidates in addition to considering their age and other allied factors.
It was also kept in view that various Blocks in Doda district get due representation in proportion of the population of the area and the number of candidates applied from that area.
It is further submitted that in case there would have been more vacancies many of the petitioners would have found themselves suitably adjusted".
6.
It is these factors which have been projected with a view to submit that the individual call letters were not issued to each and every candidate.
7.
The allegation that the signatures of the members of the Recruitment Committee were obtained later on, has however, been denied by the official respondents by making a simple statement that the averments contained in the corresponding para No. 6 are denied.
The question as to whether this is a proper denial or not, is also highlighted by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
8.
So far as the petitioner, Uttam Singh in writ petition, 283/94 is concerned, the situation is different.
This petitioner was already working against a class IV post.
He was given appointment on 17th November, 1990.
He continued to work till 10th September, 1994.
His case is that on 24th March, 1994 Jammu and Kashmir Daily Rated Workers/Work Charge Employees (Regularisation) Rules, 1994, were promulgated.
In addition to the other points which have been urged in writ petition, SSWP No. 283/94, this writ petitioner submits that he became entitled to regularisation in terms of the Rules referred to above.
9.
So far as the petitioner, Uttam Singh, is concerned, I am of the opinion that he became entitled to regularisation in terms of Rules of 1994.
The stand taken by respondent-State that the petitioner was an ad hoc employee and, therefore, he would not be entitled to regularisation, cannot be sustained.
The case of an adhoc employee cannot be worse than a daily rated worker.
The observations made by the Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, AIR 1992 SC 2130 : 1992(3) SCT 201 would also be attracted.
Independently of what has been stated above, if the aforementioned petitioner was found good and was retained in service for four years and as to why he was not selected, was required to be elaborated.
This petitioner was never called for interview and without calling for the interview, he was weeded out of service.
This cannot be permitted.
10.
This petition would accordingly stand allowed with costs.
The petitioner, Uttam Singh, shall be entitled to continuity of service.
He would also be entitled to all the back wages and other consequential benefits.
These benefits be released within three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date, the copy of the order passed by this court is made available to the respondent-authorities by the petitioner.
In case, the needful is not done within the stipulated period, respondent-authorities would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
But in that eventuality, they shall have to explain the delay of each and every day and pay interest on the monetary benefits at the rate of 12% payable by the person on whose accountdelay occurs.
Coming to the other writ petition, SSWP No. 314 of 1994.
11.
A persual of the facts indicate that the system which has been pursued by the official respondent makes it apparent that the basic formalities which were required to be complied with, were not complied with at all.
Sitting in their office, the respondent-authorities assumed that the issuance of individual call letters to the petitioners would cause inconvenience to them.
This is totally a wrong consideration.
12.
The norms which were indicated by the Supreme Court of India in "Lila Dhar's" case were totally ignored.
What was said in the above judgment is relevant and is being quoted:-  "The object of any process of selection for entry into a public service is to secure the best and the most suitable person for the job, avoiding patronage and favouritism.
Selection based on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
So, open competitive examination has come to be accepted almost universally as the gateway to public services.
"The ideal in recruitment is to do away with unfairness".
United Nations Handbook on Civil Service Laws and Practice: "Competitive examinations were the answer to the twin problems represented by democracy and the requirements of good administration.
They were the means by which equality of opportunity was to be united with efficiency - By this means favouritism was to be excluded and the goal of securing the best man for every job was to be achieved".
Public Personnel Administration by O Glenn Stahl.
"Open competitive examinations are a peculiarly democratic institution.
Any qualified person may come forward.
His relative competence for appointment is determined by a neutral, disinterested body on the basis of objective evidence supplied by the candidate himself.
No one has "pull" everyone stands on his own feet.
The system is not only highly democratic.
It is fair and equitable to every competitor.
The same rules govern, the same procedures apply, the same yardstick is used to test competence".
Introduction to the study of Public Administration by Leonard White.
How should the competitive examination be devised ?
The Kothari Committee on Recruitment Policy and Selection Methods in their report said:  "A system of recruitment almost totally dependent on assessment of a person's academic knowledge and skills, as distinct from ability to deal with pressing problems of economic and social development, with people, and with novel situations cannot serve the needs of today, much less of tomorrow - We venture to suggest that our recruitment procedures should be such that we can select candidates who cannot only assimilate knowledge and sift material to understand the ramifications of a situation or a problem but have the potential to develop an original or innovative approach to the solution of problems".
It is now well recognised that while a written examination assesses a candidate's knowledge and intellectual ability, an interview test is valuable to assess a candidate's overall intellectual and personal qualities.
While a written examination has certain distinct advantages over the interview test there are yet no written tests which can evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness, resourcefulness, dependableness, co-operativeness, capacity for clear and logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity.
Some of these qualities may be evaluated, perhaps with some degree for error, by an interview test much depending on the constitution of the interview Board.
O Glenn Stahl in his Public Personnel Administration points out:  "Any form of written test possesses certain administrative advantages over the oral and performance types.
The written form is much easier and cheaper to administer.
It can be given to a large number of individuals at the same time, thus conserving the time of the examiners.
As a general rule it is easier to evaluate objectively, and the technical proficiency demand in rating is usually, although not always, less.
The oral test has long served as a basic selection tool in private employment but has been more slowly accepted in the public field.
This conservatism arises out of three considerations: (1) the difficulty of developing valid and reliable oral tests; (2) the difficulty of securing a reviewable record of an oral test; and (3) public suspicion of the oral as a channel for the exertion of political influence through the destruction of anonymity.
Despite these acknowledged disadvantages, however, orals have been used increasingly in public personnel testing and have become important instruments wherever tests of personal attributes are considered essential.
As we have noted no satisfactory written tests have yet been devised for measuring such personal characteristics as initiative, ingenuity and ability to elicit co-operation, many of which are of prime importance.
When properly employed the oral test today deserves a place in the battery used by the technical examiner....The general principle is that resort should never be had to an oral if the relevant factors to be tested can be measured at some other point in the examining process.
The reason is that the reliability of the oral, even under the best of conditions, tends to be lower than that of the well designed written test.
The oral test should be confined, then, to the evaluation of relevant traits which cannot be measured in any other way".
13.
In the present case, neither written nor oral test was conducted.
The respondents sitting in their offices assumed that calling the petitioners would be expensive for them.
If individual letters were found to be too costly, then general public notice could be issued in some news papers indicating the dates on which the interviews were to be conducted.
The process adopted by the respondents deprived the petitioners from being considered for appointment at the lowest level of the public service.
What relief should be granted ?
14.
I am of the opinion that it would not be appropriate to quash the appointment of private respondents who have since been appointed.
There are 39 petitioners in SWP 314/94.
The State would take steps to absorb them in service in the vacancies which are available or which are now to become available in any part of the State at preference.
As earlier the appointments were made without any written test and interviews, the same parameter would be now adopted.
Let steps be initiated at the earliest and in any case not later than three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date copy of the order is made available to the respondents.
In case for any practical reason, more time is required, the respondent-State can seek extension but in that eventuality, each and every day's delay would have to be explained.
15.
Both the petitions are allowed in the manner indicated above.
Petition allowed.