M Srinivasan, CJ.
- This writ petition is directed against the order of the Administrative Tribunal made in OA No. 364 of 1997 on 141997.
The respondent herein was transferred from Paonta Sahib to Pachhad.
Challenging that order of transfer the respondent filed an application before the Administrative Tribunal.
He challenged the order on the ground that he had been in Paonta Sahib only for a short period and he should not have been transferred so soon after his promotion as Naib-Tehsildar from the post of Kanungo.
The application was opposed by the petitioner herein on the ground that there was a departmental enquiry pending against the respondent and there was an apprehension that he could influence the witnesses or tamper with the records and that is why the order of transfer was made.
2.
The Tribunal has taken the view that there was no possibility of the respondent influencing the witnesses as the persons, who were cited in the list of witnesses, were District Revenue Officer, Tehsildar, Paonta Sahib and Superintendent of DC office and it is very difficult to accept that the respondent could influence such senior officers of the Revenue Department.
The Tribunal has also opined that the reasons given by the petitioner were not convincing and, therefore, allowed the application of the respondent.
The order of the Tribunal suffers from an error apparent on the face of the record.
It is too well settled that an order of transfer made by a department can be challenged before a Tribunal or Court only on two grounds, namely, it is vitiated by mala fides and that it is against the statutory rules.
The Supreme Court had occasion to reiterate this proposition recently in Union of India and others v. SL Abbas, AIR 1993 SC 2444 : 1995(4) SCT.
455.
While holding in that case that the guidelines issued by the Government for the purpose of effecting transfer do not confer upon the employee a legally enforceable right, the Court said that unless the order of transfer is vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of the statutory rules, the Court cannot interfere with it.
3.
In this case, the Tribunal has overlooked that it was only on such grounds an order of transfer could be interfered with.
There is no finding of the Tribunal that the order of transfer is vitiated by mala fides or that it is violative of the statutory rules.
In the absence of such a finding, quashing the order of transfer is wholly unsustainable.
It is also pointed out by the learned Advocate General that the Tribunal has committed a factual error in thinking that the District Revenue Officer is one of the witnesses who could not be influenced by the respondent herein.
It is submitted by him that list of witnesses does not mention the District Revenue Officer as a witness.
It is not necessary for us to go into that question in view of what we have stated above.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondent contends that the relevant criteria, which should be taken into account before passing an order of transfer in the matter of Government service have already been fixed by the State Government and they have been ignored by the authorities.
It is submitted that in the midst of the academic year when the children are studying in school the respondent is transferred to another place.
It is also submitted that frequent transfers should not be effected in the Government service.
There is no substance in the aforesaid contentions.
5.
A perusal of the application filed by the respondent before the Tribunal shows that no mala fides was alleged against any particular officer.
On the other hand, it is seen that the respondent has been transferred only to a place, which is about 70 kms.
away from Paonta Sahib.
It cannot be said to be an unreasonable transfer and that it is vitiated by mala fides.
6.
In such circumstances, we do not find any justification to uphold the order of the Tribunal.
Consequently, the order of the Tribunal is quashed and the application filed by the respondent before the Tribunal stands dismissed.
This writ petition is allowed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.