Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable on December 5, 1998.
He was chargesheeted for absence from duty.
Having been found to be guilty, the Superintendent of Police ordered that he be dismissed.
On December 5, 1995, he was dismissed from service.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P/2.
The petitioner filed an appeal which was dismissed vide order dated February 2, 1996.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P/4.
The petitioner's revision petition was also rejected vide order dated April 20, 1997.
Copy of the order is on record as Annexure P/5.
The petitioner has approached this Court with the prayer that the impugned orders, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P/2, P/4 and P/5, be quashed and that he be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
2.
We have heard Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner.
The learned counsel submits that the impugned orders deserve to be quashed as the respondents have taken into consideration the petitioner's past record of service without giving him any opportunity to explain his position in respect thereof.
Learned counsel has also submitted that the orders are violative of the provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 inasmuch as the fact that the petitioner has served the department for seven years has not been taken into consideration.
Learned counsel has also contended that absence from duty for 59 days is not such a grave misconduct as to warrant the extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
He has relied upon the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SLR 174 : 1992(1) SCT 123.
3.
Admittedly the petitioner had remained absent from duty from April 8, 1995 to June 8, 1995.
The disciplinary authority had found that the petitioner being a member of a disciplined force, the act of absence from duty was "of the gravest kind."
It was further found that there was "no mitigating circumstances whatsoever on record in favour of the defaulter".
Resultantly, it was considered that he should not be retained in service and he was ordered to be dismissed.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
He claimed that the punishment was highly disproportionate to the charge and a lenient view ought to have been taken.
He also averred that in view of the provisions of Rule 162 the punishment of "dismissal" can be awarded only for continued acts of misconduct.
The petitioner's absence was not enough to warrant the extreme penalty of dismissal.
While dealing with these contentions, the appellate authority found that the appellant's plea for mercy could not be accepted in view of his past record of service.
It was noticed that after his recruitment on December 5, 1988, six adverse entries had been recorded against the petitioner.
He had been awarded the penalty of censure, stoppage of two future crements and warning.
Thereafter an order for stoppage of two future increments was again passed in the year 1995.
Yet again, in the year 1995 itself, another penalty to stoppage of three increments was awarded to the petitioner.
It was also noticed that most of these "punishments were awarded for absence".
In view of this factual position the appellate authority concluded that the appellant "has proved himself to be incorrigible and deserves no leniency".
Surely, the intention was not to punish the petitioner for his past misconduct but it was only to indicate that the continued acts of misconduct showed that he was incorrigible and that no case for taking a lenient view was made out.
In view of this factual position, it cannot be said that the petitioner was awarded the penalty of dismissal on account of his past record of service.
In fact, it was only taken into consideration to consider his plea regarding Rule 162.
4.
Mr. Malik has placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Mahipat v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) RSJ 132 : 1994(3) SCT 337.
In this case it was found as a fact that the punishing authority had passed the order of punishment by taking into consideration the past record of service without making him ever aware of the fact "that while awarding the punishment of dismissal, his previous record would be taken into consideration."
Such is not the position in the present case.
It was in fact the petitioner himself who had raised various pleas and it was only in the process of considering his pleas that the appellate authority had made a reference to the past record.
5.
It was then contended that the provisions of Rule 162 were not kept in view.
This provision undoubtedly contemplates that "dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility".
A perusal of the Rule shows that the penalty of dismissal is awarded normally in a case where the employee proves himself to be incorrigible.
6.
In the present case, the petitioner had claimed that the provisions of Rule 162 should be kept in view.
The competent authority had to consider whether the petitioner was guilty of such act or misconduct as may warrant the extreme penalty of dismissal.
The authority had actually examined this plea and recorded a firm finding that various penalties have been awarded to the petitioner on different occasions which clearly proved that he was incorrigible.
Mr. Malik submits that the petitioner's length of service was not kept in view.
The Rule undoubtedly provides inter alia that while awarding the penalty of dismissal "regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension".
The obvious purpose is that the authority should keep in view that by awarding dismissal, the employee is likely to be deprived of his right to get pension.
In the present case, it is admitted position that the petitioner had joined service on December 5, 1988.
Exactly on the expiry of 7 years, he was ordered to be dismissed on December 5, 1995.
By that time, he had not earned any right to get pension.
In such a situation, the relevant facts clearly indicate that since no right to pension was involved, specific reference to the length of service was not required to be made.
7.
Lastly it was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that mere absence for 59 days cannot constitute such grave misconduct as to warrant the extreme penalty of dismissal.
Reliance was placed on the Division Bench Judgment in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SLR 174.
The petitioner had been awarded the penalty of stoppage of 7 increments by three separate orders.
He had been warned, censured and had also got six adverse reports.
Thereafter, in the year 1995, he was again absent for 59 days.
Thus it was not a case of a solitary absence at a particular point of time.
The petitioner had remained absent on different occasions and had been duly punished.
It is not surprising that in view of these facts the disciplinary authority had specifically observed that the misconduct was "of the gravest kind".
The appellate authority had also come to the conclusion that the petitioner had proved himself to be incorrigible and deserved of no lenience.
In this situation, the petitioner cannot take advantage of the decision in Parkash Chand's case wherein the Court was considering the solitary act of absence and had recorded a finding that the respondents had failed to notice the provisions of Rule 162.
8.
It is true that the petitioner had served the department for full 7 years.
However, during this period he had shown no promise of becoming a good police officer.
His record was chequered.
As a member of a disciplined force he was expected to be more responsible.
He gave no indication thereof.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the view taken by the respondents was unfair or arbitrary.
Resultantly, no grounds for interference in the exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out.
Having given consideration even to the fact that the petitioner was fairly young, we do not think that he is fit to continue in a disciplined force.
Resultantly, we are unable to accept any contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.