GS Singhvi, J - Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge quashing the order dated 311984 retiring the respondent No. 1 from service and directing his reinstatement, the State of Haryana and two others have filed this appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent.
2.
The respondent No. 1, who joined service as a Constable in the erstwhile State of Punjab got his last promotion as officiating Sub Inspector of Police w.e.f.
11.2.1980.
In January 1982, he was served with a notice vide memo.
No. 308/SA-3, dated 11.1.1982 was called upon to show cause against his proposed retirement.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply dated 421982.
His representation was considered and rejected by the government.
Thereafter vide memo.
No. 13222/SA-3, dated 5111982, the Director General of Police and Inspector General of Police, Haryana conveyed to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar, his decision to retire the petitioner compulsorily from service under Rule 918(2) of the Punjab Police Rules.
In compliance of that order the Superintendent of Police, Hisar issued order Annexure P58.
Copy of the memo dated 5111982 and the order Annexure P58 are reproduced below for reference purposes :  "Copy of Memo No. 13222/SA-3, dated 5111982 from the Director General of Police, and Inspector General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar.
Subject:- Representation against Show Cause Notice for compulsory retirement - Case of Thakar Dass No. 126/HSR.
The representation dated 4282 submitted by SI Thakar Dass No. 126/HSR in reply to the Show Cause Notice for compulsory retirement has been considered and rejected by the Government.
He is, thus, retired compulsorily from service with immediate effect under PPR 9.18(2).
Please take necessary action and intimate this office accordingly.
The Ch.
Roll and Personal file of SI Thakar Dass No. 126/HSR are returned herewith.
Please acknowledge receipt.
OFFICE OF THE DY.
INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE, HISSAR RANGE  Endst.
No. 16776/A-1, dated Hissar, the 10.11.82.
A copy of the above is forwarded to the Superintendent of Police, Hissar for information and necessary action.
SI Thakar Dass No. 126/HSR should be retired compulsorily from service at once under PPR 9.18(2).
He should be relieved to retire by 111182 positively under intimation to this office.
Sd/-  Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range Hissar."
Annexure P58.
ORDER Officating SI Thakar Dass, 126/HSR of this district is hereby compulsorily retired from service w.e.f.
111182 FN under PPR 9.18(2).
Sd/- Superintendent of Police, Hissar.
16377-81, dated 10.11.82.
OB-OASI/CRC/Acctt/L.G.
No. dated  A copy is forwarded to the D.I.G.
Hissar Range for information with reference to his endst.
No. 16776/AI, dated 10.11.82.
Sd/- Superintendent of Police, Hissar.
3.
On 8121982, the Superintendent of Police, Hissar informed the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar about the desire of the Chief Minister, Haryana that the respondent No. 1 may not be retired compulsorily.
The communication dated 8121982 sent by the Superintendent of Police, Hissar to the Deputy Inspector General of Police is reproduced below:-  "Kindly refer to your office endst.
No. 16776/AI, dated 10.11.82, on the subject cited above.
The Chief Minister Haryana has desired that SI Thakar Dass may not be retired compulsorily.
The matter is, therefore, again referred to you for taking further necessary action."
4.
On 1111983, the Director General of Police, Haryana conveyed a message to the Superintendent of Police that the compulsory retirement of the respondent No. 1 has been stayed.
In compliance thereof, the Superintendent of Police, Hissar issued order dated 3111983.
That order is also reproduced below :-  "In compliance of the Director General of Police, Haryana's PRM No. 276/BA-3, dated 11183, compulsory retirement order of SI Thakar Dass No. 126/HSR issued vide this office order No. 16377-87, dated 10.11.82 is stayed for the present as desired by the Government.
Issue in OB"  5.
A similar order was passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar on 3111983.
6.
It appears that thereafter the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range was directed vide PRM No. 4121-22/SA-3, dated 821983 to send specific recommendation about the work done by the respondent No. 1 after issuance of the show cause notice.
On 1321983, the Superintendent of Police gave a report favourable to the respondent No. 1.
On 1341983, the Director General of Police-cum-Inspector General of Police, Haryana conveyed the government's decision that the respondent No. 1 be kept in service for six months.
On 1251983, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar informed the Director General of Police that as per the Superintendent of Police, Hissar, there has been no complaint against the respondent No. 1.
However, on 1251983 the Superintendent of Police, Hissar sent a PRM message to the Director General of Police (Haryana, Chandigarh) that the respondent No. 1 was not pulling well in the police station where he was posted.
The PRM dated 1151983 and 1251983 sent by the Superintendent of Police, Hissar are reproduced below :-  "No. 7901-2/A-1, dated 11583 (.)
Ref.
your Memo.
6154/SA-3, dated 13483 reg.
compulsory retirement of SI Thakar Dass No. 126/HSR, SI Thakar Dass has completed extension of 6 months today ie.
11583 forenoon (.)
S.P.
Hissar has reported that during this period there have been no complaints against SI Thakar Dass (.)
Orders are solicited if he is to be retired forthwith or not (.)"
"No. 11727-28/W, dated 12583 (.)
Kindly refer to your office PRM No. 7207/SA-3, dated 9583 regarding posting of SI Thakar Dass at Police Station Ratia (.)
He already remained posted at Police Station Ratia for 11182 to 2782 and 24782 to 31882 and his third posting at the same place will not be in public interest (.)
From his brief postings in Police Station Ratia it is obvious that he had to be transferred out twice from there soon after his posting as he could not pull on well in that Police Station (.)
Moreover he is being compulsorily retired with effect from 11583 as per Government orders conveyed by the D.G.P.
(H) and received in this office through the DIG/HSR vide his endst.
No. 6693/A-1, dated 19483 (.)"
7.
On 311984, the Superintendent of Police passed the order retiring the respondent No. 1 from service.
It is this order which was challenged by the respondent No. 1 in the writ petition on the following grounds :-  (a) that the Superintendent of Police was not empowered to pass the order of compulsory retirement under Rule 918(2) of the Punjab Police Rules.
(b) that his retirement was vitiated due to the mala fides of respondent No. 3.
8.
The learned Single Judge accepted petitioner's plea that the order of premature retirement is vitiated due to the violation of Rule 918(2) as would appear from the following extract of the impugned order :-  "There is nothing on the record how the Inspector General of Police, Haryana, dealt with the representation Annex-P/56 made to him by the petitioner.
All that is evident is that after the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner, Annexure-P/58, was passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Hissar, on 10111982, its implementation was stayed by respondent No. 2.
Further a report regarding the work and conduct of the petitioner was called for by respondent No. 2 on 15.4.1983 and the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar, reported vide wireless message dated 1151983 that his work and conduct should be taken as satisfactory.
After the above sequence of events it is not clear what prompted Superintendent of Police, Narnaul respondent No. 5 to pass the impugned order Annexure P/62 on 311984.
Respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 5 have no doubt mentioned in their reply that the impugned order was passed after the previous approval of the State Government.
However, in spite of the fact that the petitioner has taken a specific stand that only the Inspector General of Police is vested with the powers to pass the impugned order and the same having been passed by respondent No. 5 is ultra vires Rule 918(2) ibid, it is nowhere stated in the reply that any such order of compulsory retirement was either passed on the file by the Inspector General of Police or conveyed by him to respondent No. 5.
Thus it is clear that the statutory authority which is vested with the powers under the relevant rules to order compulsory retirement has not passed the impugned order.
Rather it appears that the statutory authority has been bye-passed.
The sanction of the State Government was directly conveyed to a lower level officer and the impugned order was passed by respondent No. 5.
Learned counsel for the respondents attempted to support the impugned order by contending that subsequent adverse remarks for the period 1980-81 had been recorded in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner.
These adverse remarks, however, cannot be taken into consideration for the reasons that the same are not embodied in the show cause notice dated 11.1.1982 and the petitioner was not afforded any opportunity to meet with the same.
The upshot of the above discussion is that the impugned order Annexure P62 directing compulsory retirement of the petitioner having not been passedby the Inspector General of Police, the authority vested with the power to order compulsory retirement of a police officer under 9.18(2) of the Rules, the same is illegal.
Further since it is not clear how the representation Annexure P56 made by the petitioner was dealt with and why in spite of the fact that his work and conduct after the order Annexure P58 was reported to be satisfactory the impugned order was passed, the same is held to be arbitrary and capricious.
Consequently, I allow this petition with costs and quash the impugned order dated 3rd January, 1984, Annexure P/62 directing compulsory retirement of the petitioner and direct respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 5 to reinstate him in service as officiating Sub Inspector of Police within one month from today.
The petitioner should also be paid within two months from today the salary for the period from 311984 till the date of his reinstatement along with increments and other ancillary benefits with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum till the date of payment.
The petitioner is to be treated to be in service during all this period and any other benefits which have accrued tohim should also be granted.
The costs are assessed at Rs.
500/-."
9.
When the appeal was taken up for hearing on June 20, 1988 by a Bench consisting of MM Punchhi, J, as he then was, and AL Bahri, J, Shri KK Jagia, appeared on behalf of the respondent No. 1 as a caveator.
The learned Additional Advocate General produced the file before the Court showing that the order of retirement of the respondent No. 1 was passed by the Inspector General of Police.
After taking note of the record produced before it, the Division Bench passed the following order :-  "The departmental record as referred to in the LPA has been placed before us, which Mr. Jagia, the learned counsel for the caveator has seen.
The order of the Inspector General of Police ordering the retirement of the caveator is present at page 231 of the departmental file.
The judgment of the Hon'ble Single Judge proceeds on the basis that the impugned order of compulsory retirement was passed by the Government of Haryana bypassing the Inspector General of Police.
Admitted.
Stay recovery of the back wages till further orders.
Prayer for putting off respondent No. 1 from the job he is manning, is declined for he is otherwise supposed to superannuate on August 31, 1998."
10.
When this appeal was listed for hearing on July 30, 1997, the learned Deputy Advocate General stated that he does not have the relevant file.
On his request the case was adjourned to August 4, 1997.
However, due to heavy rush of work on August 4, 1997 the case could not be taken up.
Instead it was taken up for hearing on August 5, 1997.
On that day the learned Deputy Advocate General placed before the Court a copy of the telegram sent by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range to the Superintendent of Police showing that the personal confidential file of the respondent No. 1 had been destroyed.
On August 7, 1997, the Superintendent of Police, Mahindergarh, Shri RC Mishra, appeared personally and filed an affidavit showing that the file of respondent No. 1 was destroyed under the orders of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range.
Today, Shri Jaswant Singh filed the affidavit of Shri V.B.
Singh, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar,who has stated that the factum of pendency of this appeal was not brought to his notice before he ordered the destruction of the record as per the existing government instructions.
11.
During the course of hearing, the learned Deputy Advocate General produced one file containing copies of the orders passed in the case of the petitioner.
Some of the orders extracted above are available in this file.
12.
Since the controversy raised in this petition centres around Rule 918 (2) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, the same is reproduced below :-  "(1) xx xx xx xx (2) The Inspector General of Police may, with the previous approval of the State Government compulsorily retire any Police Officer, other than an officer belonging to Indian Police Service or Haryana State Police service who has completed twenty-five years qualifying service, without giving any reasons.
An officer who is so compulsorily retired will not be entitled to claim any special compensation for his retirement.
Note 1 :- The right to retire compulsorily shall not be exercised except when it is in the public interest to, dispose (dispense?)
with the further services of an officer on grounds such as inefficiency, dishonesty, corruption or infamous conduct.
Thus the rule is intended for use - (i) against an officer whose efficiency is impaired but against whom it is not desirable to make formal charges of inefficiency or who has ceased to be fully efficient i.e. when an officer's value is clearly incommensurate with the pay which he draws but not to such a degree as to warrant his retirement on compassionate allowance.
It is not the intention to use the provisions of this rule as a financial weapon, that is to say the provision should be used only in the case of an officer who is considered unfit for retention on personnel as opposed to financial grounds.
(ii) In cases where reputation for corruption, dishonesty or infamous conduct is clearly established even though no specific instance is likely to be proved.
Note 2:- " The officer shall be given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make against the proposed action and such representation shall be taken into consideration before his compulsory retirement is ordered.
In all cases of compulsory retirement of enrolled police officers, the Inspector General of Police shall effect such retirement only with the previous approval of the State Government in accordance with the instructions, if any, issued by the Government on the subject from time to ime."
13.
On a plain reading of the rule quoted above, we agree with the learned Single Judge that the power to order compulsory retirement of a police official like the respondent No. 1 vests in the Inspector General of Police.
This power can be exercised subject to the following two conditions :-  (a) the previous approval has been obtained; and  (b) adequate opportunity of making representation is given to the employees concerned.
14.
The learned Single Judge has held that the order of retirement passed by the Superintendent of Police is without jurisdiction and only on that ground he accepted the writ petition.
However, after having thoughtfully considered the entire matter and perusing the record of the case, we are unable to uphold the conclusion recorded by him.
The record produced before the Division Bench on June 20, 1988 and the record produced before us clearly show that the order retiring the respondent No. 1 was passed by the Director General of Police and Inspector General of Police and not by the Superintendent of Police, as the learned Single Judge was held.
It is unfortunate that the appellants did not produce complete record before the learned Single Judge to support their plea that the order of retirement had infact been passed by the competent authority.
However, merely because of this lapse, we cannot ignore the reality.
A perusal of memo No. 13222/SA-3, dated 5111982 which we have reproduced above, clearly shows that the decision to retire the petitioner was taken by the Director General of Police.
The order was also passed by him.
The Superintendent of Police did nothing more than to carry out the order of the Director General of Police.
The facts brought on the record show that after receiving the show cause notice dated 11.1.1982, the respondent No. 1 submitted a representation dated 421982 which was rejected by the Government after due consideration.
Thereafter the Director General of Police ordered his compulsory retirement under Rule 918(2) and the Superintendent of Police Hissar merely implemented the order passed by the Director General of Police and Inspector General of Police.
15.
Although it is very difficult to discover any discernable and rational reason for the intervention of the then Chief Minister in a matter involving retirement of an officiating Sub Inspector but it appears that the commonness of their place of belonging played the decisive role in prompting the Chief Minister to direct the departmental authorities to hold in abeyance the order of compulsory retirement of the respondent No. 1.
However, that proved to be a temporary respite because in spite of giving due respect to the wishes of the then Chief Minister, the departmental authorities did not rescind the order dated 5111982.
Rather, the same was revived and given effect too on 311984 after it was reported that the petitioner was unfit to be retained in the police set up.
The language used in the orders passed by the Superintendent of Police, Narnaul on 10111982 and 311984 does give an impression that the Superintendent of Police had passed these orders on his own but on a careful scrutiny of the record, it has become crystal clear that the Superintendent of Police had merely acted as a post office for conveying the orders of the competent authority.
16.
In view of our conclusion that the order retiring the respondent No1 was passed by the Director General of Police, the order passed by the learned Single Judge cannot be upheld.
17.
Shri Jagia argued that the order of premature retirement of the respondent No. 1 is arbitrary and unjust and, therefore, the appellate court should not interfere with the order of reinstatement notwithstanding its finding regarding the competence of the authority concerned but we do not find merit in his contention.
The record of the case shows that during the course of service the respondent No. 1 did earn some commendation certificates and he was also given some awards but he also earned adverse reports casting serious reflection of his efficiency and integrity.
18.
The adverse reports earned by the petitioner in the last 10 years ofservice are extracted below :-  "Sr. No. Period of report Category Remarks.
1.
971973 to 3131974.
`C' An over-clever and dishonest NGO who is living much beyond his means.
He believes more in fooling by his clever talk than by doing any useful work.
Is very dangerous and needs very vigilant supervision.
(i) Honesty - very doubtful.
(ii) Moral courage and readiness to expose the mal-practices of subordinates - Has given no evidence of it (iii) Reputation for fair dealing with the public - very bad (iv) General power of control and organising ability - not much (v) Interest in modern methods of investigation and in modern police method - not much (vi) Preventive and detective ability - doubtful (viii) Efficiency on parade - avoids parade.
2.
13779 to 26.2.1980 `B' The petitioner treats the suspected criminals with great cruelty.
He does not have cordial relations with the public.
He does not have the capacity for enforcing discipline and organising the police force working under him.
He takes no interest in the modern system of investigation of crimes and believes more in torturing the suspected criminals.
He does not possess good ability for investigation of the crimes.
He does not possess good knowledge of law and the rules of conduct.
He is not dependable.
He was asked many a times to keep good behaviour towards the public but he does not have the capacity to improve."
19.
These adverse reports could legitimately be taken into consideration for forming an opinion that the petitioner was not fit to be retained in service or that his retention was not in public interest and interest of service.
His officiating promotion on 11.2.1980 as Sub Inspector cannot have the effect of washing out the adverse reports because the assessment of the record of an employee at the stage of promotion is substantially different from the assessment made for his retention in service after attaining a particular age or specified length of service.
In the former case record of a limited period is considered but in the latter case overall record of service is required to be taken into account with greater emphasis on the record of previous 10 years.
Moreover, factors which weigh in the mind of the competent authority while granting officiating promotion are not the same which have to be kept in view while deciding the issue relating to premature retirement.
In this case sufficient material was available with the competent authority to form an opinion that the retention of the respondent No. 1 in service was not in public interest and in view of the principles of law laid down in Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, 1992(2) SLR 2 : 1992(2) SCT 92, we do not find any legal justification to hold that the premature retirement of the petitioner is arbitrary or otherwise unjustified.
20.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
As a logical consequence the writ petition filed by respondent No. 1 is dismissed.
We also declare that respondent No. 1 shall not be entitled to any financial benefit on account of his having worked on the post of Sub Inspector under the orders of the Court except the salary which he may have received for the period during which he actually worked after the acceptance of his writ petition.
The appellants are directed to fix/refix the post-retiral benefit payable the respondent No. 1 on the basis of deemed date of retirement.
The appellants shall get costs according to Rs. 2,500/- from the respondent No. 1.
21.
Before parting with the case, we consider it necessary and appropriate to record our strong disapproval of the manner in which the then Chief Minister interfered with the decision of the competent authorities and also of the manner in which the case has been contested by the respondents in the writ petition.
22.
Why the Chief Minister felt impelled to direct the stay of the order of premature retirement passed after the government had rejected the representation of the writ petitioner, has not been explained.
Was it solely due to the fact that the writ petitioner belongs to the constituency of the then Chief Minister or on account of any other rational reason ?
How could an employee be continued in service even though the order of his premature retirement was still subsisting ?
These and related developments are quite intriguing.
Those who enjoy political power and who are representatives of people must realise that such interferences in the administrative decisions have demoralising effect on the service as a whole and gives encouragement to corrupt and inefficient employees who are able to establish some connection inthe corridors of power.
This will not be good for the health of the administration.
It will create an atmosphere in which upright and straight forward officers who are heart and soul of the executive government will start taking decisions to the liking of political masters rather than on merits.
Therefore, sooner such interferences are stopped better it will be for the health of the administrative set up.
23.
The failure of the officials, who were deputed to represent the government, to supply correct information and relevant record to the government counsel coupled with destruction of the service record of the respondent No. 1 suggests that someone in the government was out to favour him at the cost of public interest.
The hidden hand which created all circumstances favourable to the respondent No. 1 may have ultimately succeeded but for the fact that while admitting the appeal, the Division Bench had recorded a detailed order incorporating therein that the fact that order of retirement passed by the Inspector General of Police was available at page 213 of the file.
But for this order this Division Bench may have repeated the error committed by the learned Single Judge.
24.
Having regards to the facts of the case, we direct the appellants in general and the Director General of Police, Haryana in particular or any other competent authority to hold departmental enquiry against Shri Madan Gopal, Senior Scale Stenographer and Shri Muni Lal, Office Superintendent working under the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar, who managed the destruction of the record relating to the case of the respondent No. 1 and award them adequate penalty so that it operates as deterrent for other employees.