OP Sharma, J - The Petitioner, a Junior Stenographer of this Court was dismissed from service on the charge that he had obtained Rs.
Ten thousand from one Mohd.
Aslam, on the promise that he will get his case (Mohd Aslam v. Custodian General) pending in the Jammu Bench listed and decided in his favour.
After making the payment Mohd Aslam complained about it in writing, Hon'ble Mr. Justice AM Mir on 23-4-1991, who forwarded the same to the then Chief Justice.
The latter initiated Departmental Enquiry and appointed District Judge (Vigilance) as the Enquiry officer who found the charge proved against him.
The Chief Justice accepted the report of Enquiry Officer and by order dated 11-12-1991 dismissed the petitioner from service.
2.
The petitioner challenges his dismissal from service on the ground that the enquiry has been conducted in violation of the Classification, Control and Appeal Rules, 1956 and the rules of natural justice.
3.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that the Enquiry Officer has failed to appreciate the evidence in coming to the conclusion that the petitioner had demanded and received the amount on a promise he made to the complainant by ignoring the defence version, which stood fully established from the evidence brought on record.
Since the finding returned by the Enquiry Officer, it is further contended, is based on no evidence, the order of dismissal is liable to be quashed.
He also argued that the petitioner was not supplied copies of the documents and has thus been prejudiced in his defence.
This has vitiated the enquiry proceedings and the report.
4.
Mr. Kapoor, learned Additional Advocate General, however, contended that on the evidence brought on record, no other conclusion than the one reached by the Enquiry Officer was possible.
Moreover, the findings of fact recorded by the District Judge (Vigilance), he argued, are not open to challenge in judicial review except on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice or any procedural lapse vitiating the enquiry.
On the charge of non- supply of document, it is argued, there is not even a whisper in the petition, copy of which document was demanded and not supplied or how he has been prejudiced, in the absence of which this ground is not tenable.
5.
As noticed above, charge against the petitioner was that he while working as Junior Stenographer to Gupta, J (Mr. KK Gupta as he then was) obtained Rs 2000/- as illegal gratification from the complainant Mohd Aslam by assuring him to get his case (Mohd Aslam v. Custodian General) pending in this Court, decided in his favour.
Latter, while working as Stenographer with Hon'ble Mr. Justice AM Mir, he again obtained Rs. 8000/- as illegal gratification for the aforesaid purpose to get the case decided in his favour.
It is an established fact that the petitioner deposited Rs 10,000/- with Shri RC Khajuria the then Section Officer of the High Court, soon after the complainant reported the matter in writing.
6.
Before the Enquiry Officer, the petitioner admitted the receipt of Rs. 10,000/- from Mohd.
Aslam but pleaded that it was a loan obtained by him for the marriage of his daughter.
But this was denied by the complainant.
He stood by the allegations made by him.
The following paragraph of the Enquiry report summarises the charge and the evidence against the petitioner :  "Whatever has been stated by the complainant Mohd.
Aslam before the Hon'ble Justice Mir at his residence has been narrated by him in his complaint and the same has been fully corroborated by Shri Khajuria, SO Shri Khajuria has almost reproduced the words uttered by the complainant before the Hon'ble Justice Mir at his Lordship's residence.
The complainant himself has also reproduced the allegations against delinquent of having paid Rs. 10,000/- in the names of Hon'ble Judges in his statement during the enquiry."
7.
The enquiry report further reveals that attempts were made to win over the complainant which did not succeed but it is not necessary to go into these details because the Enquiry Officer has finally accepted his testimony and concluded that the petitioner was guilty of mis-conduct for which he has not been punished.
8.
The report of the Enquiry Officer and the order of dismissal have been challenged by the petitioner on the following grounds : (i) That the findings of the Enquiry Officer are bad because undue weight has been given to the evidence of the complainant and Shri RC Khajuria ignoring the defence version that it was purely a loan transaction, (ii) that the petitioner has been prejudiced in the enquiry because of the failure to supply him copies of the documents relied by the Enquiry Officer, and (iii) that the statement of Hon'ble Mr. Justice AM Mir was recorded in his absence and right of cross- examination was thus denied to him.
9.
The first question is about the scope of judicial review in the matter of departmental inquiries.
In Indian Oil Corporation and Another v. Ashok Kumar Arora, 1997(3) SCC 72 : 1997(2) SCT 52 (SC) it has been held that :  "20.
At the outset, it needs to be mentioned that the High Court in such cases of departmental enquiries and the findings recorded therein does not exercise the powers of appellate court/authority.
The jurisdiction of the High Court in such cases is very limited for instance where it is found that the domestic enquiry is vitiated because of non-observance of principles of natural justice, denial of reasonable opportunity, findings are based on no evidence, and/or the punishment is totally disproportionate to the proved misconduct of an employee.
There is a catena of Judgments of this Court which had settled the law on this topic and it is not necessary to refer to all these decisions ........." 10.
However, the main ground and in fact the only ground of challenge to the report of the Enquiry Officer is based on his failure to appreciate the defence version that the amount was advanced to the petitioner as a loan.
But the Enquiry Officer on appreciation of evidence has recorded a clear finding that the petitioner had obtained the amount as illegal gratification and his report has been accepted by the Disciplinary Authority.
The question arises : is the finding based on no evidence.
However, it is not a case of no evidence in support of the finding holding the petitioner guilty of misconduct.
The evidence of the complainant is supported by the circumstances which eloquently lend credence to the statement of the complainant.
It is thus neither a case of no evidence nor a case in which a reasonable man would not have taken the view which the Enquiry Officer took.
So, there is no substance in this contention.
11.
It was next argued by Mr. Chopra that statement of Mir, J having been recorded in absence of the petitioner, he was denied right of cross- examination.
This argument is contrary to the plea in para 8 of the petition, part of which is extracted below :  "That the evidence of the witnesses, barring however, the statement of the complainant Sh. Mohd.
Aslam which shall be dealt with later at a proper stage is not at all relevant to the controversy involved.
What all the Hon'ble Mr. Justice AM Mir has stated is that the complaint was made which, under letter dated April 23, 1991, His Lordship had forwarded to the Hon'ble Chief Justice.
The affidavit accompanying that complaint was required by the said Hon'ble Judge to be sworn by the Complainant in support of the letter."
12.
So the petitioner has himself admitted that evidence of Mir, J was not relevant because he had simply forwarded the complaint to the Chief Justice, so, on his own showing, the petitioner has not been prejudiced by the statement of Mir, J who had simply forwarded the complaint.
13.
It was next argued that the report was vitiated because copies of some documents were not furnished to him.
However, there is no specific averment about the particulars of any of the documents, the copy of which he might have demanded and the same was refused.
There is a general statement about it in para 6 of the petition stating that "the show cause notice (Annexure p/6) was relied by the petitioner pleading inter alia that the enquiry was vitiated due to failure of the Enquiry Officer to furnish (sic) against him".
Barring this, there is nothing to indicate which document he demanded and was not supplied to him.
Even in reply to show cause notice dated 18-9-1991, the petitioner has not referred to any document the copy of which was not supplied to him.
So, the averment is based on mere ipsi-dixit of the petitioner for which no foundation has been laid.
14.
Moreover, it is not every violation of the rules or regulations governing such enquiries that the enquiry gets vitiated.
But such violation must have occasioned prejudice to the delinquent employee before the same can be interfered as laid down in State Bank of Patiala and others v. SK Sharma, AIR 1996 SC 1669 : 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC) holding that :  "31........Justice means justice between both the parties.
The interests of justice equally demand that the guilty should be punished and that technicalities and irregularities which do not occasion failure of justice are not allowed to defeat the ends of justice.
Principles of natural justice are but the means to achieve the ends of justice.
They cannot be prevented to achieve the very opposite end.
That would be a counter-productive exercise."
15.
After referring to the entire case law on the subject, their Lordships summarised the principles governing the departmental inquiries as follows :  "1.
An order passed imposing a punishment on an employee consequent upon a disciplinary/departmental enquiry in violation of the rules/regulations/statutory provisions governing such enquiries should not be set aside automatically.
The Court or the Tribunal should enquire whether (a) the provision violated is of a substantive nature, or (b) whether it is procedural in character.
2.
A substantive provision has normally to be complied with as explained hereinbefore and the theory of substantial compliance or the test of prejudice would not be applicable in such a case.
3.
In the case of violation of a procedural provision, the position is this : procedural provisions are generally meant for affording a reasonable and adequate opportunity to the delinquent officer/employee.
They are, generally speaking, conceived in his interest.
Violation of any and every procedural provision cannot be said to automatically vitiate the enquiry held or order passed.
Except cases falling under `no notice', `no opportunity' and `no hearing' categories, the complaint of violation of procedural provision should be examined from the point of view of prejudice, viz, whether such violation has prejudiced the delinquent officer/employee in defending himself properly and effectively ......... 4.
(a) In the case of a procedural provision which is not of a mandatory character, the complaint of violation has to be examined from the standpoint of substantial compliance.
Be that as it may, the order passed in violation of such a provision can be set aside only where such violation has occasioned prejudice to the delinquent employee .......... 5.
While applying the rule of audi alteram partem (the primary principle of natural justice) the Court/Tribunal/Authority must always bear in mind the ultimate and overriding objective underlying the said rule, viz, to ensure a fair hearing and to ensure that there is no failure of justice.
It is this objective which should guide them in applying the rule to varying situations that arise before them."
16.
However, neither any violation of the provisions of Classification, Control and Appeal Rules nor rule of audi alteram partem has been pointed out in this case as noticed above.
17.
Next comes the question whether the punishment awarded is dis- proportionate to the proved mis-conduct of the Petitioner.
Demand and acceptance of illegal gratification in whatever form is the gravest of the grave charge.
It is not the money demanded or paid but the purpose for which it is demanded, that is important.
Once such a charge is proved, no punishment short of dismissal would be justified.
No doubt, the petitioner would not have been able to influence the Judge concerned, but had the judgment by chance gone in favour of the Petitioner, it would have sent a wrong signal.
Thus viewed, the punishment awarded is not disproportionate to the misconduct proved against the petitioner because the petitioner was an officer of the High Court appointed under section 108 of the State Constitution.
The maintenance of discipline in the officers and servants of the High Court is a paramount matter which depends upon the credibility of the conduct, honesty, integrity and the character of such officers.
Since the confidence of the litigant public gets affected and shaken by the lack of integrity and character of a person who operates so closely to the judge of the Court being a Stenographer with whom the Judge has to share his judicial mind about a pending case, I think, the imposition of penalty of dismissal from service is well justified.
18.
In view of the above, the petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.