HS Bedi, J - The petitioners were appointed as class IV employees with the Food Corporation of India between the years 1969-1971.
Under the policy of the Corporation 10% posts in class III were reserved for being filled in by promotion from amongst class IV employees.
As the petitioners were required to possess the matriculation qualification or equivalent for the purpose of being considered eligible for promotion to class III posts, they sought the permission of the Corporation to sit in the matriculation standard examination from the following institutions:-  (i) A.I.V.S.
Exams, Aligarh for matriculation standard exam.
(ii) Hindi Sahitya Samelan, Prayag for Prathma Pariksha.
2.
The Corporation permitted the petitioners to appear in the said examination and after having successfully completed the same, they submitted the requistite certificates to the zonal Promotion Committee and vide Annexure P/1 dated 911978 were promoted subject to verification of their certificates.
It appears that petitioner No. 3 also completed the probationary period in 1980 whereas case of the other petitioners is that though no formal order for their confirmation had been passed but as they had put in 6 to 9 years service on the promotional post on the date of the filing of the writ petition they stood confirmed by implication.
The petitioners, however, received identical notices such as Annexure P/2 dated 231981 whereby it was brought to their notice that the certificates that they had produced in order to secure their promotions pertained to an examination not recognised by the Food Corporation of India and as such they were called upon to show cause as to why they should not be reverted to the class IV posts.
The petitioners duly submitted their replies to the show cause notices and pointed out that certificates that they had produced, had been accepted without question and as such there was no question of any mis-representation on their part.
It was also pointed out that once the certificates had been accepted by the authorities as being of an examination equivalent to the matriculation standard there was no justification now for the Corporation to make a volte face.
It was further pointed put that as the petitioners had even completed the period of probation provided under section 15 of the Staff Regulations, 1971, they stood confirmed on their posts and could not be reverted after a lapse of so many years.
These explanations tendered by the petitioners were, however, not accepted by the Corporation and vide order dated 9.3.1982 Annexure P/3 to the petition, they were ordered to be reverted as class IV employees.
It is against this order that the present petition had been filed.
3.
Notice of motion had been issued in this case way back on 1631982 and it was directed that the operation of Annexure P/3 be stayed ad-interim.
The petition was admitted on 2351982 and the interim stay was directed to continue and it is the admitted position that the said stay is still continuing.
4.
A reply has been filed on behalf of respondents-Corporation and it has been pointed out inter-alia that the petitioners had been promoted due to a mistake on the part of the subordinate authorities in the corporation as they had not adequately scrutinised the certificates supplied by the potitioners.
It has further been highlighted that the petitioners had sought departmental permission to improve their qualifications and that they had appeared in the AIVS Exams.
Aligarh and Hindi Sahitya Samelan, Prayag and both the examinations had not been recognised by the Corporation and as a matter of fact not even by the Uttar Pradesh Government.
In support of this plea instructions Annexure R/3 to R/5 have also been appended with the reply.
5.
Mr. PS Rana, the learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the petitioners had committed no mis-representation as had been alleged in the show cause notice Annexure P/2 and the corporation having accepted the certificates without domur could not be permitted now to take a different stand and to attempt to revert the petitioners on the ground of mis- representation of facts as also on the ground that the examinations in question had not been recognised.
Mr. Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents has, however, argued that petitioners were required to pass the matriculation or its equivalent standard examination recognised by the Corporation for the purpose of promotion to a class III post and as the examinations taken by the petitioners had not been recognised by the Corporation, the promotion of the petitioners had been erroneously made.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
It is to be noted that in Annexure P/1 i.e. the promotion order of two of the petitioners (similar ones had been issued to the others) it has clearly been mentioned that the promotion of the officials was being made subject to verification that they were matriculates or had passed an equivalent standard examination along with English.
It is the conceded position that the examinations passed by the petitioners at the relevant time had not been recognised by the Corporation.
To my mind mere fact that the petitioners had been permitted by the corporation to take the examination would not confer any right on them to seek promotion on that basis.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that petitioners do not fulfil the educational qualifications for promotion.
7.
The question now arises as to the relief that should flow to the petitioners in the light of the above findings.
It is the conceded position that the reversion of the petitioners was stayed by this court way back in the year 1982 and even at that time petitioners had put in between 6 to 9 years of service on the class III posts and Mr. Rana, their learned counsel submits that some of the potitioners had also been promoted further to class II posts.
It is, therefore, evident that petitioners have now put in around 20 years of service on the promoted posts.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that even if there was some shortfall in their educational qualifications at the time their promotions, the experience that they have gained in the last 20 years fully qualifies them to hold the posts in question.
This view is fortified by the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bhagwati Parsad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-  "Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties...........Even if a person does not fulfil the minimum educational qualifications, he may become eligible after lapse of time on account of experience."
8.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the practical experience gained by the petitioners has to be taken into account in determining the outcome of the present writ petition.
It is accordingly held that the petitioners were not eligible for promotion at the initial stage as they did not possess the necessary educational qualifications but in the light of the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court their promotions should not be disturbed and they shall be permitted to continue on the promotional posts from the date of their promotion and to retain all the benefits that have since accrued to them.
This petition is disposed of with the above observations.