NK Kapoor, J - State of Haryana has come up in appeal against the judgment dated 1791992 whereby the respondents' claim for grant of two advance increments as were given to persons possessing higher qualification of BAMS/GAMS was allowed, with a further direction to the authorities to pay them the arrears of pay.
2.
It is the case of the petitioners that they were recruited in the service of Ayurvedic Department of the former State of Punjab prior to 1111966.
All the petitioners possess the necessary educational qualification as prescribed for the posts of Vaidyas.
On re-organisation of the State of Punjab all the petitioners were allocated to the State of Haryana and are presently serving in the State.
According to the petitioners State of Haryana revised the pay scales of Vaids/Hakims on 6101981.
This revision of pay scales was with effect from 141979/121981.
Copy of the letter is annexure P-2.
However, the grievance of the petitioners is that they form one cadre and belong to the same service yet have been discriminated as some of the persons who possess BAMS/GAMS degrees have now been given two advance increments.
Such an action being discriminatory and otherwise unjust deserves to be quashed, directing the authorities to treat the members of the same cadre as equal, thus, awarding the petitioners two advance increments as have been awarded to the persons possessing BAMS/GAMS degrees.
3.
State of Haryana in its written statement emphasised that though the petitioners were recruited to the posts of Vaidyas but none of them possess degrees of GAMS/BAMS.
According to the stand taken by the State of Haryana no doubt prior to 741972 persons holding the degrees and diplomas are appointed on the posts of Vaidyas/Hakims but in 1972 the Government considered all aspects regarding qualifications for recruitment to the posts of Vaidyas/Hakims under Haryana Government and decided that henceforth persons possessing the following qualifications will be appointed to the posts of Vaidyas/Hakims :-  "Sr. No. Name of Degree (For the post of Vaidya) Name of Institution conferring the Degree 1.
GAMS Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine 2.
GAMS Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine 3.
AMS Banaras Hindu University 4.
AMBS Banaras Hindu University 5.
AMBS Board of Indian Medicine 6.
BIMS -do- 7.
BIMS Board of Ayurvedic/Unani Systems of Medicine 8.
Bhisgacharya/Ayurvedacharya Jaipur Rajasthan For the Post of Hakim 1.
Kamil-Ul-Tibbo-Zarahat (in Urdu) Unani Tibia College 2.
Fazil-Ul-Tibbo-Zarahat (in Arabic) -do- 3.
BUTS (Bachelor of Unani Tibb and Surgery) Aligarh University.
4.
BUMS (Bachelor of Unani Tibb and Surgery) Aligarh University.
4.
In this list GAMS Degree was mentioned on the top.
On 23rd January, 1974 the notification of these degree was issued and the same were incorporated in the Departmental Rules, 1975.
In the year 1980 BAMS degree awarded by Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and BUMS degree awarded by Examining Body of Ayurvedic/Unani Systems of Medicine, Delhi Administration, Delhi were also included in the rules through a notification.
The Govt. letter and its subsequent notification regarding qualifications issued on 2311974 which reads that "Govt. have considered the matter in all aspects and have decided that henceforth persons possessing only the above qualifications will be appointed to the posts of Vaidya/Hakims under Haryana Govt."  5.
It was further stated that petitioners at serial Nos. 1, 2, 9 and 11 have not studied regularly in a recognised institution.
They have studied Ayurvedic Systems of Medicines privately and passed private examination conducted by All India Ayurved Vidya Peeth, Delhi and Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag.
Similarly, petitioners at serial Nos. 6, 7, 8 and 10 have passed the Ayurvedic examination of four years duration at the recognised Institutions.
Petitioner at serial No. 3 has passed Ayurvedic examination of five years duration from the recognised Institution.
Further elaborating it has been stated that whereas Graduate Ayurvedic Medicines and Surgery (G.AMS) is a degree course of five years duration, Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicines and Surgery (B.AMS) is of six years duration with six months compulsory Internship Training.
In this manner both the aforesaid degrees namely, BAMS/GAMS are on a higher pedestal.
Accordingly, the persons possessing BAMS/GAMS degrees have rightly been given two advance increments.
6.
The learned Single Judge, however, found no legitimate ground to discriminate the petitioners from their other colleagues possessing the higher qualifications and so accepted the petition.
7.
According to learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, the learned Single Judge has erred in coming to the conclusion that the petitioners possessed an equivalent qualification.
This in fact was not even the case of the petitioners.
All that has been stated in the petition is that they joined as Vaidyas in the Punjab Ayurvedic Department before reorganisation of the State and so ought to have been treated as equal.
According to the counsel, the learned Single Judge having come to the conclusion that in a given set of circumstances higher pay scales or advance increments can be given to an employee who has got higher qualification as compared to the others in the same rank yet somehow has treated them to be equal holding that as they were inducted in the same service, they are to be treated as equal.
Counsel further argued that reliance placed by the learned Single Judge on the judgment in Dr. Braham Dutt v. The State of Haryana and another, 1991(3) S.C.T.
125, C.W.P.
No. 3202 of 1987 decided on 2241991 was in fact misplaced.
Otherwise too, the decision in Dr. Braham Dutt's case (supra) is clearly distinguishable.
Since the petitioners do not possess the prescribed qualification of GAMS/BAMS, the learned Single Judge has wrongly granted the claim set up by them.
Counsel for the respondents on the other hand almost reiterated the same grounds which find mention in the impugned judgment.
8.
We have heard the learned State counsel as well as the counsel representing the respondents.
Broad facts have been noticed above.
Petitioners joined as Vaidyas prior to 1111966 in the Punjab Ayurvedic Department.
It is some time in the year 1957 that the State of Punjab issued a notification recognising certain Institutions/Universities which were giving particular degrees/diplomas and so approved these Institutions/Universities for the purpose of recruitment of Vaidyas.
Various Institutions like All India Ayurveda Vidya Peeth, Delhi, Hindu University, Banaras, Gurukul Kangri University, Haridwar and others (fifteen) were included in the list.
Various Universities/Institutions had been awarding degrees though with different nomenclatures like Ayurvedacharya, Ayurvedalankar and Ayurved Rattan, G.AMS, GCDM, LIM, A.LIM, BIMS, Ayurveda Dhanwantri etc. Petitioners 1, 4, 8, 9 and 11 possess degree of Ayurvedacharya; petitioner No. 2 possesses degree of Ayurvedalankar; petitioners 6 and 10 possess the degree of Ayurveda Dhanwantri; petitioner No. 7 had a degree of Vaidya Vachespati; and whereas petitioners 3 and 5 had degrees of BIMS  9.
The precise dispute to be determined is whether the degrees awarded by various Universities/Institutions (reference to which has been made above) have been considered by the Government to be equivalent.
Whether mere recognisation of the Institutions/Universities for the purpose of recruitment of a particular service by itself makes these degrees/diplomas to be equivalent.
Minimum qualification prescribed for recruitment as Vaidyas has not been stated by the petitioners.
All that has come on record is that various degrees like Ayurvedacharya, Ayurvedalankar, Ayurved Rattan and persons possessing degrees of BIMS, LIM can be recruited as Vaidyas.
Each one of the petitioners has undertaken different courses and for a different period.
Some of the petitioners have not studied regularly in any recognised Institution.
Some have studied privately and passed the examination conducted by the Institution.
No material has been placed on record to substantiate that degree/diploma possessed by one is equivalent to the degree/diploma possessed by another person.
In the absence of any such material on record, we find no reasonable ground to hold that persons possessing different qualifications and having different courses and their duration are equivalent and so be treated alike merely for the reason that they belong to the same cadre.
In fact, the learned Single Judge being aware of it held "There cannot be any dispute on the proposition that the State Government can in a set of given circumstances give higher pay scale or advance increments to an employee who has got higher qualification as compared to the others in the same rank".
The learned Single Judge while examining the question as to whether BAMS/GAMS is a higher qualification than the one held by the petitioners, relied upon the decision in Dr. Braham Dutt's case (supra) and, thus, held that the petitioners being equal could not be discriminated by the State.
10.
We have perused the judgment in Dr. Braham Dutt's case (supra).
Grievance of the petitioners in that case was that he possessed a degree of Bachelor of Indian Medicine and Surgery (BIMS) and was awarded two advance increments in view of his superior qualifications but subsequently, the State of Haryana decided to recover the amount so paid solely on the ground that the letter dated 371981 which awarded two advance increments to persons possessing higher qualifications pertaining to holders of BAMS/GAMS degrees i.e. since the degree of BIMS did not find mention in the letter dated 371981 amount paid to the petitioner as advance increments was to be recovered.
11.
It is in this context that the Court examined as to whether the qualification possessed by the petitioner, a degree of BIMS is equivalent to a degree of BAMS/GAMS.
The learned Single Judge with a view to resolve this controversy took support from the statutory rules i.e. the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class-III Technical) Service Rules, 1963 and especially to the annexures containing the particulars of the University/Institutions and the name of degree.
For facility, same is reproduced hereunder :-  "Annexure I to this effect is reproduced below :-  Sr. No. Name of the Institution/University Name of Degree  1.
Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Haryana.
G.AMS 2.
Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Punjab.
G.AMS 3.
Banaras Hindu University, Banaras.
G.AMS 4.
Banaras Hindu University, Banaras.
AMBS 5.
Board of Indian Medicine, U.P.
AMBS 6.
Board of Indian Medicine, U.P.
BIMS 7.
Board of Ayurvedic/Unani System of Medicines, Delhi.
BIMS" The Court further noticed that a degree of GAMS was subsequently redesignated as BAMS.
It was, thus, held that degree possessed by the petitioner, namely, BIMS from Board of Ayurvedic Unani System of Medicines, Delhi is equivalent to a degree of BAMS/GAMS.
Besides it, the Court further held that the respondent in fact had been treating BIMS/BAMS/GAMS to be equivalent to each other in all respects.
It is in this context that the Court held that as qualification has been considered to be equivalent for the purpose of initial appointment, such a person cannot be treated differently while granting advance increments.
12.
Facts in the present case are entirely different.
None of the petitioners possess degree of BAMS/GAMS or even of BIMS As noticed above, some of them have even not studied regularly in recognised Institutions whereas some of them have passed private examination.
Precisely for this reason the authorities have not treated them alike and have chosen to given two advance increments to such persons who possess BAMS/GAMS degrees.
Persons possessing higher qualifications are a class apart and in a given case indeed can be given some inducement by the employer.
Such a differentiation cannot be termed to be illegal and otherwise discriminatory.
Accordingly, we accept the appeal, set aside the judgment dated 1791992, thus dismissing the petition filed by the respondents.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.