DK Seth, J - In this case the petitioner has challenged the award dated 2.9.1992 passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal (I), UP, Allahabad, by which the respondent No. 3 was directed to be reinstated in service with half wages.
2.
The facts in brief are that the respondent No. 3 was included in the select list from which he along with others used to be appointed in short term vacancy as Conductor Driver from time to time by UP Roadways which is a Government Department w.e.f.
161972 (hereinafter referred as UP State Road Transport Corporation) when the State Government incorporated the petitioner.
The respondent No. 3 and others whose name appeared in the select list were being given short term employment against short term vacancy whenever it arose.
The respondent No. 3 was appointment for a fixed period on temporary basis from 151973 to 3151973 and thereafter from 1.8.1975 to 3181975 (Annexure-I to the writ petition).
It appears from the Annexure-I to the writ petition that he was given appointment against short term vacancy.
His service was terminated by an order dated 3081975 with one month's pay in lieu of notice which is Annexure-2 to the writ petition.
According to the petitioner the respondent No. 3 had raised this dispute in 1982 which was rejected and was not referred by the State Government as this dispute was raised after lapse of the seven years.
Thereafter he again raised dispute in 1990 after lapse of 8 years and this time on the report of Regional Conciliation Officer the State Government referred the dispute to the Tribunal (sic) (Annexure-3 to the writ petition) allowed the claim of respondent No. 3 and directed the petitioner to reinstate with half back wages till reinstatement.
3.
Shri SK Sharma appearing on behalf of the petitioner contends that in view of the earlier refusal to make reference subsequent reference was barred by Principle of res judicata .
Secondly he contends that the petitioner being temporary employee and his service having been terminated, no dispute can be entertained on such discharge.
Third point raised by Shri Sharma is that employees of the UP Roadways were serving with petitioner- corporation on deputation remained State Government employees and there was no relation of employer and employee between the petitioner and the respondent No. 3 and such dispute cannot be raised in between the petitioner and the respondent No. 3.
In support of his contention he relies on the judgment reported in the case of Jagdish Prasad Gupta v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1980(6) All LR 81.
He also relied on the case of (Miss) K. Sunderambal v. Govt. of Goa, Daman and Diu, 1988 FLR 463.
4.
Shri HK Mishra appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 3 submits that the petitioner might have been selected by the UP Roadways the Department of Government but still then he was employed by the UP State Road Transport Corporation in 1975 after creation of UP State Road Transport Corporation.
Therefore he cannot be said to be an employee of the Government.
His second contention is that the question of res judicata does not arise in the facts of the case inasmuch as it has been held in the award that the petitioner was unable to produce any documents to connect the earlier dispute with the respondent No. 3.
Therefore in the absence of the material it cannot be said that there was earlier refusal to refer the dispute.
He further submitted that even if the petitioner was employed by the State, he was entitled to a notice but there was no notice whatsoever and neither any opportunity was given to him.
5.
The contention that the second reference is barred cannot be sustained.
Inasmuch as when a reference under Section 10(i) of the Industrial Dispute Act is made by the Government, it exercises administrative function.
Such function is neither judicial nor quasi judicial, Prem Kakar v. State of Haryana, 176(3) SCC 433 (Sic).
While making a reference the Government does not adjudicate anything.
Therefore the principle of res judicata cannot be attracted if on the second occasion reference is made after refusal on the first occasion.
Government is entitled to make reference even after its refusal, Western Indian Watch Co Ltd v. Workers Union, 1970(1) SCC 255 : AIR 1970 SC 1205, mere fact that on previous occasion Government had taken the view that no reference was called for does not entitle the Court to conclude that there could be no cause for subsequent reference, Binny Ltd v. Workmen, 1972(2) SCC 806 : AIR 1972 SC 1975.
6.
However the above rule cannot be an absolute one.
In case of inordinate delay and an unexplained inordinate gap between the two attempts to get a reference Court may intervene.
Inasmuch as in such cases there might be dearth of evidence leading to speculation which is undesirable.
It must be shown that the workman was vigilant and that he was not responsible for the delay or that there was no laches or negligence on the part of the workman.
However in the present case the employer having not been able to prove the earlier reference, the said question becomes immaterial.
But then if the reference is taken to be the first one, then it must be said that it was inordinately delayed.
There is nothing in record to show that the workman had explained the delay or that he was not guilty of negligence or laches.
7.
Now the Tribunal has believed the oral evidence and has held that the workman was continuously employed since 1971 till 30th August, 1975.
The Tribunal relied on the evidence of one Ram Naresh Singh, an employer's witness.
If such a situation is accepted then the workman was an employee of the Government and his continuation with the UPS.R.T.C.
after it was created on 1st June, 1972 was on deputation.
If it is on deputation then there was no relation of employer and employee between the workman and the UPS.R.T.C., the petitioner herein.
The Tribunal has not relied on any documentary evidence.
It has simply believed the oral evidence.
Nothing has been shown to prove that the workman was in continuous employment.
The conclusion of the learned Tribunal appears to have been arrived at without any material evidence.
It is very difficult to believe that a workman continues to work without any letter of appointment or any other paper in relation to his employment.
There is nothing to show that the employment of the workman was regularised.
On the other hand the document produced by the employer goes to show that the workman was employed for definite period which appears to be a short term one.
8.
Therefore the finding of the learned Tribunal appears to be perverse and based on no material.
As such the order of the learned Tribunal cannot be sustained and therefore quashed.
The matter is referred back to the Tribunal for deciding afresh in accordance with law on the basis of the material already on record as well as those as may be adduced by either of the parties.
All points are kept open.
The parties should be given adequate opportunity for this purpose.
The learned Tribunal shall decide the case afresh, without being influenced by this order, as early as possible preferably within a period of one year from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before the learned Tribunal.
9.
Certified copy of this order may be given to the learned counsel for the parties on payment of usual charges within a week.
Order accordingly.