HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The plaintiff-appellant Om Parkash was appointed as an Octroi peon in the Municipal Committee, Rajpura, on April 17, 1965.
Vide order dated 16th August, 1971, Exhibit PW3/A he was promoted as an Assistant Pump Operator.
Vide order dated 27th April, 1973 Ex. PW3/B he was confirmed in the said post.
He was, however, reverted to the post of octroi peon vide order dated January 15, 1974 Ex. P.5 which was conveyed to him on 17th January, 1974.
He thereafter made various requests to the Municipal Committee, Rajpura that he should be put back to the post of Assistant Pump Operator, but having failed to get any redress he filed the present suit seeking a declaration that the order dated January 15, 1974 was illegal.
The defendant-respondents put in appearance and denied that Om Parkash had been promoted as Assistant Pump Operator and further explained that he had been only given additional duties for which he was not to be paid any additional allowance.
It was further stated that the appellant had been appointed in place of one Yudhister Kumar whose services had been terminated and as Yudhister Kumar had filed a representation before the State Government which met with success and after he had been reinstated the appellant had ipso facto to be reverted in order to accommodate him.
The trial court raised the following issues :  (1) Whether the order dated 15.1.1974 passed by the Municipal Committee, is illegal, imperative and ultra vires ?
If so, its effect ?
PP. (2) Relief.
On issue No. 1 the court found that as the appellant had been reverted on acceptance of the representation filed by Yudhister Kumar the reversion was not by way of punishment and the mere fact that he had been confirmed on the post meanwhile would not create any right in his favour.
The suit was accordingly dismissed.
Aggrieved thereby Om Parkash appellant filed an appeal before the Addl.
Distt.
Judge Patiala who upheld the finding recorded by the trial Court and dismissed the appeal.
Hence the second appeal is this court.
2.
Mr. Saini, the learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff-appellant has urged that once the appellant had been confirmed on his post, as he admittedly had been, he was entitled to a notice before his reversion and that in any case if Yudhister Kumar had to be accommodated Gursewak Singh another Assistant Pump Operator who had been appointed as such on 30th August, 1972 after the services of Yudhister Kumar had been terminated on 29th September, 1972 should have been reverted being junior to the appellant.
3.
Mr. Markan, the learned counsel for the respondent has, however, urged that the appellant had been appointed on a temporary basis as Assistant Pump Operator on 16th August, 1971 whereas Gursewak Singh having been appointed on a permanent basis on 30th August, 1972 and, as such, he had to be retained in preference to the appellant.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the evidence on record with their help.
Assuming it to be so that the initial promotion of Om Parkash appellant on 16th August, 1971 was a temporary one, yet it is the admitted position that he was subsequently confirmed on the said post vide Exhibit PW3/B dated 27th April, 1973.
To my mind therefore, he was entitled to atleast a show cause notice before any order could have been made against him.
Moreover, in the written statement that has been filed by the defendant-respondent, the positive case is that the appellant had been reverted to accommodate Yudhister Kumar as per the order of the Government.
That position is falsified by the fact that the appellant had been appointed as temporary Assistant Pump Operator on 16th August, 1971, whereas Yudhister Kumar had been discharged from service on 29th August, 1972.
It is, therefore, clear that the promotion of the appellant was not in the vacancy created by the removal of Yudhister Kumar, I am, therefore, of the opinion that the order of reversion dated 15th January, 1974 Ex. P-5 cannot be sustained.
5.
This appeal is accordingly allowed, the judgments and decrees of the courts below are set aside and the suit filed by the appellant is decreed with no order as to costs.
As it is the admitted position that the appellant has since retired, a direction is issued to the Municipal Committee, Rajpura, to determine the arrears that may accrue to the appellant as a result of this judgment within a period of six months from today and make the payment within three months thereafter.