Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Sectional Officer in the PWD (Irrigation Branch) on May 24, 1958.
In November, 1973 he qualified the departmental professional and revenue examinations.
In May 1979, he also passed Parts A & B of the AMIE.
On December 31, 1980 the petitioner was promoted as a Sub Divisional Engineer.
2.
The petitioner alleges that till the year 1979, the Department was considering the claims of persons for promotion to the Class-II Service under the provisions of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-II Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1941, in accordance with the seniority in the Class-III service.
Even though the petitioner had qualified the departmental examinations so as to make him eligible for promotion to the Class-II Service earlier than his seniors, his name was not considered because the Department took a view that the claims have to be considered in strict order of seniority.
In the year 1980 after the petitioner had qualified the AMIE examination in May, 1979, the Department took an exactly opposite view and decided that the inter se claim for promotion shall be considered in the order in which the candidates had qualified the AMIE examination.
As a result, various persons, who were junior to the petitioner but had qualified the AMIE examination earlier than him were considered before him and promoted on January 10, 1980.
The petitioner's name was considered subsequently and was promoted on December 31, 1980.
The result was that the petitioner became junior to the persons who had been promoted earlier.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner approached the Civil Court through a suit.
The Court examined the matter.
The Sub Judge First Class, Chandigarh vide judgment and decree dated October 31, 1985 declared that the "plaintiff is senior to defendants No. 3 to 15 and that in the promotion order No....dated 29.12.1980 and in the Gradation and Distribution List of Officers of the Irrigation Branch of the Punjab P.W.D.
as corrected upto Ist January, 1981 as also in all other documents already issued or to be issued hereafter in which seniority of Sub Divisional Officers is reflected, his name should appear above the names of these defendants, with entitlement to all consequential benefits on the basis of such seniority with costs......" By order dated March 2, 1987 (copy at Annexure P.1 with the writ petition), the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 68 in the list of PSE Class-II.
Various persons, including Respondent Nos. 3 to 27, some of whom were even defendants in the civil suit, were shown senior to him.
The petitioner prays that the order dated March 2, 1987, in so far as it shows him as junior to respondent Nos. 3 to 27, including some of whom were defendants in the civil suit, be quashed.
He further prays that he be declared senior to Respondent No. 3 and granted all such reliefs as have been given to the respondents.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 only.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 27 have not filed the reply.
In this written statement, it has been, inter-alia, averred that the persons, who had qualified the AMIE examination, have been given ante-dated promotions vide order dated March 2, 1987 keeping in view of the date of their eligibility and the availability of vacancies.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure R1.
The petitioner's name in this document has been placed at Sr. No. 68.
The respondents aver that "it will be observed that the petitioner has been given ante-dated promotion w.e.f.
1011980, his previous actual date of promotion is 30121980 and it is apparent that he has been given very first post of vacancy which became available for promotion for AMIE qualified Junior Engineers after his becoming eligible for promotion in 5/1979.
It is further stated that these orders have been issued as in the written statement of CWP No. 494 of 1980 an affidavit was filed by the Department that these AMIE qualified persons will be considered for promotion from the dates they have been denied wrongly on account of Para 114 of the Manual of Administration."
The respondents state that with the issue of this order "the grievances of the petitioner are fully met with as he cannot claim the promotion earlier to the eligibility in May, 1979, the date of his qualifying AMIE."
On this basis the respondents maintain that the writ petition has been rendered infructuous.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
A perusal of the order dated March 2, 1987, which is at Annexure R1, shows that the petitioner's name is at Sr. No. 68.
His date of ante-dated promotion has been shown as January 10, 1980.
Persons like Ajaib Singh, Hans Raj Garg, Ramesh Kumar, Yashpal Bhanot, Some Nath Goel etc., who were defendants in the civil suit have been admittedly shown as senior to him.
Their names appear from Sr. No. 58 onwards.
It is thus, clear that while preparing this order the respondents have not obeyed the decree passed by the Civil Court.
In spite of the fact that it had been found that the petitioner shall be treated as senior to Ajaib Singh etc., defendant Nos. 3 to 15 in the Civil suit, he has not only been shown as junior to them but has even been given a date of promotion later than the date on which they are deemed to have been promoted.
It is also not disputed that they were junior to the petitioner in the cadre of Sectional Officers.
5.
In view of the above, the claim on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner has been given his rightful seniority and that his dispute has been fully redressed cannot be sustained.
Equally his claim is not rendered infructuous.
6.
The petitioner had retired from service during the pendency of this case in May, 1995.
The grant of any benefit to him can only result in some monetary gain.
He will not be able to enjoy the actual promotion.
However, the retirement is no ground to deny the relief.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to redecide the petitioner's claim for ante-dated promotion with effect from the date a person junior to him was promoted.
While doing so, the respondents shall take into consideration the decree passed by the Civil Court.
If, after the grant of retrospective promotion it is found that any one junior to the petitioner had been granted further promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer or any other post, the respondents shall consider the petitioner's claim also with effect from the date any one junior to him has been promoted.
All consequential benefits that may accrue in the nature of arrears of salary and refixation of pay and pension shall also be granted.
The needful shall be done within three months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
8.
In view of above, Mr. Kanwaljit Singh states that Civil Misc. No. 25859 of 1996 is rendered infructuous.
It is accordingly dismissed.