V Bhaskara Rao, J - The petitioner, a Junior Assistant in the Life Insurance Corporation of India, has challenged the order of his dismissal dated 18.5.1995 being illegal, arbitrary, mala fide and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was working as Junior Assistant at the relevant period.
He joined in the respondent-Corporation on 1061969 as Night Watchman and promoted as Record Clerk in 1977 and further promoted as Assistant in the year 1990.
He was working as Assistant in City Branch III, Vijayawada Life Insurance Corporation.
In August, 1992 a cashier was transferred to some other office on promotion and no regular cashier was posted in his place for a long time.
Hence several persons were working as cashier during the period as per oral instructions of the Branch Manager.
The petitioner was orally asked by his superiors to discharge the functions of cashier for two days, namely, 20101992 and 31.10.1992 and again in November, 1992.
Thus, he worked as cashier for twenty four days.
It is his case that he discharged his duties as cashier to the best of his ability that at the end of each day he used to tally the cash balance and account books and he used to hand over the cash and the books to the superiors before leaving the Branch, and there was no discrepancy in the cash balance on any day.
After about fifteen days of his leaving the seat of cashier, the Branch Manager received a complaint 16121992 from one G Hanumantha Rao, LIC Agent stating that his commission was not realised from the premium payment of November, 1992, pertaining to three policies.
There was a preliminary enquiry and a report dated 17121992, was submitted that certain payments were not accounted for when the petitioner was acting as cashier.
It is also the case of the petitioner that although his name is mentioned in the Report, Salary Roll Number is given as 531184 and it belongs to another Officer by name Mallikarjuna Rao, who also happened to work as cashier during the relevant period in the morning hours.
The Salary Roll Number of the petitioner is given as 531301.
Thereafter, he was served with a charge memo on 851993 and the charges framed against him are as under :  (i) While you were working as an acting cashier at City Branch III, Vijayawada you did not account for amounts received by you towards premiums for policies and dues as per the Annexure to this charge sheet on the dates mentioned in Column (8) of the said Annexure; (ii) You have unauthorisedly mutilated, scored off or erased the entries and altered policy number and amount in the scroll without due authentication; and (iii) You have thus misappropriated the amounts of premiums and late fees received relating to policies and dues as mentioned in the said annexure amounting to a total of Rs. 30,670.50ps.
including late fee."
3.
During the enquiry five witnesses have been examined on behalf of management and he was given an opportunity to examine himself and to cross- examine the management witnesses.
However, Shri G Hanumantha Rao, Agent, on whose complaint the enquiry was initiated was not examined.
Instead of examining the management witnesses, the Enquiry Officer permitted the presenting officer to examine the petitioner first, and thereafter management witnesses were examined, and he was once again examined by the enquiry officer on 461994.
On a consideration of the material collected during the enquiry, the petitioner has been found guilty of all the three charges levelled in the charge-sheet.
Then a show-cause notice dated 16.11.1994, enclosing a copy of the report was issued to him.
4.
He submitted a detailed explanation and set out various defects in the report.
It is his case that the officers who worked as Supervising Officers were themselves responsible for the alleged misconduct and their responsibility is higher than his responsibility because he was only an Assistant discharging functions of cashier on the oral instructions but they are examined as management witnesses and he has been made a scape-goat and that the above discrepancy in cash was noticed more than two weeks after he stopped discharging the duties of the cashier but the prosecution witnesses positively deposed that he was guilty of the charge.
It is asserted that he is innocent and false charges have been framed against him.
He finally stated that Sri K Subramanyam, Enquiry Officer, was Secretary of Officers' Association during that period and hence he also played a role in shielding the officers.
Thus, the report of K Subramanyam is one-sided report and the whole enquiry is vitiated on account of the mala fides of the Enquiry Officer and especially on account of the tainted evidence of all those officers who were themselves involved in this case and there being no other independent evidence.
The impugned order dismissing him from service passed by the disciplinary authority cannot stand.
He finally stated that he rendered unblemished service for nearly twenty six years and he was neither charge-sheeted nor punished earlier and hence the punishment imposed is disproportionate to the charges levelled against him.
Hence this writ petition for quashing the dismissal order dated 18.5.1995 is filed.
5.
The writ petition is resisted by the respondent-Corporation by filing counter.
All the petition averments have been denied and it is stated that the petitioner is not entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India without exhausting the remedies available under the life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960, (for short, `the Regulations') which are statutory Rules having the force of law.
It is pointed out that Regulation 40 of the Regulations provides a right of appeal against the order imposing any of the penalties specified under Regulation 39, and thereafter a further right to address a Memorial to the Chairman of the Corporation if the appeal is rejected under Regulation 49.
Since effective alternative remedies are available, the writ petition is liable to be rejected in limine .
It is further averred that the writ petition raised disputed questions of fact and hence this Court cannot review the evidence to arrive at a different finding on the evidence.
It is added that there is some evidence on which findings are based, the adequency or reliability of that evidence is not a matter which can be canvassed under Article 226 of the Constitutions of India.
Likewise, this Court will not decide whether the punishment imposed is proper having regard to the gravity of the misdemeanour of the delinquent and that the reasons which induce the punishing authority are not justiciable.
As regards the procedure, it is stated that the Enquiry Officer afforded every opportunity to the petitioner to defend his case and the principles of natural justice have been adhered to.
Then the Enquiry Officer afforded every opportunity to the petitioner to defend his case and the principles of natural justice have been adhered to.
Then the Enquiry Officer thoroughly examined the oral and documentary evidence and submitted a detailed and exhaustive report holding that the charges are proved and the disciplinary authority agreed with the findings and issued show-cause notice to the petitioner.
On a consideration of explanation of the petitioner, disciplinary authority passed a detailed and reasoned order imposing penalty.
Thus, the procedure contemplated is valid.
The allegation that the management was shielding the officers or that the Enquiry Officer, Secretary of the Officers' Association, was shielding the Officers is denied.
It is asserted that this objection was never raised earlier.
It is also denied that the petitioner was made a scape-goat or being discriminated against.
It is alternatively pleaded that merely because one or the other of the possible delinquents has been left out it would not lie in the mouth of the petitioner and he cannot be heard to say that he must be exonerated on this ground.
It is also denied that the Central Office recommended stoppage of two increments only to the petitioner.
It is thus urged that the writ petition may be dismissed.
6.
The petitioner also filed an additional affidavit stating that out of six witnesses examined during the enquiry namely, Sri R Mallikharjuna Rao, Sri PV Nagabhushana Rao, Sri SHR Murthy, Sri ADP Sastry, Sri EVR Krishna Murthy and Sri KR Sastry countersigned the receipts and it is his specific case that they are his superior officers and they are responsible for the alleged misappropriation.
He then stated that the management did not take any action against them in the first instance and used their evidence against the petitioner and subsequently an enquiry was conducted against Sri R Mallikharjuna Rao, Sri PV Nagabhushana Rao and Sri KR Sastry and amount of Rs. 10,000/- from each of them was recovered and stoppage of three increments was also imposed and order was also passed against Sri PV Nagabhushana Rao to recover an amount of Rs. 15,000/- from his retirement benefits since he retired in September, 1995.
However, Sri KR Sastry was allowed to retire in 1994 with the consent and connivance of the Enquiry Officer.
7.
The respondent did not file any counter to the additional affidavit filed by the writ petitioner.
8.
Then a reply affidavit is also filed by the petitioner.
The competency of the officer who signed the counter-affidavit is itself challenged on the ground that the officer, who is working at Hyderabad South, Central Zonal Office, could not have signed the same on behalf of the officials of Divisional Office at Machilipatnam who alone are competent.
As regards the availability of alternative remedy, the stand of the petitioner is that he has challenged the disciplinary proceeding on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice and also alleged mala fides against the management itself and hence it is not necessary to avail any alternative remedy.
He added that the appeal provision is a mockery as the appeal has to be presented to the same authority against whose order the appeal is preferred.
It is reiterated that some of the officers who are examined as witnesses for management have been visited with minor punishments after his dismissal from service, whereas the extreme penalty of dismissal is imposed upon him and hence this is a clear case of discrimination.
9.
In view of the above pleadings the following points arise for consideration.
Point No. 1 .
Whether the enquiry conducted by the Enquiry Officer is in accordance with the procedure;  Point No. 2.
Whether the petitioner has any alternative remedy;  Point No. 3 .
Whether the punishment of dismissal is disproportionate to the charge.
Point No. 1 :  10.
Sri Suryanarayana Murthy, learned Counsel for the petitioner strenuously contended that a strange procedure has been adopted by the Enquiry Officer in examining the delinquent in the first instance and then examining the management witnesses that all the management witnesses are accomplices and hence an independent witness should have been examined to bring home the charge and above all Mr. Hanumantha Rao, agent, on whose complaint the enquiry was initiated was not examined at all.
It is also pointed out that in the preliminary report, the Salary Roll Number of the delinquent is given as SR No. 531184, but the person with Salary Roll No. 531184 has been left out and hence the very identification of the delinquent is doubtful.
11.
Sri JV Suryanarayana Rao, learned Counsel for the respondent- Corporation has contended that this being a writ petition, disputed questions of fact cannot be gone into.
At the same time, he pointed out that the delinquent has been examined twice, namely, once before the management witnesses were examined and again after the management evidence was closed, and hence no prejudice can be said to have been caused.
He then argued that the officers who were functioning as supervising officers on that day and who were acquainted with the transactions were examined and hence there could not have been any error in identification of the petitioner as the concerned cashier.
As regards Hanumantha Rao, agent, it is stated that except submitting a complaint which was enough to initiate disciplinary proceedings he had no other information and hence he was not considered as a material witness.
Regarding the discrepancy in the Salary Roll Number, he argued that it was only a bona fide mistake in mentioning the number inasmuch as the delinquent himself admitted that he worked as cashier during the material time for a period of twenty four days i.e. 20101992 and 31.10.1992 and again in November, 1992.
12.
I carefully considered the contentions of both sides.
When the delinquent who was examined twice, namely, once before the opening of management evidence and again after closing the management evidence, there cannot be any grievance out of it.
He had the advantage of hearing all the management witnesses and hence whatever he wanted to state to explain the incriminating evidence, he could have done so in the later examination.
I, therefore, do not find any irregularity in the above procedure.
Then regarding the management witnesses, it is on record that such of the officers, who were supervising the work of the delinquent at the material time and who were countersigning the receipts prepared by the delinquent were examined.
In a situation like this, there could not have been any independent witness and hence I do not find any merit in this criticism.
Likewise, the non- examination of Hanumantha Rao, agent is also not fatal, because he has merely lodged a complaint and thereby set the disciplinary proceedings into motion.
For the mere purpose of making the complaint, he need not have been examined.
The officer to whom the complaint was made appears to have been examined and hence he is not a material witness.
Then about the discrepancy in mentioning Salary Roll Number, it is noteworthy that the name of the cashier has been correctly mentioned in the charge memo as well as other relevant record pertaining to disciplinary proceedings and all the witnesses have categorically stated about the petitioner.
Moreover, he himself admits that he worked as cashier at the material time.
In that view of the matter, I am unable to find any material irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Enquiry Officer.
13.
It is also argued by Sri Suryanarayana Murthy, learned Counsel for the petitioner that the Enquiry Officer happened to be Secretary of the Officers' Association and whereas the petitioner herein rose from the rank of Night-Watchman and he was working as Assistant at the material time and hence the Enquiry Officer did not conduct the enquiry fairly and dispassionately and he saved the officers and made him a scapegoat.
First and foremost, it may be seen that the petitioner did not attribute mala fides to the Enquiry Officer at the threshold and had he done so they would have changed the Enquiry Officer.
It is only after everything is over that he chose to attribute motives to him.
Moreover, the other officers towards whom the Enquiry Officer is alleged to have shown favour are also proceeded against and they have also been visited with punishments like stoppage of increments and the amount involved in this case, namely Rs. 30,670.50 ps.
has been recovered from them.
I, therefore, do not see as to how the Enquiry Officer can be said to have shown any favour to the officers and made the petitioner a scapegoat.
I therefore do not see any force in this contention of Sri Suryanarayana Rao.
Thus, I find that no procedural irregularity has been committed in this case.
Point No. 1 answered accordingly.
Point No. 2 :  14.
Sri JV Suryanarayana Rao, learned Counsel for the respondent has raised a formidable ground in his counter as to the maintainability of the writ petition.
Relying upon the Staff Regulation of Life Insurance Corporation of India, he contended that Regulation 40 provides for right of appeal and thereafter Regulation 49 contemplates a Memorial to the Chairman if his appeal is rejected and whereas the writ petitioner has not exhausted the remedies under Regulations 40 and 49 which are statutory in character and having force of law and hence the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the whole scheme of Appeal and Memorial is nothing but a mockery as the appeal has to be submitted to the authority who passed the impugned order and in turn he will forward the appeal to the Appellate Authority along with this comments and that itself would go to show that the appeals are not considered dispassionately.
Likewise, the procedure for submitting the Memorial to the Chairman also smacks of the same infirmity.
He, therefore, urged that this objection may be overlooked and the writ petition may be considered.
It is true that the Regulations governing the conditions of service of the employees of Life Insurance Corporation of India known as-Life Insurance Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1960, have been framed by the Corporation in exercise of Section 49 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, with the previous approval of the Central Government and they have the force of law.
It is, therefore, needless to emphasise that the procedure laid down in the Regulations has to be followed.
I have perused the Regulations especially Regulation Nos. 40 and 49.
It would be beneficial to extract both these Regulations.
Regulation 40 : (Right of Appeal)  Every Employee shall have a right of appeal to the Appellate Authority specified in Schedule against an order imposing upon him any of the penalties specified under Regulation 39.
An appeal against an order of suspension passed under Regulation 36 shall lie to the authority to which the authority which made or is deemed to have made the order of suspension is immediately subordinate.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this regulation and subject to the provisions of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, Rules and Regulations no appeal shall lie against an order made by the Corporation under Regulation 36 of Regulation 39.
Regulation 49 : (Memorial)  An employee whose appeal under these Regulations has been rejected by the Appellate Authority subordinate to the Chairman, or in whose case such Appellate Authority has enhanced the penalty either on appeal under Regulation 40 or on review under Regulation 48(2) may address a memorial to the Chairman in respect of that matter within a period of six months from the date the appellant received a copy of the order of such Appellate Authority.
15.
The principles of natural justice not only require that any public servant is given an opportunity at the stage of enquiry, but he should also be given a further opportunity of putting forth his grievance at a higher pedestal i.e. the Appellate Authority.
Therefore, a provision is rightly made in the above Regulations.
A right of appeal is provided for against an order imposing any of the penalties specified under Regulation 39.
That apart, there is further remedy of a Memorial to the Chairman of the Corporation under Regulation 49.
Both these provisions are statutory in character and an employee of the Corporation who is proceeded against on disciplinary grounds has been given two further opportunities to ventilate his grievance once before the appellate authority specified in Schedule I and again before the Chairman who is the topmost authority under the Act.
That being so, it would have been proper for the petitioner to have preferred an appeal under Regulation 40 and he could have put forth his case before that authority.
It is no doubt true that the Regulation provides for filing an appeal before the same authority which passes the order and that authority has to forward the same to the Appellate Authority.
But, I fail to understand as to how his rights would have been affected by such a procedure.
On the other hand, the authority which passed the impugned order will be duty bound to forward the same to the Appellate Authority by virtue of the above provision and if the same is forwarded with the comments of the concerned authority it will facilitate speedy disposal of the appeal.
In that, the Appellate Authority may or may not call for the record and spend some more time in waiting for the record and he may as well dispose of the matter on the basis of memorandum of appeal and the comments thereon.
16.
Since the petitioner has not exhausted the alternative remedy, provided for in Regulations 40 and 49, there is force in the contention of Sri JV Suryanarayana Rao, learned Counsel for the respondent that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
Point No. 2 is answered accordingly.
Point No. 3 :  17.
A look at the charges is necessary for this purpose.
"I.
While you were working as an acting cashier at City Branch III, Vijayawada, you did not account for amounts received by you towards premiums for policies and dues as per the Annexure to this chargesheet on the dates mentioned in column (8) of the said Annexure; II.
You have unauthorisedly mutilated, scored off or erased the entries and altered Policy Numbers and amount in the scroll without due authentication; and III.
You have thus misappropriated the amounts of premiums and late fees received relating to policies and dues as mentioned in the said annexure amounting to a total of Rs. 30,670.50 ps.
including late fee."
18.
It is evident from the above charges that the petitioner is alleged to have misappropriated a sum of more than Rs. 30,000/-.
He was functioning as cashier at the material time although he was not appointed as regular cashier.
The fact that he was discharging the duties as cashier as per oral instructions of the Branch Manager or some other Supervising Officer may be true but that has not absolved him of the charge.
It is immaterial whether he worked as regular cashier or a temporary.
19.
The question is whether the punishment of dismissal is disproportionate to the above charge.
20.
Sri Suryanarayana Murthy, learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that there were some officers who were supervising the work of the petitioner and all of them have been proceeded against for the above charges and that the petitioner alone is visited with extreme penalty of dismissal whereas the other officers were awarded minor punishments like stoppage of increments.
He vehemently contended that the authority has discriminated the petitioner in the matter of punishment and in fact the interests of justice demand that similar punishment is awarded to all the delinquents.
It has been conceded by the learned Counsel for the respondent-Corporation that the other officers have been awarded minor punishments.
That being the case, I am unable to find any material to award the extreme penalty of dismissal to the petitioner alone.
It may be that he was functioning as cashier at the cash counter and other officers were supervising the same elsewhere and the so called pilferage in the cash might not have been noticed then and there, but the supervising officers were duty bound not only to countersign the papers that are placed before them, but they are also expected to make surprise checks of the cash now and then so that such pilferage does not occur.
There is nothing to show that those officers had ever conducted a surprise check.
In fact, the record shows that the cash on each day was tallying with the records.
I am, therefore, of the view that there is gross dereliction of duty on the part of the officers and when such officers have been visited with the punishment of stoppage of increments awarding extreme penalty of dismissal appears to be too harsh.
This Court is, however, helpless because it cannot substitute the punishment and at best it can only commend to the concerned authorities to consider the same.
As the petitioner did not prefer an appeal under Regulation 40, it would be open to him to file an appeal at this stage and since there is a provision for condonation of delay in filing the appeal, the authorities may take the circumstances under which he was placed especially the pendency of this writ petition into consideration and condone the delay and if an appeal is filed, it would be open to the authorities to consider all these aspects and to award suitable lesser punishment instead of dismissal.
21.
With the above observations, the writ petition is disposed of with liberty to the petitioner to approach the Appellate Authority under Regulation 40 of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, if he is so advised.
Order accordingly.