RL Anand, J - Feeling aggrieved of the promotion of Smt. Maya Devi, Smt. Kanta Devi, Smt. Vimal Kumari and Smt. Kiran Bala, the petitioner had filed Civil Writ Petition No 14146 of 1993 in this Court with prayer to quash the orders of promotion of his alleged juniors and to promote him to the post of Superintendent, with all consequential benefits.
The writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench vide order dated November 9, 1994, holding:-  "Petitioner's claim in this writ petition is for directing the respondents to consider his claim to the post of Superintendent in the Socail Welfare Department w.e.f.
3151991 when respondents No. 3 to 6 were so promoted.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner is senior to respondents No. 3 to 6 and his case was not considered for promotion when respondents 3 to 6 were so promoted.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, submits that in fact respondents No. 3 to 5 were wrongly promoted and the Department is now proceeding to revert them.
Be that as it may, the petitioner has a right to be considered for promotion before any one junior to him was promoted to the rank of Superintendent.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Superintendent in accordance with the Draft Rules w.e.f.
the date respondents No. 3 to 6 were so promoted viz. May 31, 1991.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is found eligible and suitable for promotion, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits.
These directions be carried out within a period of two months from the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or on receipt of certified copy of the order from the petitioner."
2.
After the aforesaid petition was allowed, the respondents presumably in exercise of the powers vested in them by virtue of the Court direction passed the impugned order (Annexure P-4), by which the petitioner was not only deprived of his right of promotion to the post of Superintendent, but was also reverted from the post of Manager, to which he was promoted on May 31, 1991, vide Annexure P-1.
It was stated in the impugned order that as the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Manager was in violation of the Draft Rules, the same was required to be cancelled and the petitioner reverted.
It is conceded before us that nobody had preferred any claim against the promotion of the petitioner as Manager, vide Annexure P-1.
It is also conceded before us that before passing the impugned order (Annexure P-4), the petitioner was not served with any show cause notice, or afforded an opportunity of being heard.
3.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents submits that it was considered by the respondents that the petitioner had no reply to submit; as such they were justified in passing the impugned order without affording the petitioner an opportunity of being heard.
We do not agree with this general proposal of law propounded before us.
The compliance of the principles of natural justice cannot be dispensed with under any circumstances.
It is also settled position of law that the benefits once conferred upon a civil servant, even though under erroneous assumptions, cannot be withdrawn without affording him at least the opportunity of hearing.
It is not for the employer to decide as to what possible defence can be taken by the civil servant after the issuance of show cause notice.
It is also not open to the employer to decide himself that as according to him, the employee would not have any defence to the proposed action, the compliance of the principles of natural justice was not necessary.
If the power to decide as to whether the affected employee would have any defence or not, is given to the employer, the basic principle of natural justice would be negated and frustrated.
The principles of natural justice can neither be put in strait-jacket, nor allowed to be measured or weighed by the person or authority responsible for compliance of the aforesaid principles.
4.
In the instant case, none had complained against the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Manager, vide Annexure P-1.
The Court while deciding the aforesaid writ petition (No. 14146/1993) had not issued any direction to the respondents to determine as to whether the petitioner was rightly promoted to the post of Manager or not.
In the absence of such complaint or direction, if the respondents chose to reconsider their action by reviewing the orders already passed, which amounted to reversion of the petitioner, they were under constitutional obligation to afford the petitioner an opportunity of hearing before passing the said order.
The respondents have miserably failed to justify their action, by which the petitioner has been reverted from the post of Manager, vide Annexure P-4.
5.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed by setting aside the impugned order (Annexure P-4), by which the petitioner was reverted from the post of Manager.
The petitioner is held entitled to all the consequential benefits.
This judgment will, however, not prevent the respondents from passing fresh order of reversion of the petitioner, if so desired, but no such order shall be passed without affording the petitioner an opportunity of being heard and without compliance of the principles of natural justice.