ML Koul, J - Petitioner Gurbhajan Singh Mann, who was working as Executive Engineer in the Building and Roads Branch of Public Work Department of the State of Punjab was considered for promotion to the rank of Superintending Engineer along with other Executive Engineers including respondent No. 2 Shri SC Kalra.
The Departmental Promotion Committee met on June 6, 1996 for that purpose as required under rule 9 of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I PWD (B&R Branch) Rules, 1960.
It recommended to keep the name of Shri SC Kalra, respondent, in a sealed cover due to pendency of vigilance enquiries.
It may be observed that the petitioner is junior to Shri SC Kalra as Executive Engineer.
2.
On September 25, 1996, the State Government after accepting the recommendations of the Departmental Promotional Committee regularly promoted the petitioner and some other Executive Engineers to the rank of Superintending Engineer.
The promotion order issued by the Government reads as under :  "The Governor of Punjab is pleased to promote the following Executive Engineers to the post of Superintending Engineer, Punjab, PWD (B&R) in the pay scale of Rs. 4500-6100 with immediate effect :- 1.
Shri Kuldip Singh Proforma promotion 2.
Shri US Kanwal 3.
Shri TC Bali 4.
Shri S.S. Swany Proforma promotion 5.
Shri Surjit Singh Bhatti Proforma promotion 6.
Shri GS Mann.
2.
These promotions are subject to the condition that if any Superintending Engineer is repatriated from deputation then the junior-most promotee Superintending Engineer in Punjab, PWD (B&R) will be reverted to the post of Executive Engineer.
3.
These promotions are further subject to the condition that if the senior Executive Engineer placed in the sealed cover is exonerated of the charge/enquiries levelled against him, he will be senior and the junior- most Superintending Engineer will be reverted to the post of Executive Engineer.
4.
These promotions are further subject to the decisions of pending seniority court cases in the various counters."
Respondent No. 2 Shri SC Kalra was later on promoted as SE on purely ad hoc basis on October, 23, 1996.
However, this ad hoc promotion was subject to the decision of the enquiry registered by the Vigilance Department.
The order dated October 23, 1996, copy Annexure P-3, promoting Shri SC Kalra, respondent No. 2, as Superintending Engineer is reproduced below :  "Shri SC Kalra, Executive Engineer, Punjab, PWD (B&R) is promoted to the rank of Superintending Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 4500- 6100 p.m. on purely ad hoc basis with immediate effect.
However, these orders are subject to the decision of Inquiry registered by the Vigilance Department."
As a sequel to the order of ad hoc promotion of Shri SC Kalra as a Superintendent Engineer, the petitioner was reverted to the post of Executive Engineer on the same day, i.e. October 23, 1996.
Copy of the order has been appended as Annexure P-4.
The order of promotion of Shri SC Kalra on ad hoc basis (copy Annexure P-3) and the reversion order of the petitioner (copy Annexure P-4), both dated October 23, 1996, have been made the subject matter of challenge in this writ petition.
3.
While issuing notice of motion on October 31, 1996, it was ordered that the reversion of the petitioner shall remain stayed provided he had not been relieved of the post.
4.
During the course of proceedings in this Court, the respondent-State was asked to file an affidavit as to whether any charge-sheet had been framed against Shri Kalra when the Departmental Promotion Committee had met and what is the stage of Vigilance enquiry/enquiries.
An affidavit was filed by Shri Harjit Singh, Under Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Public Works, dated March 4, 1997.
It was stated as under in the aforesaid affidavit :  "3.
That following Vigilance Departmental enquiries are pending against respondent No. 2 :- (a) Preliminary Enquiry No. 9 dated 2161996-Ferozepur regarding misappropriation of Government funds in the construction of pillars at Border.
(b) Regular Enquiry No. 2 dated 7121995-Fatehgarh Sahib, regarding misuse and misappropriation of Government money.
(c) Preliminary Enquiry No. 1 dated 3061995-Fatehgarh Sahib regarding misappropriation of Govt. funds in execution of Government works.
(d) Preliminary Enquiry No. 1 dated 311997-Fatehgarh Sahib regarding issue of sanction for Rs. 5 lacs through Departmental irregularities and calling of quotations in the back dates.
4.
That the matter is under investigation of the Department of Vigilance in respect of Enquiries mentioned in sub-paras (a), (b) and (d) of para 3 above.
Further, as regards sub-para (b) of para 3 it is submitted that enquiry has been completed but no report has been submitted by the Director Vigilance whereas report in respect of enquiry mentioned in sub-para (c) of para 3 above have been received by the Govt. and no charge against respondent No. 2 has been proved."
A subsequent affidavit was also filed on March 13, 1997, in which it was stated as under :-  "2.
That I have filed an affidavit dated 4th March, 1997 in this Hon'ble Court in which details of Vigilance Enquiries pending against respondent No. 2 have been given with their present position.
3.
That besides the aforesaid inquiries, there is no charge- sheet pending against him at present."
Before noticing the rival contentions of the parties, it may be noticed that respondents No. 4 and 5, namely Shri PL Dhawan and Shri Jagdish Pal Chander belong to Scheduled caste category and were junior to the petitioner as Executive Engineer but had been promoted earlier as Superintending Engineers by virtue of reservation of posts for the Scheduled caste as per the policy of the State Government.
Further during the pendency of the writ petition, Shri PP Sharma, respondent No. 3, had retired as Superintending Engineer on March 31, 1997.
Shri DS Sekhon (II), an Executive Engineer, B&R Department had moved a Civil Misc. application No. 6840 of 1997 to become a party in the writ petition praying that Shri Kalra could not have been promoted as Superintendent Engineer and cannot be allowed to continue on ad hoc basis till his sealed cover is opened after the culmination of the enquiry and in the resultant vacancy arising on account or retirement of Shri PP Sharma on March 31, 1997, he should be promoted as Superintending Engineer.
Another fact which may be noticed is that during the course of proceedings the enquiry file regarding item 3(b) of the affidavit of March 4, 1997, of Shri Harjit Singh, already referred to above was sent for.
In the enquiry report dated March 4, 1997, the petitioner has been found guilty.
The State counsel stated at the bar that Additional Secretary, Vigilance Department, has recommended to issue regular charge sheet to respondent No. 2 Shri Kalra on the basis of the findings in the enquiry dated March 4, 1997.
5.
Mr Rajiv Atma Ram counsel for the petitioner, to assail the order of ad hoc promotion of respondent No. 2 Shri SC Kalra and the petitioner's consequent reversion, made the following submissions :  (i) The case of respondent Shri Kalra was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee and it was recommended that his name be kept in a sealed cover till he is cleared from the enquiries.
Therefore, without opening the sealed cover and knowing the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee, respondent Shri Kalra could not have been promoted as Superintending Engineer.
(ii) Even if respondent No. 2 could be promoted, he was promoted only on ad hoc basis as Superintending Engineer whereas the petitioner was promoted on regular basis.
Petitioner having been promoted on regular basis cannot be asked to make room an ad hoc promotee.
(iii) Even otherwise, the ad hoc promotion vide order dated October 23, 1996, copy Annexure P-3, was subject to the decision of the enquiry registered by the Vigilance Department.
In one of the enquiries mentioned at para 3(i) of the affidavit of Sh. Harjit singh dated March 4, 1997 (already reproduced above) Shri Kalra has been found guilty of serious charges and it has been decided by the Vigilance Department to issue a regular charge sheet to him.
In this view of the matter, the ad hoc promotion cannot be allowed to continue.
(iv) In any case, the petitioner is not the junior-most Superintending Engineer who should make room for Shri Kalra.
In fact after the petitioner was promoted as Superintending Engineer, he regained his seniority of the lower rank as Executive Engineer over the Scheduled caste who were promoted earlier because of the reservation as per judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Ajit Singh Januja and others v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1996(2) SC 727 : 1996(2) SCT 278 (SC).
Consequently, respondents No. 4 and 5 would rank junior to the petitioner as Superintending Engineer and it is one of them who should make room for Shri Kalra.
6.
On the other hand, the stand of the State Government is that respondent No. 2 had made a representation which was considered in the light of instructions dated January 20, 1994, and July 22, 1996, copies Annexures R1/1 and R1/2 respectively.
The competent authority passed the impugned order, copy Annexure P-2, to promote respondent No. 2 on ad hoc basis and to revert the petitioner - in accordance with the condition imposed in the order of the promotion of the petitioner that the junior-most Scheduled Caste could be reverted on the promotion of any senior Executive Engineer.
No fault can be found in the reversion order of the petitioner.
7.
Mr. AK Chopra, learned counsel for the respondent, Shri SC Kalra, submitted that the very consideration of Shri Kalra's case in a sealed cover method was illegal.
He had unblemished record of service and could not be ignored for promotion and his name kept in a sealed cover simply because some vigilance enquiries were pending investigation.
According to the learned Counsel, the sealed cover method could only be adopted if a charge-sheet had been served on Shri Kalra and not before that.
According to him, the instructions dated July, 22, 1996, Annexure R1/2 would not be applicable to the case of Sh. SC Kalra firstly because these were issued after the Departmental Promotion Committee had met and secondly even if these were to apply, the case did not fall under these instructions as according to these instructions though before issue of the charge-sheet the case could be considered in a sealed cover method but it could only be done if prima facie case had been established against an employee though the charge-sheet had yet to be served.
According to the learned counsel, no prima facie case had been established against Shri Kalra after the date when the Departmental Promotion Committee had met.
Learned counsel contended that in fact vide order dated October 23, 1996, copy Annexure P-3, respondent Shri Kalra should have been promoted on regular basis and not on ad hoc basis.
Shri Kalra should be deemed to be regularly promoted and petitioner being junior to him has to make room for Shri Kalra and there is nothing wrong in reverting the petitioner.
It was further submitted that the petitioner was head of the technical wing of the Vigilance Department and he was interested to see that respondent Shri Kalra be not promoted on one or the other ground and, therefore, had started the vigilance enquiries against Shri Kalra in order to see that he was promoted in place of Shri Kalra.
It was further submitted that pursuant to interim directions dated March 20, 1997, the petitioner had been allowed to continue as Superintending Engineer and further another post had fallen vacant on April 1, 1997, on the retirement of Shri PP Sharma.
Both the petitioner as well as respondent Shri Kalra could be adjusted.
8.
In reply, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the fact remains that respondent No. 2 was promoted on ad hoc basis vide order dated October 23, 1996, copy Annexure P-3.
He never challenged his ad hoc promotion to say that he should have been regularly promoted or that his case could not have been considered under the sealed covered method.
As a respondent he cannot challenge the order of his own promotion on ad hoc basis and cannot get the relief to convert the order of promotion on ad hoc basis to regular promotion.
9.
Incidentally, it may be observed that we had asked specifically the State counsel as to whether on the vacancy of Superintending Engineer having occurred on April 1, 1997 on the retirement of Shri PP Sharma, Superintending Engineer, was the Government withdrawing the order of reversion of the petitioner.
After getting instructions in writing learned counsel for the State stated that the Government was not contemplating to withdraw the reversion order of the petitioner.
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is substance in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The undisputed facts are that Shri Kalra, respondent No. 2's case was considered in the sealed cover method as there were vigilance enquiries pending against him.
Till date the sealed cover has not been opened.
It is not known what are the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee, which have been kept in a sealed cover.
Could under these circumstances, respondent No. 2's promotion be ordered ?
It is not the State's case that respondent No. 2's case was wrongly considered under the sealed cover method.
Without opening the sealed covered, how could promotion or even ad hoc promotion be ordered of respondent No. 2 ?
Even if it is assumed that promotion could be ordered on ad hoc basis, can under the circumstances of the present case when the petitioner was actually promoted on regular basis, could he be asked to make room for an ad hoc promotee ?
The answer has to be in the negative.
Even otherwise the ad hoc promotion of respondent No. 2 was subject to the decision of enquiry registered by the Vigilance Department.
As has been observed above, in the enquiry which culminated in the enquiry report dated March 4, 1997, Shri Kalra has been found guilty of some serious charges and the Vigilance Department, as per the statement of the State counsel, has decided to issue him a regular charge- sheet.
The ad hoc promotion, which was subject to the decision of enquiry, cannot go on.
Otherwise also to instil faith in the public and the endeavour of the Government to provide clean administration, it would not be in the interest of administration to keep a person in the promoted rank when the Vigilance Department has found against that particular individual and further has even decided to issue a regular charge sheet.
If ultimately, respondent No. 2 is exonerated of all the charges, he would not stand to lose as he would be promoted w.e.f.
the date his junior was promoted with all consequential benefits in accordance with law.
According to us, in these circumstances, even if ad hoc promotion could be ordered, it cannot be allowed to continue.
11.
As observed above, it is not the stand of the State that consideration of the case of Shri Kalra under sealed cover method was wrong.
Respondent No. 2 cannot be allowed to urge that his consideration under the sealed cover method was not in accordance with law.
He is not a petitioner before us.
He never challenged his ad hoc promotion made vide Annexure P-3.
Even otherwise without opening the sealed cover and without knowing the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee contained in that sealed cover, the question of promotion cannot arise.
12.
For the view we have taken above, it is not necessary for us to go into the point as to who is the junior-most Superintending Engineer and whether any one of the Scheduled castes, i.e. respondents No. 4 and 5 are beyond their quota.
We keep the points of inter se seniority and any one of respondents No. 4 and 5 being beyond the quota of the Scheduled caste specifically open.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and quash the order of ad hoc promotion of respondent No. 2 Shri SC Kalra dated October 23, 1996, copy Annexure P-3 and the consequential order of reversion of the petitioner dated October 23, 1996, copy Annexure P-4.
The respondents would fill in the post of Superintending Engineer fallen vacant due to the retirement of Shri PP Sharma in accordance with law.