GS Singhvi, J - Whether a candidate who has passed Punjabi Parbodh examination can be treated as possessing knowledge of Punjabi language of Matriculation standard is the main issue which arises for determination in this petition.
2.
The petitioner who is a dependent of and ex-serviceman and who has passed Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (for short BAMS) from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, and who has also passed Punjabi Parbodh examination conducted by Director, Language Department, Punjabi, Patiala, on 1591996, applied for recruitment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer in response to the advertisement No. 2 of 1996 issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab (for short the Board).
She was directed to appear for interview on 2591996.
When the petitioner appeared before the Board she was not interviewed on the ground of lack of qualification.
It was given out to her that Punjabi Parbodh examination passed by her on 1591996 cannot enure to her benefit because she ought to have fulfilled the condition of eligibility as on 3041996, the last date fixed for the receipt of the applications.
The decision of the Board not to interview her has been challenged by the petitioner on the following two grounds :-  (a) That in the advertisement No. 2 of 1996 requirement of knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent has not been incorporated for the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer and, therefore, the Board cannot reject her candidature on the ground that she had not passed Punjabi language examination of matriculation standard before 30th April, 1996.
(b) The knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent can be tested only at the time of interview.
Therefore, even if a candidate has not passed examination of Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent, he/she may possess the knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard, and, therefore, the Board has seriously erred when it rejected the candidature of the petitioner only on the ground that she had not passed Punjabi language examination on or before 30th April, 1996.
3.
Before we consider merits of the challenge made to the decision of the Board not to consider the candidature of the petitioner, we deem it proper to mention that in compliance of the interim direction issued by the Court on 8101996 the petitioner was interviewed by the Board.
The result of her interview was produced before the Court on December 3, 1996.
On a perusal of the result we found that the petitioner has secured more marks than the last candidate selected in the reserved category of ex-servicemen.
4.
First contention urged by Shri Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner is that general conditions of eligibility incorporated in the advertisement cannot be applied qua the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer because separate qualifications have been prescribed for the said post.
Shri Chopra argued that the eligibility of the petitioner should have been examined in the context of clause 15 of the advertisement and it was not open to the Board to fall back upon the general conditions and reject the candidature of the petitioner.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, relied on the provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Services (General & Common Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994, and submitted that the requirement of knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent has to be read as a part of the conditions of eligibility for recruitment to all Class-I, Class-II and Class-III services and as the petitioner had not passed Punjabi language examination of matriculation standard upto the 30th April, 1996, her candidature was rightly rejected by the Board.
Rules 1, 2(b), 17 and 20 of the Rules of 1994 are reproduced below for reference purposes :-  ``(1) These rules may be called the Punjab Civil Services (General & Common Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994.
(2) They shall come into force at once.
(3) They shall apply to all the posts of Class-I, Class-II and Class-III services in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab.
2.
Definitions :- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires :- (b) ``Board'' means the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab or any other authority constituted to perform its functions.
17.
Knowledge of Punjabi Language - No person shall be appointed to any post in any service by direct appointment unless he possesses knowledge of Punjabi Language of Matriculation Standard or its equivalent.
Provided that where a person is appointed on compassionate grounds on priority basis under the instructions issued in this behalf by the Government, the person so appointed will have to acquire knowledge of Punjabi Language of Matriculation Standard or will have to qualify a test conducted by the Language Wing of the Department of Education of the Punjab Government within six months from the date of his appointment: Provided further that where educational qualifications for a post in any service are lower than Matriculation, then knowledge of Punjabi Language shall be lowered accordingly.
20.
Overriding effect :- The provisions of these rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any rules for the time being in force for regulating the recruitment and conditions of service for appointment to Public Service and Posts in connection with the affairs of the State.''
On a perusal of the rules quoted above, it becomes clear that the rule making authority has given over-riding effect to the provisions of Rules of 1994.
Thus, these rules shall prevail notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other rule.
Therefore, while advertising the posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officer, the Board was bound to incorporate the requirement of knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent.
If we read the advertisement No. 2 of 1996 in the light of the statutory rules quoted above, there remains no doubt that the general conditions of eligibility incorporated in clauses 1 to 14 of the advertisement constitute an integral part of the conditions of eligibility prescribed for various posts, including the post of Ayurvedic Medical Officer advertised by the Board.
We are, therefore, unable to agree with Shri Chopra that the requirement of knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard could not have been invoked by the Board qua the petitioner.
Even otherwise we are of the opinion that the rule of harmonious construction has to be applied while interpreting various clauses of advertisement.
If the clauses of advertisement No. 2 of 1996 are read harmoniously, there can be no escape from the conclusion that the Board has incorporated the general conditions in the first place and then incorporated the special conditions of eligibility for various types of posts separately but all the conditions will have to be read together for the purpose of determination of eligibility of the candidates.
Thus, the Board cannot be charged with the allegation of having acted illegally in insisting upon the fulfilment of the requirement of knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard.
5.
We, however, find merit in the second submission of Shri Chopra that the Board could have tested the knowledge of the petitioner of Punjabi language only at the stage of interview and not earlier and therefore, its decision to reject the candidature of the petitioner must be declared as arbitrary.
The counter argument made by the learned Deputy Advocate General is that although the rule 17 of the Rules of 1994 and clause 7 of the advertisement are not happily worded, inasmuch as they do not lay down that the candidate should have passed an examination of Punjabi language of matriculation standard but in order to become eligible for recruitment a candidate must show that he/she has passed such examination.
We are unable to agree with Mrs. Tuli.
What is implicit in her argument is that the language of the rule 17 should be re- written by the Court with a view to incorporate the requirement of passing of an examination in Punjabi language of matriculation standard.
That is not the function of the Court.
While enacting Rule 17, the rule making authority must be presumed to be aware of the necessity to incorporate a condition regarding the knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard only and not of having passed an examination in Punjabi language of matriculation standard.
If the rule making authority has not considered it necessary to incorporate the requirement of passing of examination of matriculation standard in Punjabi language, we do not find any justifiable reason to read such a requirement in the rule.
6.
The stage for testing of knowledge of a candidate regarding Punjabi language and its standard reaches only when the candidate is subjected to interview and not before that.
It was, therefore, imperative for the Board to have interviewed the petitioner to find out whether she possessed knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard or its equivalent.
As on the date of interview the petitioner had passed Punjabi Parbodh examination conducted by the Language Department, and there is no contest by the respondents that this examination is of matriculation standard.
Thus, the petitioner must be presumed to be having the knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard and the Board was clearly in error when it rejected the candidature of the petitioner on the ground that as on 30th April, 1996 she had not passed Punjabi Parbodh examination or any other examination of matriculation standard in Punjabi language.
7.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and declare that the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board acted illegally in rejecting the candidature of the petitioner.
Since the petitioner has already been interviewed and she had secured more marks than the last candidates selected in the reserved category of the dependents of Ex-servicemen, we direct the competent authority to consider her for appointment against the reserved vacancies and pass appropriate order within a period of four months of the submission of a certified copy of the order before the competent authority.
If it becomes necessary to dispense with the services of less meritorious candidate, then the competent authority shall take necessary steps in this regard in accordance with the rules of natural justice.