Dalveer Bhandari, J - The petitioner submits that since August, 1993, he has been carrying on teaching work as a lecturer of Botany with the respondent University.
It is also submitted that the petitioner's services were regularised by the Selection Committee and the petitioner joined as a permanent Lecturer from 22.12.1995.
The grievance has been made by the petitioner that the Governing Body of the College without assigning any reason, refused to grant approval to the appointment of the petitioner.
2.
On 27121995, the Principal had sent a letter to the petitioner in which it is mentioned that the Governing Body in its meeting on 26121995 had not approved the appointment of the petitioner.
The petitioner, aggrieved by the order dated 27121995, has prayed that the said order be set aside.
In the writ petition filed by the petitioner, this court issued a show cause notice and also directed that the petitioner's services shall not be terminated.
3.
Shri K Desai, Chairman, Governing Body of Sri Aurobindo College filed an affidavit on behalf of the respondent.
In the affidavit, it is mentioned that there were three permanent vacancies of lecturers in Botany and the same were advertised to be filled up.
In the advertisement, it was clearly mentioned that there existed vacancies for three posts of lecturers in Botany.
In pursuance of the advertisement, 125 applicants were called for the interview on 18th December, 1995.
Out of them the Selection Committee recommended three candidates and they are respondents 6 to 8 in this petition.
The respondents 6 to 8 in the said order were offered appointment of Lecturer in Botany on permanent basis.
There more candidates were short-listed to fill up any vacancy which may arise in future within a period of one year.
According to the University rules life of a select panel is one year.
The petitioner was placed on serial No. 4 in the select panel.
The respondents 6 to 8 when offered the appointment, accepted the same and joined the services under the college and are presently teaching as lecturers in Botany.
4.
It is submitted by the respondents that the Principal of the college acted in a most arbitrary and whimsical manner.
The Principal has filed a separate counter affidavit.
The Principal is stated to have received a letter from Shri Manoj Kumar, the teacher-in-charge of the Department of Mathematics in the college to the effect that the staff association in a meeting held on 19121995, decided that one post in the Department of Mathematics be surrendered so that the 4th post in the Department of Botany could be filled up.
It is submitted in the counter-affidavit that the said action of Shri Manoj Kumar was challenged before the work-load committee.
On 27121995, a letter was addressed by the said committee to the Principal wherein it has strongly (sic) to the addition of work-load in the Department of Botany.
5.
It is categorically stated that the Principal issued an appointment letter to the petitioner without seeking any prior concurrence from the Governing Body.
As per the University rules and regulations, the teaching staff is appointed by the Governing Body of each college on the recommendations of the selection committee.
Ordinance 13 Chapter VII clearly indicates that the letter issued by the Principal without approval of the Governing Body is void and is of no consequence.
In fact, this letter is the result of an unholy conspiracy hatched between the Principal of the college and the petitioner.
6.
It is submitted in the counter-affidavit that before the Governing Body of the college could take any action to undo the mischief perpetrated by the Principal, in connivance with the petitioner, the petitioner obtained the ex parte ad interim order from this Court and subsequently the services of the petitioner could not be terminated and the petitioner is continuing in the college.
It is further submitted in the counter-affidavit that the Principal, in contravention of all the norms, rules and regulations contrived to help the petitioner in an illegal manner, is evident from the fact that the subjects of Botany and Mathematics have no concern or connection with each other.
It does not stand to any logic or reasoning as to how a post of a lecturer in Mathematics can be surrendered and transferred to the Department of Botany.
The teaching posts are sanctioned keeping in view the number of students and number of classes to be taken as per the schedule of work load recommended by the University.
There is no requirement of an additional lecturer in the college in the Department of Botany and assuming that in the Mathematics Department, one extra sanctioned post exists, the question of the same being assigned to the Department of Botany does not arise.
7.
It is submitted that mala fide of the Principal and certain teachers is further evident from the fact that the Principal of the college has addressed a communication to the deponent on 16.7.96 stating that due to the increased work load in the Department of Mathematics, one lecturer be appointed to cope with the existing work load.
The said letter dated 16.7.96 could not have been written because the same is based on incorrect facts.
It is also incorporated in the counter-affidavit, that the so-called surrendering, of the post of lecturer in the Department of Mathematics was nothing but a satratagem of contrivance to benefit the petitioner.
The Department of Mathematics has sufficient work load and the question of surrendering one post of lecturer in the Department of Mathematics was fundamentally not only contrary to the law but was even contrary to (sic).
The existing work load did not justify surrendering of one post, in the Department of Mathematics.
There is no question of any mala fide in the selection process.
The Selection Committee consisted of very eminent professors.
It is also incorporated in the affidavit that the petitioner was all along aware that there were only three vacant posts of lecturers in the Department of Botany which were required to be filled up and were in fact filled up by respondents 6 to 8 who were admittedly above the petitioner in merits.
8.
The Principal of the college had also filed a separate counter-affidavit.
In his counter-affidavit, it is stated that he offered the post to the petitioner because he was the most deserving candidate who appeared before the selection committee in December, 1995.
He submitted that the decision of offering the post to the 4th person in the panel of December, 1995 was based on the University Grants Commission's guidelines as per their letter dated 10101972.
As per UGC Guidelines, for every 15 students in BSc General, there ought to be one teacher.
Since there were 159 students in all, in the three years of BSc, so, there should be at least 11 teachers to teach the students as per the UGC Guidelines.
Before the appointment of the petitioner there were only 9 teachers in the department of science.
So, appointment of the 10th teacher was eminently called for and the (sic) department was good enough to provide (sic) the same temporarilly.
Therefore, he took the opportunity in the best interest of the College to appoint the petitioner.
9.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
Admittedly, three posts of teachers in Botany were advertised.
Respondents 6 to 8 were empanelled by the selection committee, (sic) offered the post after selection, they (sic) the respondent college and are teaching there.
In these circumstances, whether the Principal was justified in appointing the petitioner without there being any vacancy and in (sic) contravention of the recommendations of the Governing Body of the college.
the universities are governed by certain set of rules and regulations and according to the university rules and regulations, the appointment of lecturers cannot be made without the recommendation of the Governing Body.
Therefore, the Principal unilaterally could not have appointed the petitioner according to the university rules and regulations.
We can appreciate the anxiety of the Principal in appointing the petitioner who according to his assessment was a deserving candidate but all rules and regulations of the university cannot be given a go-by in this manner by anyone including the Principal.
The Principal was also not justified in totally disregarding and ignoring the recommendations of the Governing Body.
10.
We are clearly of the opinion that the appointment of the petitioner is not in consonance with the rules and regulations of the respondent-University.
In this view of the matter, we do not find any merit in the writ petition.
The writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merits.
Consequently, interim order granted by the court is vacated.
11.
In the facts and circumstances of this basis, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.