Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The paper book of this case runs into about 700 pages.
The hearings have gone on for long.
However, the issue is short.
The petitioner who is a Lecturer in Chemistry, is primarily aggrieved by the order dated December 16, 1992 by which she was transferred from the Government Senior Secondary School, Ropar to the School at Purkhali.
She alleges that the respondents had passed this order in order to prevent her from pointing out the irregularities which were being committed by Smt. Gurcharan Kaur, the Principal of the School at Ropar and various other officers of the department.
According to the petitioner, she had submitted various complaints alleging inter alia that the former Principal of the School Ms. S Kaushish had committed forgery and irregularities in the purchase of material and caused undue harassment to her.
The allegations made by the petitioner were enquired into.
It was established that irregularities had been committed by Ms. Kaushish, the Principal of the School.
Yet no action was taken against her.
Since the petitioner had refused to be a party to those irregularities and had refused to make false entries in the Stock Register relating to the Science Laboratories, the Principal had started engineering trouble against her.
Similarly, the petitioner also alleges that Smt. Gurcharan Kaur who was posted as Principal of the School at Ropar in the year 1991 had also joined "the clique more vigorously".
Like her predecessor, even respondent No. 4 had started to pressurise the petitioner to do various illegal and unlawful acts.
She did not agree.
She bluntly "refused to first consume and then to show the purchase of same science stores, worth over a lac of rupees which had been supplied to the School during 1990..." Resultantly, respondent No. 4 was annoyed.
Thereafter, a vilification campaign was initiated against the petitioner.
On July 20, 1992, the petitioner was relieved telegraphically at 9 pm The transfer order was never delivered to her.
She met the Secretary, Department of Education, Government of Punjab.
The operation of the order of transfer was stayed.
The petitioner was allowed to continue at her place of posting.
Unhappy over the situation, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) (Respondent No. 2) joined hands with the other respondents.
She dug out an old report submitted by the District Education Officer.
She ignored the fact that it had already been rejected by the Government.
On the basis of this report, she ordered the petitioner's transfer vide impugned order dated December 16, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the order of transfer was passed on account of extraneous considerations.
It was mala fide.
It was calculated to harass and defame her.
It was meant to pressurise her to withdraw the "allegations against the Principal".
On December 16, 1992, the petitioner was prevented from entering the School and performing her lawful duties.
The petitioner also alleges that from December 21, 1992, she was not allowed to join at Purkhali.
The proceedings under Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure had been initiated by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Ropar.
It was calculated to save the defaulters and their associates.
She alleges that on coming to know of this fact "the then Education Secretary, Shri Rajesh Chhabra, IAS called the explanation of the present Director - Mrs. Darshan Kaur..." The Director, however, "continued to victimise the petitioner".
When she did not revise the orders regarding the petitioner's transfer in spite of the directions issued by the Secretary to the Government, she went to her office.
On seeing the petitioner, the respondent (Mrs. Darshan Kaur, DPI, Schools) burst upon her and told her inter alia to "go and immediately withdraw all complaints against Mrs. Gurcharan Kaur and report this to SDM Ropar ... and then you will be allowed to join at the place you want yourself".
According to the petitioner, Mrs. Darshan Kaur is in the habit of shielding the culprits.
The petitioner has referred to various matters to suggest that in spite of findings recorded by different officers, no action has been taken by the second respondent against the guilty persons.
The petitioner alleges that she has had a consistently good record of service.
She has served the department with utmost devotion.
She performed her duties faithfully.
Her results have been excellent.
In spite of these facts, she was being victimised only to save the guilty persons.
She illustrates her claim by pointing out the facts and figures with regard to the results of the School.
She has also pointed out that on account of her credibility, she was "invariably associated with important departmental duties".
In particular, she has referred to the fact that she was made the member of the Selection Committee constituted by the Government of Punjab to select teachers in Ropar District.
She was informed about this vide letter dated January 4, 1993.
The petitioner had also been appointed as a "Paper Setter" by the Punjab School Education Board vide order dated January 12, 1993.
She was associated with the "Stores Purchase Committee of Science Stores constituted by DEO(s) Ropar on 8293 vide his office letter No.
2193-48-52."
The petitioner further alleges that she was relieved from the school "in absentia".
Even when she was present in school, it was wrongly stated that she was late.
In order to harass the petitioner, the Principal had directed the Sweeper not to clean the Laboratory.
The petitioner further alleges that in pursuance of the impugned order of transfer, her salary was with-held and was not paid.
She, consequently, prays that the order of transfer be set aside and she be given all consequential reliefs like arrears of salary etc.  2.
Various written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
On behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 6 and 9 to 11 viz. the State of Punjab, Mrs. Darshan Kaur, DPI, Schools; the District Education Officer, Ropar; Mrs. Gurcharan Kaur, the Principal Government Girls Senior Secondary School, Rupnagar; Mr. Ashok Kumar, Lecturer in Chemistry, Government Girls Senior Secondary School, Rupnagar; Deputy Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister, Punjab; Mr. Jaswant Singh, the former DPI, Schools; Mr. Nirmal Singh, the Legal Assistant with the DPI Schools and Mr. Baldev Singh, Deputy District Education Officer, Schools, the written statement has been filed by Mrs. Surjit Kaur, Assistant Director, Schools Administration.
It is not understood as to how the allegations levelled against individuals could be answered by the Assistant Director.
It has been stated by way of preliminary objection that transfer of an employee is not a punishment and the department is competent to post a person any where in public interest.
It has been further stated that during the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner has been posted at the "Government In-service Training Centre, Ropar".
It has also been stated that the petitioner was transferred in July 1992.
After the order had been stayed, the second respondent had acted "keeping in view the atmosphere of the school at that time".
It has been vaguely averred that "the petitioner has been transferred from Ropar keeping in view the atmosphere of the School".
Regarding the petitioner's allegation that she was not allowed to join at Purkhali, it has been stated that the authorities of the Education Department never restrained her from joining.
With regard to the petitioner's allegation that when she was not permitted to attend to her duties in School on December 16, 1992, she had submitted a representation and reported for duty in the office of the District Education Officer, Schools, Ropar vide letter dated December 16, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.3, it has been stated that "Annexure P.3 is admitted as a matter of record".
Curiously, the allegations made against various persons have been denied by Smt. Surjit Kaur in spite of the fact that there is nothing to indicate that she had any personal knowledge in that behalf.
It has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
Two separate written statements have also been filed by Respondent Nos. 7 and 8.
The petitioner has filed various affidavits, misc. applications and documents.
It is not necessary to refer each one of them separately.
The petitioner has conducted this case personally.
In spite of the fact that she has not studied law, she has conducted her case ably.
Mr. AG Masih has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
4.
Since the written statements filed on behalf of the respondents were not clear and even the sequence of events had not been brought out, Mr. Masih was asked to produce the records and to give the sequence of events.
He has produced the record and also certain documents.
He has placed on record the sequence of events signed by Mr. Jeet Singh, Superintendent Establishment, Office of the DPI, Schools, Punjab (Pages 1 to 5).
Pages 6 to 92 are the photo copies of various office notes and orders etc. produced by Mr. Masih.
This file containing 92 pages is taken on record as Mark `A'.
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was initially ordered to be transferred on July 17, 1992, from the Government Senior Secondary School, Ropar to the School at Village Shehna, District Sangrur.
Mr. Masih admits that this order was stayed by the Government.
Consequently, the sequence of events as relevant, for the present case only, may be noticed from the file at Mark `A'.
A perusal of the file (Mark A) at Page 21 shows that on December 16, 1992, the OSD to the Chief Minister had recorded the following order :-  "Presented to CM He has desired that the applicant may be transferred immediately and send a report to CM Sd/-  OSD/CM  16.12.92"  Mr. Masih states that it was in pursuance of this order that Respondent No. 2, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) had passed the impugned order by which the petitioner was transferred from Ropar to Purkhali.
The order dated December 16, 1992 has been passed on a photo copy of the report dated September 3, 1991 submitted by the District Education Officer, Ropar to the Deputy Commissioner, Ropar.
The report is actually signed by Mr. MP Singh, the Deputy District Education Officer.
There was no applicant before the Chief Minister.
The petitioner had submitted no application.
There was no request for the transfer of the petitioner.
Mr. Masih is not in a position to state as to who presented the report to the Chief Minister.
It is also not disputed that no proposal for the transfer of the petitioner had been moved by the department.
In this situation, it is not understood as to how the order of transfer was passed.
More particularly, there is nothing on record to show as to why the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) Respondent No. 2 ordered the transfer of the petitioner from Ropar to Purkhali.
The Chief Minister's order (assuming it was his) does not even remotely suggest that any directions for the transfer of the petitioner had been given.
Was the order of the Chief Minister used as a lever to get rid of the petitioner ?
Was the petitioner being transferred on account of the fact that she had levelled serious allegations against various persons ?
Who presented the report to the Chief Minister ?
These are the questions which remain un-answered.
6.
The petitioner alleges that Respondent No. 2 had ordered her transfer on account of wholly extraneous considerations.
She had acted mala fide.
She further submits that some of the allegations levelled by her had been enquired into and were substantiated.
It had been found that irregularities had been committed in the purchase of various articles.
According to her, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) was trying to shield the guilty officers.
These allegations have not been categorically denied by the respondents in spite of the fact that they have been impleaded personally and were served with the notice of the writ petition.
In view of the above, it is difficult to reject the petitioner's contention that the order dated December 16, 1992 passed by respondent No. 2 was highly arbitrary, illegal and unfair.
7.
There are few other things which deserve notice.
A complaint had been submitted by one Mr. MM Mittal against Ms. Kaushish.
An enquiry into this complaint was ordered.
Mr. RN Goyal was appointed as the Enquiry Officer.
Mr. Goyal had submitted a report dated January 24, 1992.
A photo copy of the report as produced by Mr. Masih (Pages 94 to 113 - probably as indicated in the file) is taken on record as Mark `B'.
A perusal of the file shows that Mr. RN Goyal had framed the following issues :-  "(i) whether Miss Kaushish is guilty of purchasing science material in gross violation of Government instructions/overlooking the rules of financial propriety and put pressure on Miss Malti Batra to make illegal and exaggerated payments.
(ii) whether Miss Malti Batra, Lecturer in Chemistry, was victimised at the hands of Miss Kaushish, the then Principal.
(iii) whether the responsibility for closure of science classes in the school lies with Miss Malti Batra or with Miss Kaushish and her ally teachers."
While examining these issues, Mr. Goyal has observed that initially Ms. Kaushish was reluctant to produce the record.
After a while she opened her locked Almirah, took out a file and "went to an adjoining room where two other teachers, one of whom was reported to be retired one, were present".
He got suspicious.
He followed Ms. Kaushish and saw "that an attempt was being made to remove certain papers from the file by untagging the papers...".
He further observed that it is "shocking that every document which is incriminatory in nature is missing from the original file of the school pertaining to purchases.
It seems that the Principal and other members of the Committee have tampered with the record pertaining to purchases and removed those letters on the basis of which their guilt could come to fore....Further, there is nothing on record to show that the firms on which the order was placed were borne on the list of firms approved for purchase of Stores in Punjab".
He further noticed that on receipt, the material should have been examined, counted, measured or weighed and taken into charge by a responsible Government employee.
The Principal had asked Miss Malti Batra, the petitioner to make the payment out of the Science funds.
The petitioner "in turn pointed out certain discrepancies in the procedure followed for the purchase and sought certain clarifications from the Principal before making the payment ...
When Miss Kaushish did not pay any heed to the request made by Miss Malti Batra, she reported the matter to the office of the District Education Officer (S), Ropar, as a result of which an audit was made by the Section Officer of the Office of DEO(S) Ropar.
Despite this Audit Report and an indication that payments should not be made to the concerned firms, Miss Kaushish made the same on the plea that before making payment she had removed all the objections raised in the Audit Report and that verbal permission of DEO(S), Ropar, has been obtained for the same".
Mr. Goyal has also noticed the fact that the petitioner had also pointed out that payments for two other bills had been made.
She had even produced photo copies of the documents.
Finally, he has concluded with regard to Issue No. (i) that "it is very much clear that all the purchases have been made in gross violation of financial rules as has also been concluded by the Section Officer, O/O DEO(S), Ropar in his Audit Report".
8.
With regard to the second issue, after examining various facts, he noticed that the petitioner was not paid the amount of Rs. 8,600/- from her General Provident Fund in spite of the sanction having been given by the appropriate authority.
According to him, Miss Kaushish allowed the financial sanction to lapse.
He finds that this speaks of "the magnitude of the vindictiveness on the part of Miss Kaushish that she went to the extent of flouting the orders of the higher authorities to harass Miss Malti Batra.
To my mind this is the height of indiscipline on the part of Miss Kaushish for which I have no option but to recommend that necessary disciplinary action may be initiated against her".
He further finds that Ms. Malti Batra had not been cooperating (with) Miss Kaushish in furtherance of her illegal acts i.e. purchase of science material illegally throwing all canons of financial propriety to winds.
The remarks recorded in the ACR have no basis at all and are the result of legal stand taken by Miss Malti Batra.
These adverse remarks "recorded in the ACRs of Miss Malti Batra have been the result of the vindictive attitude of Miss Kaushish, the then Principal .....
I, therefore, strongly recommend that action may be taken to expunge the unfounded adverse remarks in the ACRs of Miss Malti Batra..."  9.
With regard to the third issue, he found that "on no score Miss Malti Batra can be held responsible for the closure of science classes in the school and her name has been dragged in this controversy at the instance of the parties opposed and jealous to (of) her".
Accordingly, he concluded that all the charges framed against Miss Kaushish, the Principal, Government Senior Secondary School (Girls) Ropar, stood proved.
10.
Mr. Masih also admits that in pursuance of the findings recorded by Mr. RN Goyal, Miss Kaushish was charge-sheeted.
A regular enquiry was held.
The Enquiry Officer submitted a report dated May 3, 1995.
Some of the charges levelled against Miss Kaushish regarding financial irregularities were proved.
In spite of that, a lenient view was taken and no action was taken against her as she had already retired and was not keeping good health.
A photo copy of the enquiry report produced by Mr. Masih (Pages 298 to 325) is taken on record as Mark `C'.
This report gives a fair idea regarding the fact that the petitioner had refused to be a party to various illegal acts of the Principal.
She had not hesitated to point out the correct position.
On this account, she was victimised and harassed.
Not only her reports were spoiled but even her legitimate demands were over-looked.
Similarly, the petitioners had also levelled allegations against Mrs. Gurcharan Kaur, the Principal of the School.
Mr. Masih points out that on enquiry by the District Education Officer, Nabha, the allegations were not substantiated.
However, the fact remains that the petitioner had levelled allegations against her.
11.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it appears that the Chief Minister had not really ordered the petitioner's transfer from Ropar to Purkhali.
The Director of Public Instructions (Schools) had passed the order dated December 16, 1992 without any consideration of the matter.
The possibility of this order having been passed on account of the fact that the petitioner had levelled allegations against the Principals of the Schools where she was posted, is apparent from the record.
In this situation, it is clear that the order was not passed on any administrative grounds or calculated to serve public interests.
It was passed to serve the private interests.
12.
Besides the above, it also deserves mention that Mr. KS Saroj, IAS, the then Sub Divisional Magistrate, Rupnagar had issued a show cause notice under Section 144 Cr.PC (wrongly mentioned as Section 134 in the notice) on December 10, 1992.
In this notice, it was inter alia stated as under :-  "Show cause notice under Section 134 Cr.PC  Miss Malti Batra, Lecturer, Sr.
Secondary School (Girls) Rupnagar.
An inquiry conducted by Parents, Teachers Association of Senior Secondary School for Girls at Ropar has been laid before me as well as an open letter written by the Chemistry students show that :-  1.
You are not interested in teaching and the future of the students is in danger.
2.
You want to stay in this school by disinforming higher authorities that the Principal of the School is corrupt and unable to run the management of school.
3.
You are not handing over the lab.
apparatus to the Principal, so, therefore, no practical classes of science students are held.
4.
You are indisciplined and hardly attend the classes and taking pay without discharging proper duties.
From above facts, it seems that you are not doing your duty properly.
Therefore, show cause in my court on 151292 at 1000 am as to why you should not be prevented from going to the school and taking pay from govt. treasury for next two months under Section 144 Cr.PC  Given under my hand and seal of the court on 10th of December, 1992.
Sd/-  Sub Divisional Magistrate,  Rupnagar.
Endst.
No. 2106-7/Peshi dated 10.12.92  A copy is forwarded to the :-  1.
Station House Officer, Rupnagar for necessary action to deliver the show cause notice to Malti Batra and pasting a copy in the premises of Sr.
Secondary School for Girls Ropar.
2.
Distt.
Education Officer(S), Rupnagar.
From the above mentioned allegations/reports, it shows that the future of students is not safe in the hands of Miss Malti Batra, Lecturer.
Therefore, show cause in my court on 151292 at 1000 am as to why you should not be directed for arranging another Lecturer of Chemistry in place of Miss Malti Batra.
Sd/-  Sub Divisional Magistrate  Rupnagar."
13.
Whether or not the petitioner was a good teacher, the Sub Divisional Magistrate had no occasion to initiate proceedings under Section 144 Cr.PC or to ban the petitioner's entry to the school.
A perusal of this notice further indicates that a copy had been forwarded to the Station House Officer for delivery of the show cause notice to the petitioner and for pasting a copy in the premises of the school where she was posted.
The District Education Officer, Rupnagar was asked to show cause "as to why you should not be directed for arranging another lecturer of Chemistry in place of Miss Malti Batra".
Prima facie, it appears that Mr. Saroj acted in derogation of the law.
He assumed powers which did not vest in him under Section 144 Cr.PC The petitioner filed a misc. petition in this court viz. Criminal Misc. No. 1238-M of 1993.
It was disposed of as having become infructuous on May 17, 1993.
A copy of the notice sent to the petitioner by the Sub Divisional Magistrate is placed on record as Mark `D' (Pages 1 - 2).
14.
In spite of her transfer, it appears that the petitioner was assigned different duties.
To illustrate, she was appointed as a member of the selection committee vide orders dated January 1, 1993 which were conveyed to her on January 4, 1993.
The petitioner was also associated with the Stores Purchase Committee.
The order in this behalf was issued to her by the Deputy Education Officer (Schools) Ropar on February 8, 1993.
The factual position in this behalf has not been disputed by the respondents in the written statement.
It has not even been suggested that the petitioner had remained absent after the issue of her order of transfer or that she had not reported for duty.
Still further, it also appears from the record that the Secretary to the Government, Department of Education had taken serious note of the fact that respondent No. 2 had ordered the petitioner's transfer in spite of the fact that stay orders had been passed by the Government earlier.
The Secretary in his note dated January 13, 1993 had observed as under :-  "The Principal approached the SDM Ropar who strangely initiated action under Section 144 Cr.PC against the Chemistry teacher.
In fact, he passed an order prohibiting her entry in the school.
The husband of the principal of the school stood with a few persons in front of the gate to prevent her entry to the school.
I had to ring up the Deputy Commissioner, Ropar to tell him that SDM had no authority to prevent entry of a teacher in the school and against a single person no criminal action can be started under Section 144 Cr.PC Section 144 Cr.PC applies to those cases where there is an apprehension of breach of peace by five or more persons.
In a dispute between the lecturer and the principal the passing of an order under Section 144 Cr.PC was illegal.
The Deputy Commissioner promised to take necessary action in this case, as he was also surprised to hear about this action of the SDM.
In the meanwhile the DPI(S) received another order from the OSD(T) to CM dated 16121992 ordering the transfer of Chemistry teacher from the school.
Without referring to the previous orders on the subject, without consulting the Secretariat file on which the CM was to take decision.
The DPI(S) ordered the transfer of the Chemistry teacher out of the school.
This one sided action of the DPI(S) has caused further resentment in the matter and the DPI(S) has informed me that the CM had called her about this action....".
On this basis, the Education Secretary inter alia suggested that the "explanation of the DPI(S) may be called for her hasty action in transferring the teacher from the school before the CM could pass final orders on the case on the secretariat file.
She has defied the stay order issued by the undersigned and without waiting for formal orders in this case by the CM..." The matter remained under consideration till August 23, 1993 when the petitioner was again posted at Ropar.
In this situation, it is apparent that the petitioner had been directed to perform certain duties by the DEO etc. She had been performing those duties.
It is also admitted that no communication was sent to her indicating that she was being treated as absent from duty.
Keeping in view the fact that the order of transfer was wholly arbitrary and the petitioner was still performing certain duties, it does not appear to be reasonable that she should be deprived of the salary for the period from January 1, 1993 to August 23, 1993.
She is entitled to the salary of the period.
15.
The petitioner also complains that her leave account has not been properly settled.
She has been treated as on leave on days when she had performed her duties.
No action has been taken against the persons who have been found guilty.
16.
So far as these matters are concerned, the controversy can't be resolved in these proceedings.
Settlement of leave account etc. is a matter for the department to consider.
If the petitioner has any grievance, she can submit a representation within one month from today.
If she submits such a representation to the Government, the Secretary to the Government, Department of Education, shall consider and decide it in accordance with law within three months by passing a speaking order.
17.
In view of the above, the order dated December 16, 1992 by which the petitioner was transferred, is set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be paid the salary for the period from January 1, 1993 to August 23, 1993 within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The representation, if submitted with one month from today shall be decided by the Education Secretary within three months by passing a speaking order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to her costs which are assessed at Rs. 5000/-.
She may have actually spent more in fighting this case but these "costs" would be some consolation for her as vindication of her stand.
It is also directed that the file Mark `A' and the documents Mark `B' to Mark `D' shall be kept in a sealed cover alongwith this case.
The writ petition and the various misc. applications are disposed of in the above terms.