K Sreedharan, CJ.
- The State of Punjab challenges the decree passed by the Courts below in favour of the respondent granting him pension.
2.
The short facts necessary for the disposal of this appeal are as follows :  3.
Respondent herein joined service of Zila Parishad, Gurdaspur, in 1942 as a class IV employee.
In 1974, the management of the roads was transferred from Zila Parishad to Public Works Department.
Hence the services of the respondent were transferred to the department of the State.
Respondent retired from service on 3151981.
He claimed pension but his claim was declined on the ground that he did not put in the minimum of ten years approved service for any pension.
Thereupon, he instituted Civil Suit No. 407 on 26.11.1985.
4.
The State and Executive Engineer, PWD B and R, Pathankot, filed detailed written statement contending as follows :  5.
Respondent was a work charge Baildar in Zila Parishad with effect from 161951 and he continued to work as such upto 14.8.1972.
He was brought on regular cadre in the Public Works Department with effect from 1581972.
He was taken on transfer on 581974 in Construction Division, Pathankot, and he retired on 3151981 on superannuation.
As respondent put in less than ten years of regular service, he was not entitled to earn pension under Rule 4.2(b) of Chapter IV of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II.
Consequently, respondent was not entitled to pension from the State.
6.
On the basis of the pleadings, the trial Court went into the question as to whether respondent, herein, is entitled to pension.
The learned Subordinate Judge 1st Class came to the conclusion that respondent remained in service of the Government for a continuous period of more than ten years as a confirmed employee and consequently he was entitled to the grant of pension as per Rule 4.2(b) of Chapter IV of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II.
As a consequence of this finding, the suit was decreed directing the State to fix the pension of the respondent from the date of his retirement i.e. 3151981.
The State and the Executive Engineer challenged the decree before the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur in Civil Appeal No. 98 of 1987.
While dismissing the appeal the appellate Court took the view that in calculating the period of service for computing pension, the service rendered by respondent on work charge basis is also to be reckoned.
Hence this appeal.
7.
It is the common case that respondent entered service under Zila Parishad as a work charge Baildar w.e.f.
161951 and continued to discharge that duty till 14.8.1972; that he was brought on regular service w.e.f.
1581972; that his services were taken over by the State Government on 581974 and that he retired from service on superannuation on 3151981.
His claim for pension was disputed by the appellant, herein, contending that he has not put in the minimum required service of ten years as per Rule 4.2(b) of Chapter IV of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II.
Relying on the decision reported in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(2) Punjab Law Reporter 223, the lower Appellate Court directed the appellant to compute pensionary benefits of the respondent although he was not a regular Government employee, from 161951.
8.
Before dealing with the facts of the case, I consider it worthwhile to refer to the statutory provisions relating to the grant of pension.
Rule 312 of Chapter III of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II states that the service of a Government employee does not qualify for pension unless it conforms to the three conditions, namely, (i) the service must be under the Government (ii) the employment must be substantive and permanent (iii) the service must be paid by Government.
This provision makes it mandatory that the pensionable service rendered by a Government servant must satisfy the above three conditions.
This is further made clear when we refer to Rule 316 of Chapter III of Punjab Civil Services Rules and the note appended to it.
As per clause (a) of Rule 316, the service of a Government employee does not qualify for pension unless he is appointed and his duties and pay are regulated by the Government.
The note makes it clear that employees of municipalities, employees of grant-in-aid schools and institutions, subordinates appointed by Treasurers on their own responsibility, service on an establishment paid from a Contract Establishment Allowance etc. and service on an establishment paid from the Household Allowance of the Governor are not called within the eligible category of pensionable service.
Till respondent was absorbed in Public Works Department, he was working under the Zila Parishad.
Employees under the Zila Parishad were not being paid by the Government.
So employees under the Zila Parishad are not holding pensionable posts, the liability of which can be fixed on the Government.
The period of service under the Zila Parishad cannot also be reckoned for computing the pensionary benefits in the case of those who were absorbed in Government service.
Viewed in this light whole service rendered by the respondent under the Zila Parishad, cannot be treated as pensionable service.
9.
Respondent's services were taken over by the Government on 581974.
It is not disputed that his services were regularised by the Government with effect from 1581972.
It is also the common case that the Zila Parishad confirmed the service of respondent with effect from 2261970.
In such a situation even though the Government regularised the service of the respondent with effect from 15.6.1972 only, that must relate back to the date on which he was confirmed as Mate in the Zila Parishad namely, 2261970.
On the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, for meeting the ends of justice, I am taking this view because the contrary view will result in miscarriage of justice as far as the respondent is concerned.
10.
Relying on the decision in Kesar Chand's case, referred to above, learned counsel representing the respondent argued that service rendered by respondent as work charge employee under the Zilla Parishad should also count for pensions.
This argument, I am afraid, cannot be accepted.
The Full Bench in that case was concerned with the work charge employees who were engaged by the Government and paid by them.
Respondent, under no circumstance, can claim to have been engaged by the Government and paid by them.
Therefore, the said decision cannot come to his rescue.
11.
The main argument advanced by the State before the Courts below was that respondent had not put in minimum ten years service for claiming pension as required by Rules 42(1)(b) of Chapter IV of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II.
This argument was advanced on the basis that Government regularised respondent's service on 1581972 and he retired from service on his superannuation on 3151981.
On the facts and circumstances of this case, I take a view that regularisation of respondent's service which was ordered with effect from 1581972 should relate back to the date on which his service was confirmed by the Zila Parishad, namely, 2261970.
In that situation, petitioner must be deemed to have had pensionable service with effect from 2261970 to 3151981.
This is more than ten years.
I take this view on the basis of the non-production of the order by which the respondent's services were regularised.
Government are in possession of orders by which employees of the Zila Parishad were taken over by them and the conditions of service governing them.
Government did not care to produce those document before the Court below or in these proceedings.
Adverse inference has to be drawn on their failure to produce the documents.
The documents by which the services of the petitioner were taken over by the Government, if produced, would have gone against the Government and that is the reason they kept those documents away from Courts.
In this view of the matter also, I feel that respondent's service is taken to be regularised service for the purpose of grant of pension with effect from 2261970.
While so computed, respondent has got more than ten years of regular service to his credit.
He is, therefore, entitled to the minimum pension admissible as per law.
Appellants are bound to disburse the minimum pensionary benefits due to the respondent in accordance with law from 3151981.
Appeal is disposed of in the above terms modifying the decree passed by the Courts below.
A decree in the above lines be drawn by the office.
I make no order as to costs.