SB Sinha, A.C.J.
- All these four appeals are directed against a common Judgment of a learned single Judge of this Court dated 1621999 whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by the respondents herein has been disposed of with the following directions :-  "(i) The panel in question relating to Howrah District stands set aside and quashed.
(ii) The Secretary, Education Department is directed to forthwith set up or set apart, as the case may be, two latest computers and adequate computer operators and appropriate software at a proper secured place.
(iii) The Secretary, Education Department, Govt. of West Bengal is directed to constitute a 3-member committee to supervise the work to be entrusted upon them in terms of the order.
In the matter of choosing the members of the said committee the Secretary, Education Department must have regard to their integrity.
(iv) As may be desired by the 3-member committee, the Secretary, Education Department shall make available such workmen and officers to them for doing the work to be entrusted upon them in terms of this order.
(v) The Chairman, District Primary School Council, Howrah shall furnish the original applications received by it from the candidates, the particulars regarding the interview of such candidates, makes obtained by the candidates, marks obtained by the candidates during viva-voce test and all necessary papers in connection with preparation of the panel to the said committee within 7 days from the date of constitution of such committee by the Secretary, Education Department.
(vi) Upon receipt of the papers and documents mentioned in the next proceeding clause the committee shall feed all the data therefrom to both the computers, to be set up simultaneously.
After such data are fed up, the panel shall be prepared after comparing the results of both the computers on the basis of merit and in doing so marks to which a candidate is entitled to as prescribed by the statute as also the marks to which a candidate is entitled to in accordance with the marks obtained by him during the viva voce test shall be taken into account.
(vii) The panel must be prepared in accordance with the directions as above within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the papers and documents from the Chairman, District Primary School Council.
After the panel is prepared in the manner as above, a copy thereof shall be published by hanging up the same at the Zilla Parishad Officer at Howrah and a copy thereof shall be supplied to the Director of School Education (PE) West Bengal.
It is made clear that in the panel itself the statutory academic marks and the marks obtained by the candidates in viva voce should be indicated separately as well as the total marks should be shown.
(viii) Published panel shall remain for inspection by the public for a period of 15 days (ix) If any candidate desires to point out any irregularity in the panel he shall be entitled to do so by making an application to the Director of School Education (PE) within 21 days from the date of publication of the panel in the manner as aforesaid.
The Director of School Education (PE) shall dispose of the individual applications that may be received by him within 21 days after due consultation with the members of the committee mentioned above.
(x) 7 days thereafter the final panel shall be prepared which shall be countersigned by the Chairman, District Primary School Council, Howrah.
The Director of School Education (PE) and the three members of the Committee and a copy of such panel shall be hung up in the same manner and at the same place for a period of 15 days.
(xi) The appointment from the said panel shall be given in accordance with the directions issued by the Supreme Court and the Division Bench of this Court.
(xii) Insofar as the candidates who shall be listed in the final panel their age shall be fixed as on the date of preparation of the present panel which is being set aside."
2.
The admitted facts of the matter are as follows :  In the year 1986 process of selection for preparation of panel for 806 vacancies and the post of Assistant Teacher in Primary Schools within 25 circles were notified by the District School Board, Howrah.
Names of candidates of 7237 were sponsored by the different Employment Exchanges and besides the said candidates 67 more candidates also appeared at the written test under court's order.
3.
West Bengal Primary (Rural) Education Act, 1930 and West Bengal Primary (Urban) Education Act, 1963 were repealed and replaced by West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as `the said Act').
In terms of sections 105 of the said Act a notification was issued in July, 1990 as a result whereof, the District School Boards which were holding examination for the purpose of empanelling the candidates were replaced by West Bengal Primary School Councils and till the constitution thereof the functions of the Council were to be performed by the ad hoc committees.
The State also framed Rules on or about 22nd November, 1991 in exercise of its power under Section 106(1) of the said Act.
4.
The validity of the said Act and the Rules had been under challenge and a Division Bench of this Court in West Bengal Board of Primary Education v. The State of West Bengal reported in 1997(1) C.L.J.
165 upheld the validity thereof and held that all appointments shall be made in terms of the said Rules.
However, it appears that certain interim orders had been passed in some writ applications in July, 1993 but as the interim orders had been passed in some writ applications in July, 1993 but as the interim order relating to operation of the Rules continued despite delivery of the judgment by the learned trial Judge, which was the subject matter of appeal in the above referred case, the Council adopted the norms laid down under Rule 9 with some modifications for computation of marks in the following manner :-  "1.
Academic Qualification, 65 marks  2.
Training, 10 marks  3.
Oral Interview, 10 marks 4.
Co-curricular Activity, 5 marks Percentage of marks to the total full marks obtained by a candidate in SF/MP/HS would be computed as percentage of 65 and the percentage of total full marks obtained by him in JB Training Exam.
would be computed as percentage of 10 marks for training; with regard to 5 marks relating to Co- curricular activity, the council adopted the Certificates mentioned in Rule 9(b)(vi) A.B.C.D.E.
as eligible for awarding 1 mark for each certificate.
It was further decided that after recording marks in respect of the said four aspects of the candidates eligibility by all the members of the Selection Committee, the total marks awarded by individual members of the Selection Committee would be added up and thereafter divided by the number of members of the Selection Committee to get the average marks."
5.
25 circle-wise panels were prepared.
On or about 17.9.1993 District School Board accorded provisional approval to the said panels.
Appointments Letters pursuant to such approval had been issued to 796 candidates.
Questioning preparation of the said panel a writ petition was filed before this Court.
6.
An interim order was issued by a learned single Judge restraining the Council from giving any appointment from those panels whereagainst an appeal was preferred which was marked as FMAT No. 6030/93.
In the said appeal, two special officers were appointed for making investigation in regard to the selection procedure and preparation of the panel.
The Special Officers filed a joint report after inspection of evaluation sheets and other relevant papers and records wherein allegedly several specific cases of irregularities were pointed out.
The learned Special Officers commented that the procedure adopted in preparing separate circle-wise panel instead of a district-wise panel was not proper and resulted in serious injustice to the candidates.
7.
By an order dated 3031994 a Division Bench of this Court in the said FMAT No. 6030/93 directed the Director of School Education to recast the panel on the basis of the report of the Special Officers upon holding that the panel prepared in respect of the District of Howrah may not constitute major problem for the purpose of giving effect thereto.
The said judgment of the Division Bench was the subject-matter of a petition for grant of Special Leave to Appeal before the Supreme Court of India which has since been reported in 1996(7) SCC 333.
The Apex Court approved the order of the Division Bench as far as Howrah District was concerned both in respect of appointment from the panel as well as like (life ?)
thereof as also in respect of preparation of fresh panel for future vacancies.
8.
In the meantime on or about 27.11.1995 District School Board examined the panel in the light of the observations made by the Special Officer in their Report and upon preparing district-wise panel accorded his approval thereto.
9.
Another Division Bench in a writ petition filed by Dilip Kumar Adok and others by an order dated 941997 extended the life of the panel with a direction that all the vacancies for which the panel was prepared must be filled up within the extended time.
10.
Another Division Bench by an order dated 26.8.1998 directed the District School Board to recast the panel within 4 months and issue direction to the Council to appoint the successful candidates strictly in accordance with law.
The panel was not, in fact, recast but was merely re-arranged.
Thereafter the present writ applications were filed questioning non-inclusion of their names in the panel on the plea that those who are entitled to much lesser marks have been included therein.
The Director was asked to produce the full panel with mark-sheets as prepared by him on 27.1.1999.
He was also directed to produce the tabulation of the last five empanelled candidates.
11.
Mr. Pabitra Bose, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State and Arun Prokash Sirkar, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Council in M.A.T.
Nos. 778-779/99 inter alia, submitted that the court cannot legislate which has been done by reason of the impugned judgment.
The learned Counsel contends that Selection Committee had awarded marks in accordance with rules.
12.
The learned Counsel submits that the learned trial Judge was not justified in passing the impugned order quashing the panel although the persons who obtained appointments from the panel had not been brought on records whether in their individual or representative capacity which vitiates the judgment and in support of the said contention reliance has been placed on Prabodh Verma v. State of UP reported in AIR 1985 SC 167.
13.
It was further submitted that the court cannot frame the norms to be substituted instead and in place of the statutory Rules and thereby entrench upon the Legislative function of the rule framing authority under Section 106(1) of the WB Primary Education Act, 1973.
In support of the said contention reliance has been placed on UP Sales Tax Service Association v. Taxation Bar Association, Agra and others, reported in AIR 1996 SC 98 and Chandigarh Administration v. Manpreet Singh reported in AIR 1992 SC 435 : 1992(2) SCT 69 (SC).
14.
Referring to a decision in Mohidur Rahaman v. The State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1995(1) CHN 199 the learned Counsel submits that the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot lay down any guidelines or direct the respondents to implement the same which lies within the exclusive domain of the Supreme Court under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Counsel submits that the Apex Court in Paschimbanga Prathamik Sikshak Prapta Bakar-O-Sikshak Samiti and others v. President, WB Primary School Council and others, reported in 1996(2) SCT 159 (SC) : 1996(7) SCC 333 issued directive on the statutory functionaries to discharge their respective statutory functions as regards recasting or preparation of the panel whereas the learned trial Judge had issued guidelines for preparation of the panel.
15.
Mr. Basu would urge that the finding of learned trial Judge to the effect that the mark-sheet and the tabulation sheet of the empanelled candidates would be revealed and the participants may make an application before the petitioners on their statutory marks got the District School Education suffers from legal infirmity.
It was submitted that the writ petitioners were not entitled to issuance of any writ of or in the nature of mandamus as they have no legal right inasmuch the life of the panel has expired.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on an unreported decision of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 35-36 of 1985 (Shri Ajit Kumar Sanyal and others v. Narayan Ch.
Ghose and others) disposed of on 16101987 wherein it was held :-  "The maximum period is 10 months plus 6 months which means 18 months.
The circular cannot extend the period beyond 18 on this and therefore it would be an unauthorised act as the rule is binding on the Director Public Instruction.
It was not open to him to extend the life of the panel.
We are, therefore, of the view that the circular in its present from is not in accordance with law and would not be binding.
In the earlier portion of the said judgment, their Lordships refused to extend the life of the said panel and held that a direction to regularise such appointments would run counter to the scheme of empanelment and would not be in keeping with the spirit of the rules...... we see no basis for extending the period beyond the period provided in the rules."
16.
Reliance has also been placed upon a Division Bench decision in this Court in Distt School Board v. Paschimbanga Prathanik Sikshak Samiti reported in 1991(1) SLJ 479 wherein it has been held :-  "As such in my view if any appointment is made from the panels which were prepared in the year 1983-85, it shall be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as many more meritorious candidates who have come eligible after the preparation of such Rules shall be deprived of their rights to be considered for appointment against the existing vacancies.
In view of the aforesaid statutory Rule 3E the life of a panel has been fixed for a period of 12 months from the date of preparation of the panel.
The State Government may extend the period of such panel by a period not exceeding six months.
There is no dispute that the period of twelve months expired long ago.
It was stated at the Bar that there is no order of the State Government extending the period of the panels.
As such the panels prepared in different districts between the year 1983-85 have lost their existence and no direction can be given to make appointments on the basis of those panels after making necessary scrutiny and examination in the light of the direction given by the learned Judge."
17.
Mr. LC Behani, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that even in the decision of the Division Bench an irregularity had been found in respect of the panel prepared for Howrah District and it was held that the Director of School Education should prepare the panel afresh.
According to the learned Counsel, the Director of School Education had not even cared to prepare the panel in terms of the aforementioned directions of the Division Bench which was upheld by the Supreme Court as also the subsequent decision of the Division Bench in the contempt application.
The learned Counsel submits that in stead and place of recasting the panels only the panels were re-arranged.
The court clearly found such action to be illegal.
While purporting to re-arrange the panel contends Mr. Behani, merit of the candidates, viz. marks obtained by them at the written examination and at the interview were ignored.
It was submitted that had the marks obtained by the petitioners according to statute as found by the Director of School Education is considered, they would be placed much higher up in the merit list and would be found to be eligible for appointment.
The learned Counsel submits that despite directions, the Director of School Education failed to produce the panel and only produced the mark-sheets and tabulation sheets and, thus, the learned trial Judge had no other option but to issue the aforementioned directions.
The case at hand depicts a sordid state of affairs.
It is unfortunate that the statutory authorities failed to perform their statutory duties.
The Director of School Education is the highest officer of the Education Department.
It is his solemn duty to see that not only his subordinates act strictly upon following the terms of the rules particularly when the same is governed by the statutory rules but also to see that the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India are carried into effect in its true letter and spirit.
It is a matter of great regret that the Director of School Education has failed and/or neglected to produce the panel before the learned trial Judge.
18.
In FMAT No. 6090/93 : 1995(1) SCT 572 (Cal.)
(DB),(Midnapore Zilla Nimna Buniyadi Ek Shikshak Shikshan Prapta Bekar Sikshak Samity and others v. State of West Bengal and others) disposed of on 3031994, a Division Bench of this Court held :-  "During the course of hearing, however, strenuous submissions have been made on behalf of the writ petitioners about the utter irregularity in the matter of preparation of the panel.
It was submitted that the observations of the Division Bench have been totally given a go-bye and unworthy persons were placed at the top whereas genuine and worthy persons were left at large.
The situation, however, came to a passe where, in fact, one Mr. Khanra filed an affidavit stating therein that though he is a member of Selection Committee but he was asked to proceed in a particular manner which does not stand to reason nor can be termed to be a very fair selection process.
This definite affidavit from the member of the Selection Committee raised certain eye-brows as regards the efficacy and the fairness of the panel prepared by the concerned School Board but by reason of the enormity of the records and by reason of the fact that this court cannot possibly go into the matter with such details this Court appointed two learned Advocates of this court who are otherwise experienced enough in these matters to give an illustrative inspection report to this Court upon verification of the original records for two districts of West Bengal only viz. Midnapore district and Howrah district.
Be it clarified that this Court was not going into the question of assessment as such, but this inspection by the joint Special Officers was being directed only for the purpose of having an idea as to whether formalities have been complied with or not in accordance with law.
19.
Upon considering the report of the Special Officers appointed for this purpose and upon checking the panels of the selected candidates prepared by Midnapore and Howrah District Councils, the learned Judges expressed their surprise to find that some of the candidates whose academic qualification was only upto the Class VIII had been selected for appointment.
20.
As regard the Midnapore District, it was found that serious irregularities had been committed.
However, as regard the Howrah District it was held :-  "The panel for Howrah District cannot, however, be described to be that irregular, though certain instances have been brought to light, but those irregularities in our view, cannot constitute a major problem for the purposes of giving effect to the panel and as such, we direct the Director of School Education (Primary) to consider the observations of the Special Officer so far as the District of Howrah is concerned and proceed to grant approval upon proper verification of the anomalies as pointed out by the Special Officers.
Be it recorded here that we are not trying to assess the suitability of the candidates, but the irregularities cannot be obliterated.
We have been given to understand during the course of hearing that the Director of School Education (Primary) has already given his approval in regard to the panel, but in our view, the matter ought to be examined further in the light of the report of the Special Officer and the Director of School Education (Primary) should recast the panel, if necessary, upon removal of the anomalies, if there be any, and if the Director considers the same to be an anomaly at all."
The learned Judges further directed :-  "The entire process, however, should be completed within a period of four months from the date hereof.
It is clarified, however, that persons who have already been favoured with the letter of appointment shall continue to remain in employment until after the matter is considerated by the Director in terms of this order.
If the panel is recast by the Director, the new members of the panel should be given appointment and the persons already in employment be kept in waiting until after further vacancies and their cases be considered along with others."
21.
The said decision as noticed hereinbefore was upheld by the Supreme Court stating :-  "As regard the other concerned districts we, however, make it clear that the directions given by the High Court in the impugned judgment for being complied with before giving appointment from the panel prepared for the district of Howrah will also apply to them and in complying with the above directions and findings of the Special Officers appointed by this court."
22.
Admittedly a contempt petition was filed and a Division Bench of this Court, inter alia, held that the panel had not been correctly recast.
Before the bench the panel prepared was produced and certain interpolations was found therein.
It was observed :  "Therefore, in the above situation we are, however, unable to agree with the contention of the respondent that the appointments which were given after the order are valid."
It was further observed :-  "However, we are not in a position to specifically characterise as to which all the applicants had been given appointments after the order of Division Bench dated 9th April, 1997 was passed.
It was directed that those who had joined service by virtue of their appointment in ignorance of the directive of the Division Bench would continue temporarily."
23.
It was clearly held that the respondents have committed contempt.
However, a lenient view has been taken and the displeasure of the court about his conduct was expressed and it was observed :-  "In the facts and circumstances of the case, we considered the case of both parties from every angle.
We find that the panel prepared by the District Primary School has been made in violation of the Court's order and, therefore, the Director of School Education shall recast the panel within a period of four months from the date and issue direction to the President, District Primary School Council, Howrah to appoint the successful candidates from the panel strictly in accordance with the merit without any alteration."
24.
The only question which, therefore, arises for consideration at this stage before us is whether the learned trial Judge, in the fact situation of the case was correct in issuing the impugned direction.
25.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that normally the court shall not legislate but it is also equally true that the courts' hands are long enough to reach injustice wherever it is found.
The appellants herein cannot be permitted to play tyrant with the lives of the several candidates who had been fighting litigations for a long time.
It is equally unfortunate that the Director of School Education has not produced the panel.
26.
The legal position in this connection is absolutely clear.
As indicated hereinbefore, vires of 1973 Act and 1991 Rules had been upheld by a Division Bench of this court in West Bengal Board of Secondary Education v. State of WB and others, reported in 1997(1) CLJ 165 wherein it has been held that any action and/or activities made by an authority violating the Statutory provisions of the Rules is a nullity.
27.
There cannot further be any doubt that although some times keeping in view the nature of irregularities in the selection-making process the entire panel may not be set aside but where gross illegality or serious illegalities have been found in preparation of the panel, the entire panel can be cancelled.
28.
In Bihar Public Service Commission and others v. State of Bihar reported in AIR 1997 SC 2280 : 1997(1) SCT 501 (SC), it has been held :  "Be that as it may, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court committed gross error of law in issuing the mandamus requiring the Public Service Commission and the State to give appointment to the respondent even after going through the Biswas Committee Report which in no uncertain terms indicates the gross irregularities and illegalities committed by the Services Selection Board in the matter of holding the examination and drawing the list of successful candidates."
29.
In Gopal Chandra Dixit v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1998(1) C.L.J.
16, it has been held :-  "I have already mentioned that the entire illegality and defects in the matter of appointment had its root in the fraud committed by the Headmaster of the institution as alleged, but within the knowledge of the respondent No. 17.
Therefore, the respondents No. 17 being a party to that fraud, according to the principles of equity he should not be allowed to reap the benefit of his own fraud and that also at the cost of a fair chance of appointment of the second candidate in the panel i.e. the present petitioner.
In other words, the court of Justice should not be a party to an act, to perpetuate a fraud committed by one of the parties to the litigation."
30.
In Krishna Yadav and another v. State of Haryana and others reported in AIR 1994 SC 2166 : 1994(3) SCT 581 (SC), it has been held :-  "In the above circumstances, what are we to do ?
The only proper course open to us is to set aside the entire selection.
The plea was made that innocent candidates should not be penalised for the misdeeds of others.
We are unable to accept this argument.
When the entire selection is stinking, conceived in fraud and delivered in deceit, individual innocence has no place as "Fraud unravels everything".
To put in other words, the entire selection is arbitrary.
It is that which is faulted and not the individual candidates.
Accordingly, we hereby set aside the selection of Taxation Inspectors.
31.
The court should not proceed on a presumption before arriving at a finding of fact it must go through the records and if necessary exercise its power to compel the authorities to proceed in accordance with law.
(See State of AP v. K Jayaraman reported in AIR 1975 SC 633).
32.
It is also well settled that the court should not ordinarily make any legislation.
33.
In UP Sales Tax Service Association v. Taxation Bar Association, Agra reported in AIR 1976 SC 98, the Apex Court has held :-  "The decision in Dwarka Nath v. Income-tax Officer, Special Circle, D Ward, Kanpur, AIR 1966 SC 81, also is of no assistance to the 1st respondent.
Though this court was considering the scope and nature of the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226, there is no doubt now as regards the scope of the jurisdiction of the High Courts.
However wide its power be, the question is whether a writ or order or prohibition could be issued prohibiting a statutory authority from discharging its statutory functions or transferring those functions to another justifications (jurisdiction ?).
Having given our anxious and careful consideration, we are of the considered view that the High Court does not have the aforesaid power.
Exercise of such power generates its rippling effect on the subordinate judiciary and statutory functionaries.
On slightest pretext by the aggrieved parties or displeased members of the bar, by their concerted action they would browbeat the judicial officers or authorities, who would always be deterred from discharging their duties according to law without fear or favour or ill- will.
Therefore, we hold that writ petition is not maintainable.
The impugned orders are clearly and palpably illegal and are accordingly quashed."
34.
The High Court, as has correctly been submitted, cannot also issue any guideline where guidelines can be found out from the rules itself.
(See Mohidur Rahaman v. The State of West Bengal and others, reported in 1995(1) CHN 199).
35.
In this case as noticed hereinbelow the Director of School Education had not produced the panel Had such panel been produced, the learned trial Judge could have perused the same and pass an appropriate order.
It did not do so which it was obliged to do.
Furthermore, we are of the opinion that keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case that it was necessary that the persons who had been appointed, should have been impleaded in representative capacity in view of the decision of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1985 SC 167 (Prabodh Verma v. State of UP).
36.
For the reasons aforementioned we are of the opinion that the matter should be considered afresh by the appropriate bench.
The Director of School Education is hereby directed to produce the panel.
He must state as to whether it is not in a position to recast and produce the panel in terms of the Judgment of this Court.
The Director of School Education, if necessary, should be asked to appear in person to place the entire facts before the Court.
Some of the appointees may be impleaded in representative capacity.
37.
The learned trial Judge may take the help of the Special Officers who had earlier been appointed in order to find out as to whether the irregularities that had been pointed out by them in respect of the panel of the district of Howrah had been removed or not.
In the event it is found that the orders of this Court have been flouted there cannot be any doubt that the learned trial Judge would be entitled to strike down the appointments of such persons who had been appointed in violation of the provisions of the statute.
38.
With the aforementioned observations and directions these appeals are allowed.
The judgment and order is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the appropriate bench for passing an order in accordance with law.
In the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
39.
Before us as indicated hereinbefore the parties had addressed at great length on the application for contempt filed before the learned trial Judge.
Some of the parties had also filed after the arguments were complete.
However, having regard to the views we have been taken in the main matter, we are of the opinion that it is not necessary to proceed with the contempt proceedings as no action thereon is called for at this stage.
The contempt applications are accordingly disposed of and the rule is discharged.
Appeals allowed.