SP Srivastava, J - Feeling aggrieved by an order dated 1471983, passed by the UP Public Services Tribunal dismissing the claim petition of the petitioner challenging an order passed by the District Collector dated 471973 reverting the petitioner to post of paid Apprentice and thereafter removal of his name from the list of Paid Apprentices vide the order dated 2581973, passed by the same authority which orders were left intact with the dismissal of the claim petition, the petitioner has approached this Court seeking redress praying the quashing of the aforesaid orders.
2.
Before the Tribunal the petitioner had, in the alternative, prayed that his representation against the impugned orders be directed to be disposed of.
Apart from the aforesaid relief claimed in the writ petition, he has prayed for the issuance of a direction requiring the Board of Revenue to decide the revision filed by him which is claimed to have been filed on 2111975.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned standing counsel representing the respondents and have carefully perused the record.
4.
The facts in brief, shorn of details and necessary for the disposal of this case lie in a narrow compass.
The petitioner had been selected on 3.10.1966 on the basis of a competitive test held in the Collectorate for appointment as Paid Apprentice.
However after his recruitment as Paid Apprentice, the petitioner was ordered to officiate on various ministerial posts in the Collectorate as against the casual vacancies on a purely temporary and officiating basis.
It appears that on the basis of a report of the Prabhari Adhikari, Record Room, (Criminal), requesting the petitioner's transfer on the ground of unsuitability, the District Collector after perusing the entries in the character roll and other material brought to his notice passed an order reverting back the petitioner as paid apprencie but when it was found that there has been no improvement, his name from the list of apprentices was directed to be removed.
5.
Along with the counter affidavit, the extracts from the service book of the petitioner have been reproduced indicating the annual entries awarded to him.
The entry for the year 1968-69 indicates that he was found to be careless and irresponsible official.
In 1969-70 he was reported to be an official categoriesed as below average and did not take any interest in his work.
In 1971-72, he was reported to be an immature official who did not understand his responsibilities towards work and discipline.
It was also remarked that he apprehends to inculcate the spirit of callousness towards work and discipline.
The counter affidavit indicates that all the adverse entries ordered against the petitioner had been duly communicated to him.
In the order dated 25th August, 1973, the District Collector had observed that the official career of the petitioner had been very deplorable throughout and his immediate superiors were not pleased with his work and conduct and they did not hold any good opinion of him.
It may also be noticed that the petitioner could not be confirmed on a permanent post on account of his work and character roll and had been passed over against his juniors and despite warnings he did not improve and as his conduct showed irresponsibility and indiscipline he had to be reverted as paid apprentice.
It was further observed that his work and conduct had been quite unsatisfactory and his record of service was very bad.
With the aforesaid observations, the name of the petitioner was directed to be removed from the list of paid apprentices.
6.
The petitioner sought to challenge the order passed by the District Collector before the Commissioner, Allahabad Division, Allahabad.
The Commissioner in his order dated 231974 has observed that the petitioner was holding the post of Naqal Navees on an officiating basis and therefore having no right to hold the post, no exception could be taken to the reversion of the petitioner as paid apprentice under the impugned order passed by the District Collector.
It was also observed that the work and conduct of the petitioner had been watched but he was not found fit to be continued even as a paid apprentice and the order removing his name from the list of paid apprentices could not be said to be in any manner irregular.
7.
The Commissioner himself undertook the exercise of evaluating the entire performance of the petitioner during the period of his service and noticed the fact that the petitioner had been superseded which order had attained finality.
Having not found any irregularity in the removal of petitioner's name from the list of paid apprentices, the Commissioner vide his order dated 231974 rejected the representation of the petitioner observing that, even under the order passed by the Board of Revenue dated 1741958, no appeal or representation could be entertained against the removal of the name of a person from the list of paid apprentices.
8.
The petitioner sought to challenge the aforesaid orders before the Services Tribunal asserting that the order directing the name of the petitioner to be removed from the list of paid apprentices was mala fide.
This plea was repelled by the respondents asserting that the performance of the petitioner had not been satisfactory and his name has been removed because of his unsuitability.
The Tribunal observed that the discretion of the concerned authority in directing the name of the petitioner to be removed from the list of apprentices was not bad and did not call for any interference by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal further held that the representation claimed to have been pending before the Board of Revenue was not maintainable as the Rules governing the service conditions of the petitioner did not provide for any avenue of a remedy of such a representation.
9.
Before the Services Tribunal, an objection had been raised by the respondents in regard to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear and dispose of the claim petition on merits asserting that the claim petition of the petitioner had been filed much beyond the period prescribed therefor under the provisions of the UP Public Services (Tribunal) Act, 1976.
10.
The claim petition challenging the order of the Commissioner had been filed on 24.1.1979.
According to the Tribunal, the starting point for computing the period of limitation had to be taken to be 2nd March, 1974.
The Tribunal rejected the contention of the petitioner that the date 2111975 which was the date of submitting his representation to the Board of Revenue had to be taken as the starting point for computing the period of limitation.
In this connection, the Tribunal recorded a finding that no statutory remedy had been provided whereunder the representation of the petitioner against the order of the Commissioner could be entertained and the petitioner was not entitled to seek any benefit on that account, holding therefore, that the claim petition was also barred by time, the Tribunal dismissed the same.
11.
From the facts and circumstances brought on record, it is apparent that the petitioner had been appointed as a paid apprentice and an order removing his name from the list of paid apprentices could not be challenged either by way of appeal or a representation and thus was deemed to have attained finality.
It is further apparent that subsequent to his appointment as paid apprentice, the petitioner's services had been utilised on purely officiating basis as a stop-gap measure as against available short term vacancies.
He had not been confirmed and was not entitled to the benefits of confirmation.
The order superseding and refusing the appointment on substantive basis which was granted to the juniors had also attained finality and was never challenged.
The adverse entries recorded against him had been duly communicated and there is nothing on the record to indicate that any representation against the said entries was ever allowed.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has strenuously urged that even according to the assertions made in the counter affidavit and the defence set up before the Services Tribunal, it was clear that the impugned order of reversion of the petitioner had been passed on the basis of the alleged unsatisfactory work of the petitioner and his unsuitability.
Further, even the removal of the petitioner's name from the list of paid apprentices had been directed on the basis of his unsuitability.
In this view of the matter, it is urged that these orders in effect amounted to inflicting punishment and are manifestly illegal as no opportunity of hearing had been afforded to the petitioner before passing of the aforesaid order.
It is urged that it was incumbent upon the respondent authorities to afford an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before ordering his reversion and directing his name to be removed from the list of paid apprentices.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that although the impugned orders on the face of it appear to be innocuous but lifting the veil if the matter is looked into, considering the attendant circumstances, there can be no manner of doubt that the impugned orders have been passed on the basis of alleged unsuitability of the petitioner and he has been punished without complying with the requirement envisaged under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
14.
As observed by the apex Court in its decision in the case of Regional Manager v. Pawan Kumar Dube, reported in AIR 1976 SC 1766 : 1976 Lab IC 1146, there is no magic formula or uniform set of facts which could convert even as apparently colourless or innocuous order into punitive or unjustifiably discriminatory action, pointing out that it was, however, well established that even an apparently inoffensive order may fail to pass tests imposed by Articles 16 and 311 of the Constitution of India that the dealings of the superior officers with their subordinates in Government service in a welfare State must be shown to be based on fair play and reason when facts are actually proved which indicate that these requirements may be lacking.
15.
In its decision in the case of Kanhai Lal v District Judge, reported in AIR 1983 SC 351 : 1983 All LJ 184-(1), the apex Court had pointed out that there can be no doubt that even a temporary servant is entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and no penal order can be passed against him without complying with the requirement of that Article.
16.
The aforesaid principle, it seems to me cannot be deemed to be available to the Government servants who are on daily wage basis or have a time bound tenure, or fall in the category of paid apprentice or are allowed to man a post on purely officiating basis or in a stop gap arrangement.
It will be stretching the above mentioned principle too far in case it is extended to Government servants falling in the aforesaid categories or the like as it will have the inevitable effect of equating them or putting them at par with the Government Servants who having proved their worth entitled to the security of tenure and other benefits of confirmation or the benefits attached with a permanent appointment.
The line of distinction running along with the nature of appointment cannot be allowed to vanish.
The expressions like employee on daily wage basis, ad hoc, officiating basis, paid apprentice, confirmed, permanent, time bound appointments etc. are expressions which reflect different status in service hierarchy and carry with them different benefits of varying degrees.
In the absence of any statutory protection so far as the tenure of Service is concerned, the only thing required is to ensure a fair and reasonable action.
The doctrine of fairness or the duty to act fairly and reasonably is a doctrine developed in the administrative law field to ensure the rule of law and prevent failure of justice when the action is administrative in nature.
It is, therefore, obvious that the discretion in such matters exercised by the appointing authority should be exercised not in an arbitrary manner but on reasonable basis.
In the proceedings seeking a judicial review of such an administrative action, the scope of interference is limited.
More often the facts speak for themselves.
It seems to me that in the present case, the discretion exercised by the appointing authority cannot be said to be arbitrary.
17.
In the present case what is apparent is that the petitioner had no right to hold the post.
He had been selected in the year 1966 for serving as a paid apprentice.
He had been granted chances to officiate on casual/short term vacancies in substantive posts but could not prove his merit so as to be absorbed against the substantive vacancy and had to be superseded.
The UP Rules for the Recruitment of Ministerial Staff of Subordinate Offices in UP as in force at the relevant time provided that the promotions and appointments to a higher post shall be made by promotion.
The petitioner failed to be absorbed on the higher post on which he was allowed to officiate.
There can be no manner of doubt that even an order which visits the Government servant holding a post even temporarily, with evil consequences must pass the tests envisaged under Articles 16 and 311 of the Constitution of India but when a Government servant has no right to hold the post at all and his service conditions do not ensure a security of tenure, in that event the adherence to the principle of natural justice is not at all necessary when the order dispensing with the services is innocuous and does not cast any stigma.
18.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, even on the own showing of the petitioner he had no right to hold the post.
To begin with his status was that of a paid apprentice.
Later on he was allowed to hold a higher post as against the casual vacancies purely on officiating basis for short duration.
The petitioner could not insist upon opportunity of hearing before dispensing with his services specially when the factors taken into account, while dispensing with his services had been brought to the notice of the petitioner inasmuch as the entries in his character roll relied upon and the other activities referred to were in his knowledge.
It seems to me that in the circumstances, the contention that the impugned orders stand vitiated in law on account of failure to provide any opportunity of hearing before passing them is not sustainable in law.
19.
Further, the Tribunal has found that the claim petition of the petitioner had been presented much beyond the prescribed period of limitation.
The finding of the Tribunal in this regard does not appear to suffer from any infirmity whatsoever.
The appointment of the petitioner as paid apprentice was subject to the order passed by the Board of Revenue referred to in the order of the Tribunal which provided that an order removing the name of a paid apprentice from the list of the paid apprentices could not be challenged by way of appeal or representation.
The Commissioner has also found that the appeal of the petitioner was really not maintainable as against the order removing his name from the list of the paid apprentices.
The petitioner, therefore, could not take any advantage of his representation which is said to have been submitted before the Board of Revenue.
When the Board of Revenue itself, as noticed by the Commissioner in his order, had indicated that no representation will be entertained against an order removing the name of a person from the list of paid apprentices, there could be no occasion or jurisdiction for submitting such a representation and in the absence of statutory provision providing for a remedy of representation, there can be no justification claiming any relaxation or condonation of delay in filing the claim petition on the basis of such a representation.
20.
The petitioner has placed reliance upon Rule 7 of UP Punishment and Appeal Rules for Subordinate Services, 1932 framed in exercise of the jurisdiction envisaged under Rule 54 of the UP Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930 as applicable to the State of Uttar Pradesh.
Rule 54 aforesaid provides that the power to make rules prescribing the penalties, that may be imposed on members of Central services, Classes III and IV under the administrative control of a Government, the authority which may impose such penalties, the appeal which may be preferred from orders imposing such penalties, the conditions subject to which and the authorities by which such orders may be reversed or altered, cases in which no appeal lies or in which no appeal is preferred is delegated to such a Government providing that when such rules empower a subordinate authority to impose a penalty, provision shall be made in the rules for at least one appeal to a higher authority from an order imposing such penalty.
21.
Rule 54 as indicated above is specifically confined to the cases of members of central services.
Rule 7 of the UP Punishment and Appeals Rules indicated above provides that no appeal shall lie to higher authority against an appellate order confirming an order of dismissal or other punishment, but the authority immediately superior to the authority passing the original order, if no appeal has been preferred or, in case of an unsuccessful appeal, the appellate authority may exercise revisionary powers in cases where in consequence of some flagrant irregularity some material injustice appears to have been done.
22.
What has been contended is that the representation of the petitioner submitted before the Board of Revenue should have been treated as a representation invoking revisory jurisdiction of the Board of Revenue.
In this connection, suffice it to say that the aforesaid provisions can be attracted only where there is an order of dismissal or any other order inflicting punishment.
In the present case, the order removing the name of the petitioner from the list of paid apprentices or the order putting an end to his officiation in the higher post could not be deemed to be either an order of dismissal or an order imposing a punishment as contemplated under the aforesaid Rule.
23.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, the pendency of the representation relied upon by the petitioner cannot come to his rescue so as to justify disturbing the finding of the Tribunal in regard to the question of limitation.
24.
Considering the entire circumstances of the case as brought on record, it seems to me that no case for the intervention of the equity is made out.
25.
In view of my conclusions indicated hereinabove, no justifiable ground is made out for any interference by this Court, while exercising the extra- ordinary jurisdiction envisaged under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
26.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.