Ashok Bhan, J - Question which calls for determination in the present case is :  "Whether the ad hoc service rendered by a person before his regular appointment to a cadre in a civil service counts for the purpose of seniority."
2.
Petitioner is a Diploma holder in Pharmacy and was appointed as Pharmacist by the Director of Health Services Haryana, Chandigarh on 28111967 on temporary basis initially for a period of six months which was extendable with the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) for which he was required to apply on the prescribed application format with the prescribed fee of Rs. 5/-.
Service of the petitioner was extended from time to time beyond the period of six months by respondent No. 2.
Petitioner continued to work as Pharmacist in the department on temporary basis till he was appointed on regular basis after selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board Haryana (hereinafter referred to as the Board) on 2051973.
Department has assigned seniority to the petitioner with effect from the date he was appointed on regular basis.
Petitioner filed several representations for redetermination of his seniority by counting the period of ad hoc service rendered by the petitioner.
As petitioner failed to get a positive response, present writ petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to refix the seniority of the petitioner after counting the period of ad hoc service rendered by him before his appointment on regular basis after selection by the Board.
Case of the petitioner is that he has been working continuously on the post to which he was appointed on ad hoc basis uninterruptedly followed by regular appointment after selection by the Board and, therefore, the period spent by the petitioner on ad hoc post as temporary employee has to be counted while determining the seniority.
3.
Written statement has been filed.
Claim of the petitioner has been denied.
It has been averred that petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis for six months or till the recommendee of the Board reports for duty whichever is earlier.
Petitioner did not face any Selection Committee and was just appointed on the basis of his request as is evident from his letter of appointment dated 28111967 Annexure P1.
As per the instructions dated 16.3.1962 (Annexure R1) issued by the Chief Secretary, ad hoc service cannot be counted towards seniority as regular Pharmacist.
It has further been submitted that 128 posts of Pharmacists were advertised by the Board in the year 1972 and the petitioner applied for the post of Pharmacist.
After his selection and on the recommendation made by the Board petitioner was appointed on regular basis in May 1973.
Petitioner had not faced any Selection Committee and had been appointed for a limited period of six months, which was extended from time to time.
Such a service rendered by him on ad hoc basis could not be counted towards seniority.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
A Division Bench of this Court in Sohan Lal v. State of Haryana and another, 1992(3) RSJ 534 while answering a similar question held :  "The service rendered by a person on ad hoc basis before his regular appointment to a cadre in civil service does not count for seniority".
The Judgment in Sohan Lal's case (supra) was approved by a Full Bench of this Court in Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(4) SCT 800 (P&H) : 1995(1) RSJ 382.
After discussing the case law it was concluded by the Full Bench as under :-  "For the purpose of present enquiry, clauses (A) and (B) in the Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others case (supra) coupled with elucidation of these clauses in Aghore Nath Dey's case (supra) and also the views expressed in the earlier judgments of the Apex Court, it can be said: (i) that the period as an ad hoc appointee cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of an incumbent; (ii) it is only when such an appointment is as per rules and not by way of a stop gap arrangement and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with that the services so rendered will be taken into account towards his seniority in the cadre; (iii) in the absence of Rules, it would have to be kept in view as to whether the appointment so made is against an existing vacancy and not for a limited period and in that case the period so spent by an incumbent can be considered to determine his seniority in the cadre; (iv) if the appointment is otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural defects, such defect/defects stand cured with the subsequent regularisation; (v) mere long stay at the post on account of some inaction on the part of a delinquent officer or on account of interim direction of the Court will not clothe an appointee with any right to tag such a period to determine his seniority in the cadre.
Period of service as a stop gap arrangement shall be ignored while determining his seniority in the cadre.
The above points are only illustrative and not exhaustive in content.
Any point which is not specifically covered therein is to be examined in the light of clauses (A) and (B) of Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others case (supra) as explained in Aghore Nath Dey's case (supra)".
It has been held by the Full Bench that the period of ad hoc appointment cannot be taken into account for determining the seniority of the incumbent unless the appointment had been made as per rules and not by way of stop gap arrangement or for a limited period.
In the present case, petitioner had been appointed for a limited period of six months purely on temporary basis till recommendee of the Commission/Board was made available.
He did not face any Selection Committee and was being appointed for a limited period of six months from time to time.
Service rendered by him cannot be counted towards seniority.
6.
Examining the case from another point of view and angle, the relief prayed for cannot be given to the petitioner.
Board had advertised 128 posts of Pharmacists.
Petitioner submitted his application in response to the said advertisement and on his selection on sponsoring by the Board he was appointed on regular basis.
He was assigned a number in order of merit.
The order of merit determined by the Board cannot be disturbed.
If the plea of the petitioner is accepted then he would become senior to the persons who were selected alongwith him by the Board upsetting the inter se merit determined by the Board.
As per the written statement, about 100 Pharmacists working in the Health Department have been denied the claim similar to that of the petitioner.
Petitioner cannot be given treatment differently and assigned seniority over and above his seniors by disturbing the seniority which is continuing for the last more than 20 years.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same.
No costs.