Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is a member of the Scheduled Castes.
He was appointed as a Senior Lecturer in Medicine on December 3, 1986.
It is alleged that there are 15 posts of Assistant Professors in the speciality of Medicine.
Under the instructions issued by the State Government, 14% posts are reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
Accordingly, two posts have to be filled up from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes.
Resultantly, the petitioner claims that he is entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) with effect from December 21, 1989 when a vacancy had become available.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim on a two hold basis.
Firstly, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had claimed a similar relief by filing CWP No. 7946 of 1991.
In this writ petition which was based on similar pleas, the petitioner had prayed for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the Respondent-State of Punjab to promote him to the post of Assistant Professor in Medicine with effect from December 2, 1989 or at the least from the last week of December 1989 when Dr. Kajal had been promoted from the post of Assistant Professor to that of Professor of Medicine.
This writ petition was disposed of by a Bench of this Court with the following order passed on January 22, 1992 :-  ``Present: Mr. RL Gupta, Advocate for the petitioner.
Mr. HS Riar, Addl.
AG Punjab for the respondents.
In view of the stand of the respondents in their return and the statement of the Additional Advocate General that the petitioner would be considered for appointment while filling up the next vacancy, no occasion arises for granting any further relief to the petitioner.
Dismissed Sd/- (S.S. Sodhi) Sd/- (GC Garg) JUDGES'' In view of this order, the respondents submit that the petitioner is not entitled to claim promotion to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) with effect from December 1989.
They further state that the petitioner was in fact promoted against an available post vide orders dated March 5/10, 1993.
He had actually joined the post on March 11, 1993.
Thus, the order passed by the Bench had been complied with and the petitioner is not entitled to claim anything more.
3.
The petitioner has filed on replication.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. RL Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contended that the Respondent-State of Punjab has not complied with the directions given by the Division Bench in its order dated January 22, 1992.
Accordingly to the learned counsel, a post of Assistant Professor had become available on May 4, 1992.
Respondent No. 4 had been adjusted against this post.
In fact, the petitioner should have been promoted against it.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents have pointed out that in the total cadre of 15 posts, the members of the Scheduled Castes can at best claim two posts.
In fact, five persons belonging to Scheduled Castes viz. Dr. HL Kajal, Dr. Adarsh Kumar, Dr. Krishan Singh, Dr. Santokh Singh and the petitioner are borne on the Cadre of Assistant Professors (Medicine).
According to the learned Counsel for respondent No 4, the appointments made by the Respondent-State of Punjab are far in excess of the quota which could have been assigned to the members of the Scheduled Castes.
Still further, relying on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Janjua's case, JT 1996(2) SC 727, it has been contended that even if the petitioner's plea that he is entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant Professor from May 4, 1992 is accepted, the fourth respondent would still rank senior to him as he is admittedly senior in the cadre of Senior Lecturers.
Consequently, any interference with the action of the Respondent-State would only result in the issue of a futile writ as the petitioner shall not gain anything in the matter of seniority or for further promotion to the rank of Professor.
In fact, according to the counsel for the respondents, the petitioner having been promoted to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine), the writ petition has become infructuous and deserves to be dismissed as such.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Has the Respondent- State of Punjab complied with the directions given by the Division Bench in its order dated January 22, 1992 passed in CWP No. 7946 of 1991 ?
6.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had been appointed as a Senior Lecturer on December 3, 1986.
The promotion and appointment to the post of Assistant Professor as also that of Senior Lecturer is governed by the provisions of the rules called `The Punjab Medical Education and Service (Class I) Rules, 1978'.
According to the provisions of these rules, a person becomes eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor when he has ``teaching experience for a minimum period of three years in the specially concerned as Senior Lecturer ......'' Consequently, the petitioner would be eligible for promotion to the rank of Assistant Professor only on completion of three years of service as a Senior Lecturer in the speciality of medicine.
Indisputably, the petitioner had completed the requisite period of experience on December 2, 1989 and would the eligible for consideration with effect from December 3, 1989.
When the petitioner was not promoted soon after he acquired the requisite eligibility, he had filed CWP No. 7946 of 1991.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the Respondent-State of Punjab.
A reply had been filed.
Thereafter, the writ petition had been disposed of with the directions as noticed above.
In view of these directions, the petitioner is no longer entitled to claim promotion to the post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) with effect from December 1989.
This claim stand clearly negatived by the order of the Division Bench.
It has also not been disputed that the order has became final as the petitioner had not filed any petition for special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution.
As a result, the only question that survives is regarding the petitioner's promotion against the next available post.
7.
It has been categorically stated in the written statement filed on behalf of the department that Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had been working as Assistant Professors (Medicine) on ad hoc basis with effect from July 13, 1988.
Since they are senior to the petitioner and were already working as Assistant Professors, they had a right to be adjusted on the availability of posts.
A post of Assistant Professor (Medicine) had become available on August 27, 1990.
Another post had become available on May 4, 1992.
The respondents who were already working since 1988 were adjusted against both these posts vide order dated November 27, 1992.
Since Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had been allowed to work as Assistant Professors on ad hoc basis in July 1988, the Petitioner could have challenged the order while filing CWP No. 7946 of 1991.
He did not do so.
In fact, he had not even impleaded the two respondents as parties in that petition.
Even in the present case, since the petitioner has not made any prayer for setting aside order of July 7, 1988 by which respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted, even though, he has produced a copy thereof as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition, it appears that their promotion since July 1983 or their adjustment against the available vacancies is beyond the pale of controversy in this petition.
Since they were already working as Assistant Professors, while the petitioner was still on probation as Senior Lecturer, the respondents were entitled to adjust them against whatever post was available in the cadre.
That having been done, it is the admitted position that the next post had become available on January 20, 1993.
The petitioner's claim was considered for promotion against that post.
On having been found suitable he was ordered to be promoted vide order dated March 5/10, 1993.
It has not been shown that any vacancy had become available after May 4, 1992 and prior to January 20, 1993.
8.
Mr. Gupta has also contended that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had been appointed as Assistant Professors only for a period of six months.
Their retention on these posts after January 1989 was illegal.
9.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
The petitioner could have raised this plea in CWP No. 7946 of 1991.
As already noticed, it is the admitted position that even at that time, the respondents were working as Assistant Professors (Medicine).
The petitioner had admittedly not challenged their appointment or continuance on the post.
He had not even impleaded them as parties.
The petitioner's claim was upheld by this Court only to the extent that he will be considered against the next available post.
The post became available in January 1993.
The petitioner has been promoted in March 1993.
He is working on the post.
Therefore, he has no justifiable cause for grievances.
Even otherwise, it has not been disputed that in the event of the petitioner being given the earlier date of May 4, 1992, he would not gain any substantial advantage inasmuch as the respondent No. 4 would still become senior to him on promotion in view of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme court in Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra).
Consequently, the issue of any writ would be only an exercise in futility.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.