Sat Pal, J. - In this petition, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 31st August, 1992, passed by the Superintendent of Police, Karnal, by which the petitioner was awarded the punishment of dismissal from service.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the State of Haryana on 1st August, 1985.
He was served with a charge-sheet (Annexure P-1) for his alleged absence from duty for four months 21 days 16 hours and 20 minutes (from 2331989 to 1481989).
The allegations levelled against the petitioner were enquired into by the Inquiry Officer and the Inquiry Officer held him guilty of the charges.
The appointing authority agreed with the findings given by the Inquiry Officer and vide order, dated 31st August, 1992, awarded the punishment of dismissal from service.
The appeal and the revision filed by the petitioner were also rejected.
Against the order of punishment of dismissal from service and the orders rejecting the appeal and the revision, this writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.
3.
Mr. Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submitted that the penalty awarded to the petitioner was disproportionate as such a penalty could be awarded only for gravest acts of misconduct defined under Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
He further submitted that under Rule 162 absence from duty is not a grave act of misconduct and as such the punishment of dismissal from service could not be awarded to the petitioner.
He also submitted that a lenient view should be taken in the matter and the petitioner may be ordered to be reinstated in service without back wages.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel placed reliance on a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab, 1996(2) SCT 758(SC) : JT 1996(2) SC 649.
4.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
In the written statement, it has been stated that the petitioner did not apply for leave nor intimated the Department regarding his absence from 2331989 to 1481989 and as a result of the Inquiry, the petitioner was held guilty of wilful absence for the aforesaid period.
The said fact has not been controverted by the petitioner.
In the order of dismissal, it has been stated that on the first occasion the petitioner was censured for his absence and the second time, his two increments were stopped with temporary effect for the similar misconduct.
From the aforesaid facts, it is evident that it is not for the first time that the petitioner has been found guilty of the charge of wilful absence from duty.
Admittedly, the petitioner was employed in police force and discipline is required to be maintained in such force.
Habitual absence from duty does amount to grave act of misconduct, particularly when such absence has been found to be unauthorised.
In the present case, as stated hereinabove, the petitioner was awarded punishment on two occasions earlier for the same act of misconduct, i.e. wilful absence from duty.
This time, it has been proved on record that the petitioner did not apply for leave nor intimated the Department regarding his long period of absence of four months, 21 days 16 hours and 15 minutes.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the petitioner cannot be shown any leniency and he is not entitled to any relief.
The view we have taken finds full support from the decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court on 23rd July, 1996 in CWP No. 15427 of 1995 (Tarsem Kumar v. State of Punjab and others).
5.
As regards the case of Malkiat Singh (supra) it may be observed that in that case, it was found that on two occasions, the absence of the petitioner from duty was for one day and for one night and the said period of absence was not considered to be regular absence.
On the third occasion, the petitioner remained absent from duty for more than one month and 9 days, and for this absence, he had submitted medical certificate.
It was in these circumstances that a lenient view was taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in that case but in the present case, as stated herein above, the petitioner was once censured for his unauthorised absence and second time his two increments were stopped with temporary effect for similar misconduct and again on the third occasion, the petitioner remained absent from duty for more than 4 months, 21 days and he did not even apply for leave nor intimated the Department regarding his aforesaid absence from duty.
In view of this, the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Malkiat Singh (supra) is of no assistance to the petitioner.
For the reasons recorded hereinabove, we do not find any merit in this petition and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.