Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner prays that the order dated February 5, 1980 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, be quashed and a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to consider his case for regularisation in accordnace with the instructions issued vide letter dated July 1, 1980.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
A few facts which are relevant for the decision of the case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The teachers in Haryana had remained on strike from February 12, 1973 to March 9, 1973.
In order to meet the ensuing situation, the department had recruited teachers without resorting to any process of selection.
The petitioner was one of the persons who were appointed during the period of strike on March 7, 1973.
However he had also resorted to strike and, consequently, on the very next day viz. March 8, 1973 his services were terminated.
On March 9, 1973, the strike was called off.
The petitioner alleges that he reported for duty after the strike had been called off but not allowed to join.
After the strike was over, the State Government decided that the teachers who were working on ad hoc basis and whose services had been terminated on account of resorting to strike be also taken back.
The petitioner alleges that instructions were issued in this behalf on August 16, 1977.
He was ``reinstated on 2331978 in GH Sadayaana.''
He joined soon after receiving the ``reinstatement letter''.
Thereupon he was treated as a stipendiary Teacher.
In December 1978, the Government took a decision to regularise the services of all stipendiary Teachers.
A copy of the letter issued by the Government in this behalf has been attached as Annexure P2 with the writ petition.
On the basis of this decision, the services of the petitioner were regularised w.e.f.
January 1, 1979.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
Certain persons were aggrieved.
They, consequently, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 783 of 1979 in this court.
When this writ petition came up for hearing, the counsel for the respondents gave an undertaking inter alia to the effect that any teacher ``who was employed for a short period during the strike but was relieved of his post after the coming to an end of the strike and was re- employed not as a result of notional break but otherwise, then he would not be treated as stipendiary teacher and would be treated only as an ordinary ad hoc teacher.''
Various other stipulations were also made in this undertaking.
In view of the undertaking given on behalf of the respondents, the petitioners did not press the writ petition.
It was, accordingly, disposed of vide Order dated August 28, 1979.
Thereafter, the State Government issued a letter dated February 5, 1980 directing that the services of the teachers covered by the afore-mentioned part of the undertaking be de- regularised.
It was, however, provided that they be retained in service as ad hoc teachers.
The petitioner alleges that in pursuance of these instructions, respondent No. 2 issued orders for the de-regularisation of his services.
The petitioner as well as various other persons approached this Court, through different writ petitions.
The petitioner had filed CWP No. 1779 of 1980.
All these petitions had come up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court on July 30, 1980.
At the time of hearing, it was pointed out that the Government had taken a decision as contained in memo No. 14/27-80-Edu.III(4) dated July 1, 1980 in pursuance of which the cases of various persons for regularisation shall be considered.
This memo is on file as Annexure P-6.
Mr. RK Malik states that according to this decision of July 1, 1980, the services of such teachers as had completed two years of services on December 31, 1979, were to be regularised with effect from January 1, 1980.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, it was pointed out that he as well as 23 other teachers and 16 masters were not qualified for regularisation.
It was stated that their claim shall be considered on merit.
A copy of this decision has been produced on record as Annexure P-5.
According to it, the services of the teachers who were in position on December 31, 1979 and had completed two years service upto the said date were entitled to be considered for regularisation w.e.f.
January 1, 1980.
On March 3, 1981, the Director of Public Instructions issued a letter indicating that teachers who had not completed two years of service upto December 31, 1979 would be treated as ordinary ad hoc teachers.
The petitioner has not produced a copy of this letter.
According to him, the respondents were contemplating the termination of his services.
Consequently, he filed this petition with the complaint that the action of the respondents in threatening termination of his services as well as the order of de-regularisation are illegal, unjust and unfair.
As already noticed, the petitioner prays that the order of de- regularisation be quashed and that the respondents be directed to consider his claim for regularisation in accordance with the circular letter dated July 1, 1980.
3.
The Motion Bench admitted that writ petition and granted copy of termination to the petitioner.
Having got the stay, the petitioner has continued in service for the last about 15 years.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been stated by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioner had challenged the order of de-regularisation in CWP No. 1779 of 1980.
This writ petition was disposed of vide order dated July 30, 1980.
In view of the fact that the claim regarding deregularisation has already been decided in this writ petition, the second petition for the grant of same relief is not competent.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out that the general strike of teachers had ended on March 9, 1973.
The Government decided that teachers working on regular basis who had gone on strike may be taken back in service.
However, the teachers who had been appointed during the strike period and had also joined the strike should not be taken back in service.
So far as the petitioner is concerned it has been pointed out that he had been appointed on ad hoc basis on March 7, 1973.
He had joined the strike on March 8, 1973.
Consequently, the petitioner was not eligible even for appointment as he had joined the strike.
The petitioner's allegation that he had been reinstated in service on March 22, 1978 has also been described as ``totally wrong and misconceived.''
It has been categorically stated that ``no such orders of reinstatement of the petitioner were issued.''
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner had been given a fresh appointment on ad hoc bais and as a result, he had joined on March 23, 1978.
It has been admitted that he was treated as a Stipendiary Teacher thereafter.
It has been further stated that the petitioner's claim for regularisation was considered.
He was not found eligible as ``he had not completed two years' service on 31.12.79''.
Various grounds as raised by the petitioner have been controverted.
The respondents pray that the writ petition has no merit and may be dismissed.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Malik, counsel for the petitioner is that the order of deregularisation is invalid as it had been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner had not been afforded any opportunity.
If he had been heard, he could have shown that the undertaking given on behalf of the respondents in CWP no. 783 of 1979 was not binding on him.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the respondents.
6.
The sequence of events as noticed above clearly shows that the petitioner had been appointed as a JBT teacher on March 7, 1973.
This appointment had been given to the petitioner to tide over the situation created by the strike.
Instead of fulfilling this purpose, the petitioner had himself resorted to strike on March 8, 1973.
Consequently, he did not attend to his duties.
On March 9, 1973, the strike had been called off.
Thereafter, the petitioner was granted ad hoc appointment on March 23, 1978.
It has not been suggested anywhere in the petition that the petitioner had performed any duties on March 7, 1973.
The averment in the written statement that he had proceeded on strike on March 8, 1973 has not been controverted by filing any affidavit.
Consequently, the net effect is that the petitioner had actually been appointed on March 27, 1978.
In spite of this factual position, the respondents had passed an order to regularise his services w.e.f.
January 1, 1979.
At that stage, the decision of the Government to regularise the services etc. was challenged through CWP No. 783 of 1979.
At the hearing of this writ petition, counsel for the respondents had given an undertaking inter alia to the effect that any teacher who had been employed during the strike but was relieved of his post and was re-employed would not be treated as a Stipendiary Teacher.
It has not been disputed that the petitioner's case would fall within the mischief of this undertaking.
Consequently, the order dated February 5, 1980 was passed that the services of the teachers who fall under category (ii) of the undertaking be deregularised.
Accordingly, the petitioner's services were deregularised.
Thereafter, he filed CWP No. 1779 of 1980.
The order of deregularisation had been challenged.
The writ petition was disposed of alongwith various other cases vide order dated July 30, 1980.
The order of deregularisation was not set aside.
That being so, it is apparent that the relief claimed by the petitioner was not granted to him.
This decision has become final between the parties.
Consequently, it operates as res judicata and the petitioner cannot be permitted to challenge the order of deregularisation on any ground which was available to him at the time of the decision of CWP No. 1779 of 1980.
7.
In this situation, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of deregularisation was invalid as no opportunity had been afforded to him is wholly misconceived and cannot be sustained.
Such an objection had to be raised at the time of hearing of the earlier petition.
There is nothing in the order to show that the petitioner had challenged the order on this ground.
There are two possibilities.
Either the petitioner had raised this ground and it was not accepted or the ground was available but he failed to raise it.
In either event, the result is that the petitioner cannot be permitted to challenge the order which had been passed prior to the filing of CWP No. 1779 of 1980.
The ground now sought to be raised was in any event available to the petitioner at that time.
He having accepted the order dated July 30, 1980, cannot now be permitted to challenge the order of deregularisation.
8.
Mr. Malik relies on the decision of CWP No. 1773 of 1981 decided on December 17, 1983 to contend that the petitioner had a right to be heard before the order of deregularisation could be passed.
I have perused the order.
This order does not show that the petitioners (Zile Singh etc.) had filed any petition prior to the filing of CWP No. 1773 of 1981.
Consequently, in their case, the question of res judicata did not arise.
The factual position was totally different.
Thus, the petitioner can derive no advantage from this decision.
9.
Mr. Malik submits that the undertaking given in CWP No. 783 of 1979 is not binding on the petitioner.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
Firstly, the petitioner could have raised such a contention in CWP No. 1779 of 1980.
A perusal of the order shows that reference to CWP No. 783 of 1979 was made.
However, the contention as now sought to be raised even though available, does not appear to have been raised.
Secondly, the Government having given the undertaking, was bound by it.
It has to carry out its undertaking.
If the effect of that undertaking has to be taken away, the petitioners in CWP No. 783 of 1979 should have been impleaded as parties in this case so that they could have been heard before any order to their prejudice could be passed.
They have not been impleaded as parties.
In this situation, the contention that the petitioner is not bound by the undertaking cannot be accepted.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis on March 7, 1973.
He had immediately resorted to strike and stifled the very purpose for which he had been appointed.
Thereafter, he was given fresh ad hoc appointment in March 1978.
It is not understood as to how he could be treated as a Stipendiary teacher.
There is not even a suggestion that any stipend had been paid to the petitioner ever.
In fact, it has not been shown that the petitioner had at all worked for a day in March 1973 and had been paid any salary therefor.
The situation that emerges is that the petitioner had joined service on March 23, 1978 and got regularisation of his services w.e.f.
January 1, 1979.
No instructions or order passed by any authority entitled the petitioner to be regularised w.e.f.
January 1, 1979.
In fact, during the course of hearing of CWP No. 1779 of 1980, it had been pointed out to the court that 24 teachers which admittedly included that petitioner were not qualified for regularisation.
Consequently, even the petitioner had no right to regularisation w.e.f.
January 1, 1980.
11.
Mr. Malik points out that while disposing of CWP No. 1779 of 1980, it had been inter alia observed that the claim of 24 teachers and 16 masters shall be considered on merits.
This was apparently in the context of the consideration of the claim of regularisation.
Even at that stage, it had been pointed out that they were not qualified to get their services regularised.
Even now the petitioner's prayer is for regularisation of his services in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated July 1, 1980, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was not qualified for the regularisation of his services even according to these instructions on January 1, 1980.
Consequently, even on rehearing the matter, it is not possible to grant the petitioner the relief of regularisation even w.e.f.
January 1, 1980 in accordance with the instructions at Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
This is so because the petitioner did not fulfil the requirement of two years of service by December 31, 1979.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently dismissed.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.