GS Singhvi, J - Constitutional validity of one of the conditions of eligibility laid down by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as `the respondent-University') for admission to LL.B.
Courses whereby benefit of reservation made for `border area' candidates has been denied to those belonging to the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur has been challenged in this writ petition.
2.
In order to decide whether the impugned provision offends equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution, it will be useful to make a brief reference to the facts.
The petitioner is a permanent resident of Gurdaspur.
After having passed 12th class examination conducted by the Punjab School Education Board in the year 1996, the petitioner applied for appearing at the Entrance Test to be conducted by the respondent-University for admission to 5 years LL.B.
Course.
After having qualified the test, the petitioner was called for interview on 1871996.
During the course of interview, the petitioner's claim for admission against the seats reserved for `border area' candidates was rejected on the ground that as per the University Calendar district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur have been excluded from the category of `border area'.
This provision has been challenged by the petitioner on the ground of discrimination and arbitrariness.
The petitioner's assertion that the respondent-University has made an artificial classification between the candidates of district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur who seek admission to its courses and those who seek admission to Medical, Dental and Ayurvedic Courses.
According to him, when the Government treats the candidates of district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur as belonging to border area for the purpose of admission to Medical, Dental and Ayurvedic Courses, there can be no rhyme or reason to deny the candidates of these two towns benefit of reservation made for `border area' candidates for the purpose of admission to LL.B.
and other similar Courses in which education is imparted by the respondent-University.
Plea of estoppel has also been raised by the petitioner on the premise that after having allowed him to take the Entrance Test and having declared his result, the respondent- University cannot deprive him of the benefit of reservation meant for `border area' candidates.
The case set up by the respondent-University is that the policy of reservation for admission to various courses conducted by it in the teaching departments including the Regional Centre at Jalandhar has been approved by the Syndicate in the year 1991 after threadbare examination of various aspects and exclusion of the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the definition of `border area' is neither irrational nor unjustified.
It is stated that Syndicate excluded the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the category of `border area' keeping in view adequate educational facilities available in these two townships.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the provisions of the Prospectus issued by the respondent-University for admission to the Faculty of Law as well as the Prospectus issued for the Common Entrance Test (PMT) for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS (Ayurvedacharya) Courses in the Government Medical/Dental Colleges of Punjab, Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala and Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana and argued that if the candidates belonging to the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur are entitled to the benefit of reservation meant for border area candidates for the purpose of admission to MBBS and other sister courses, there is no rhyme or reason to deny benefit of such reservation to similarly situated candidates for admission to LL.B.
Courses.
Learned counsel argued that Entrance Tests for medical and other courses are conducted by the respondent-University and, therefore, different conditions of eligibility cannot be prescribed for giving the benefit of reservation made in favour of border area candidates.
Shri Pheruman further argued that once the Government of Punjab has declared district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur to be border area towns on the premises that both these towns fall within 10 miles of the international border, the respondent-University has no jurisdiction to exclude these towns from the definition of border area and the candidates belonging to these towns cannot be denied the benefit of reservation for the purpose of admission to the courses conducted by the University.
Learned counsel argued that distinction sought to be made between Ferozepur and Gurdaspur on the one hand and the other towns coming within the limit of 10 miles from the international border for the purpose of admission to the courses of the University is patently arbitrary and irrational and there is no relation between distinction sought to be made and the object of giving the benefit of reservation to the candidates belonging to the border area.
4.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the respondent University submitted that the decision taken by the Syndicate of the University is meant for all teaching departments of the University and candidates seeking admission to the LL.B.
Courses have not been singled out for discriminatory treatment.
According to him, the University is an independent autonomous body and, therefore, it has the right to decide for itself the nature and extent of reservation of scats for different categories of candidates and there cannot be any compulsion for the University to follow the guidelines issued by the Government in matters relating to reservation.
Learned counsel laid emphasis on the fact that reservation in favour of border area candidates has been made keeping in view the scarce educational facilities available in such areas and as the Syndicate came to the conclusion that the educational facilities available in Ferozepur and Gurdaspur towns are adequate and are not lacking in any manner, the benefit of reservation meant for border areas need not be extended to the candidates belonging to these two towns and there is nothing arbitrary in such decision.
Learned counsel further argued that the provisions contained in the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar Act, 1969 and the Statutes do not impose any obligation upon the University to make reservation in favour of a particular category or class of persons and, therefore, the petitioner cannot claim benefit of such reservation as a matter of right.
Shri Patwalia further pointed out that the Competitive Entrance Examination for admission to MBBS and other sister courses is conducted by the University in accordance with the instructions of the Government and the conditions of eligibility etc. are also laid down by the Government and, therefore, no comparison should be made between the qualifications laid down by the Government and those laid down by the University on the basis of the decision taken by the Syndicate in its meeting held on 2831991.
To counter the argument of Shri Pheruman regarding equitable/promissory estoppel, Shri Patwalia argued that mere appearance of the petitioner at the Entrance Test cannot be made a ground for compelling the University to violate the conditions of the prospectus, which were known to the petitioner even before he submitted application for appearing in the Entrance Test.
He further argued that the petitioner's position has not been prejudicially affected by the refusal of the University to give him benefit of the reservation made in favour of the border area candidates and there is no material available on the record to show that the petitioner had appeared in the Entrance Test on the basis of any assurance given to him that the University will admit him against the reserved seats.
5.
The impugned condition of eligibility which has been printed at page 5 of the prospectus (1996-97) issued by the respondent-University for admission to LLB/LLM Courses at Amritsar and Jalandhar is nothing but a reproduction of the extract of the reservation policy approved by the Syndicate of the University in its meeting held on 2831991.
The relevant extract of this policy is reproduced below for the purpose of ready reference :-  ``Reservation Policy The following reservation policy for admission to University Teaching Departments including the Regional Centre at Jalandhar shall be applicable w.e.f.
the admission of 1991-92.
A.
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes 225% B Backward Classes 5% C. Rural Area 10% D. Border Area 3% E Sports 2% F Defence Personnel and their wards, (sons, daughters and spouses).
2% G Physically handicapped 2% H Children of persons killed in terrorist violence/Army Deserters killed/Sikh migrants of 1984 riots.
2% xx xx xx Explanation from A to H. (A) to (C) xx xx xx (D) A candidate shall be eligible for admission under this category only if he/she hails from a town/village within the belt of 10 miles from the international border, has studied there at least for five years and passed public examination (Matric or Higher Secondary part-1+2 from a school located in a border town/village excluding the District towns of Ferozepur, Gurdaspur).
Two certificates - one from the DC/GA to DC of the District or SDO (Civil)/SDM with the verification of town/village being within a distance of 10 miles from the International border and another from the Headmaster/Principal of the Institution with details of exact dates of joining and leaving the school/college must be produced alongwith the application form.
(E) to (H) xx xx xx'' 6.
The prospectus for PMT (1996-97) was also issued by the respondent- University.
However, a look at paras 11 and 12 of this prospectus shows that the respondent-University did nothing more than to incorporate the conditions of eligibility which were notified by the Government of Punjab vide notification dated 1541996.
The extract of the prospectus issued for PMT (1996-97) is also reproduced for ready reference:-  1.GENERAL 11 The Punjab Government vide Notification No11/60/96-5 HB III/929 dated 1541996 has decided that selection of students for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS (Ayurvedacharya) courses for the session 1996-97 in all the three State Medical Colleges, two State Dental Colleges and Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala shall be made by holding Competitive Entrance Examination (PMT) in the three compulsory subjects that is Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
12.
The Governor of Punjab is further pleased to order that the selection of students for admission to MBBS course for the session 1996 in the private recognized Dayanand Medical College (D.M.C.
), Ludhiana shall be made through the same Entrance Examination (P.M.T.)
in compliance of the directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Writ petition (C) No. 607 of 1992 in Unnikrishnan v. A.P.
on the same terms and conditions of eligibility except or otherwise defined specifically for the purpose to this private medical college and that the candidates applying against NRI/Foreign students seats are not required to appear in this Entrance Test.
xx xx xx xx xx xx 7.
Reservation in State Medical and Dental Colleges.
15% of the total seats for State Medical/Dental Colleges will be filled on All India basis through test to be conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi (for MBBS/BDS only).
The remaining seats (after 15% CBSE quota) are reserved for the categories noted below and to the extent mentioned against each:- Category Code  (i) to (iii) xx xx xx (iv) Border area 2% E (v) to (xiii) xx xx xx Note 1 to Note 3 : xx xx xx Note 4: A candidate shall be eligible for admission under category (iv) above only if he/she hails from a town/village within the belt of 10 miles from the International Border and he/she has studied for at least 5 years in a recognised institution located in such town/village.
The certificates to this effect should be obtained one from the DC/G.A.
to DC of the District or the SDO (Civil) of the Sub-Division concerned and another from the Headmaster/Principal of the institution with details of exact date of joining and leaving the school/college.
Exact particulars must be mentioned in the certificates.
xx xx xx xx xx xx" 7.
The respondent-University has been established under the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar Act, 1969 (for short, `the Act').
Section 2 of the Act defines various terms used in the Statute.
Section 3 provides for the incorporation of the University.
Section 4 of the Act enumerates the powers and duties of the University.
Section 4(15) empowers the University to make special provision for spread of University Education among classes and communities which are educationally backward.
Section 12 enlists various authorities of the University and the Syndicate is one of them.
Section 14(1) specifies the persons who will be regarded as members of the Syndicate.
Section 14(5) declares that the Syndicate shall be the principal executive body of the University having the management and administration of revenue and property of the University and it shall be responsible for the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.
Section 20 contains the list of matters which may be covered by Ordinances to be framed by the Syndicate.
Section 28 gives certain temporary powers to the Government.
8.
Reference to the various provisions of the Act makes it plainly clear that the respondent-University is a creature of Statute and it has got an independent statutory status with different powers vesting in its different bodies.
Being the principal executive body of the University, the Syndicate is vested with the powers of management and administration of revenue and property of the University and it has been made responsible for conduct of all administrative affairs of the University for which no other provision has been made.
The Act does not contain any provision empowering any other body to make rules regulating the admissions to the courses being conducted by the University and, therefore, the Syndicate could legitimately exercise its power of management for formulating the policy for admission to the University teaching departments and also provide for reservation.
Resolution Annexure R-1/2 shows that a conscious decision has been taken by the Syndicate to provide for reservation in favour of various categories of persons including those belonging to border area.
At the same time, a deliberate decision has been taken by the respondent-University to exclude the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the category of border area.
The reason for this exclusion as assigned in the written statement filed by the respondent- University is that educational facilities available in Ferozepur and Gurdaspur are adequate and not lacking in any manner.
In addition to the averments made in the written statement, learned counsel for the respondent- University made a statement during the course of arguments that several schools and colleges have been established in the district towns Gurdaspur and Ferozepur and educational facilities available to the children of these two towns can match with any other town of Punjab and this is the basis of the decision taken by the Syndicate to exclude these two towns from the category of border area.
9.
While dealing with the challenge to the provisions made by educational institutions like the respondent-University, we have to keep in mind the well established principles of law that Court's interference in the internal working of the educational institutions should be rare and ordinarily the Court should not transgress the autonomy of educational institutions in matters relating to admissions, examinations and discipline.
Universities and like bodies are possessed with expertise and special knowledge in the field of education, research etc. and it is their exclusive domain to formulate the conditions of eligibility for admission to various courses.
The Courts are not possessed with sufficient expertise and skill to substitute their opinion for the one formed by educational institutions.
We should not be taken as suggesting that every decision taken by the Universities and such like bodies are immune from judicial scrutiny.
Rather the power of judicial review can be exercised in all matters except where there is constitutional inhibition.
However, due respect and weightage is always required to be given to the decisions of academic bodies.
10.
Keeping these principles in view, we shall now examine whether the exclusion of the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the definition of border area is unconstitutional, as contended by Shri Pheruman.
Prima facie it may appear to be illogical that candidates belonging to the same place are treated differently for the purpose of grant of benefit of reservation meant for border area candidates.
It may sound quite unreasonable that for the purpose of admissions to medical and other sister courses students belonging to Ferozepur and Gurdaspur are entitled to benefit of reservation meant for border area on the basis of policy decision taken by the Government but for admissions to various teaching departments in the University, they are not entitled to such benefit.
However, a careful scrutiny of the resolution Annexure R-2/1 and the background in which the University took the decision to exclude the district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the category of border areas, it is not possible to hold that the decision of the Syndicate of the University violates the doctrine of equality.
The justification offered by the respondent-University for including the towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur in the exception clause is that adequate educational facilities are available in these towns and, therefore, candidates coming from these two towns cannot be treated as educationally backward.
This appears to be quite in tune with the object with which the reservation has been made in favour of the candidates belonging to the border area.
The backdrop of the reservation made in favour of the border area candidates is that those living within 10 miles of the International Border are not in a position to get educational facilities and for geographical and other reasons the Government has not been able to make adequate provision for providing education to those living in the border area.
If after careful scrutiny of the material available with it, the Syndicate of the respondent-University took a conscious decision to exclude the district towns of Gurdaspur and Ferozepur from the category of border area, it is not possible to treat that decision as arbitrary and unreasonable simply because for the purpose of admission to medical courses, candidates belonging to these two towns are still entitled to the reservation meant for border area candidates.
In this context, composition of the Syndicate assumes considerable importance.
This body consists of Vice Chancellor, Pro-Vice Chancellor, Secretary, Education Department Punjab, Director of Public Instruction, Punjab, Dean, Academic Affairs and Students Welfare, three Deans of Faculties, two Heads of Department, three Principals of Colleges, three members of the Senate and three persons nominated by the Chancellor.
A corporate body like the Syndicate which consists of a galaxy of academicians was fully justified in taking an independent decision while providing reservation for border area candidates along with other categories.
It was quite justified in excluding the towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the category of border area and absence of similar provision in the conditions of eligibility formulated by the Government cannot lead to an inference that the decision of the Syndicate is unconstitutional.
11.
We do not find any substance in the argument of Shri Pheruman that the classification sought to be made by the Syndicate is arbitrary, irrational or it does not have any nexus with the object of admission to LL.B.
Courses.
Rather, exclusion of district towns of Ferozepur and Gurdaspur from the category of border area on the premise that adequate educational facilities are available in these two towns provides a rational relation between the classification and the object sought to be achieved.
We, therefore, do not find any reason to uphold the challenge to the provision contained in Annexure R 2/1.
12.
Plea of the petitioner based on the principle of equitable estoppel deserves to be negatived on the short ground that there cannot be an estoppel against the statute.
Simply because the petitioner was allowed to appear in the Entrance Test and his result has been declared, it cannot be said that he has acquired a right to be admitted against the reserved category seats and the University should be directed to act in violation of its own policy.
That apart, we find that the petitioner has failed to provide a sound factual basis to support his plea of equitable or promissory estoppel.
He has not pleaded that any representation was made by the University to him that he will get benefit of reservation nor has he pleaded that by its action the University has put him to a disadvantageous position.
Thus, the basics of the plea of promissory estoppel are missing in the pleadings of the petitioner.
We, therefore, do not find any ground to entertain the plea of promissory estoppel.
For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.