CVN Sastry, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner assails the order dated 8.5.1986 passed by the 2nd respondent which was confirmed on appeal by the 1st respondent on 12.7.1990 imposing the punishment of withholding 2 annual increments with cumulative effect besides recovering a sum of Rs. 7,173.60 ps.
in instalments from his salary.
The petitioner has since retired from service on 3061995 during the pendency of this writ petition.
2.
The facts leading to this writ petition may be stated briefly : While the petitioner was working as Deputy Director (Dairy Development) in Chittoor Milk Shed, he was served with a charge memo on 2161984 containing 2 charges : (1) Though the Field Assistant brought to the notice of the petitioner on the evening of 231984 the spoilage of cattle feed, the petitioner had not taken prompt remedial action immediately and utterly failed to alert the concerned staff including the Manager (Procurement) on which they could have started salvaging operations; and (2) He visited the feed godown only on 1431984, thereby losing precious time of nearly 12 days and exhibited sheer negligence.
If he had acted promptly on 231984 or 331984, atleast some feed could have been saved from the spoiled bags.
In reply to the said charges, the petitioner submitted an explanation stating inter alia that since he had already fixed up a programme to conduct a Gram Sabha for organising a Milk Producers' Co-operative Society on 331984, he had instructed the Field Assistant on 231984 to contact the Manager (Procurement) for detailed inspection and segregation of the cattle feed bags; that he underwent Vasectomy operation on 531984 and was on leave till 1331984; that he inspected the godown on 1431984; that under the circumstances, he was not at all negligent in the performance of his duties; that the spoilage of the cattle feed was due to internal combustion and chemical action which was beyond his control; and that he cannot be held responsible for the same.
After holding an enquiry into the said charges, the Enquiry Officer submitted a report on 3121984 holding the charges to be proved.
The Enquiry Officer did not, however, recommend any punishment and left it to the discretion of the Management.
On the basis of the Enquiry Officer's Report, a show-cause notice dated 1451985 was issued to the petitioner proposing the punishment of stoppage of 2 annual increments with cumulative effect besides the recovery of 20% of the loss i.e., Rs. 7,173.60 towards the loss of the cattle feed.
The petitioner submitted his reply to the show-cause notice on 1171985.
After considering his reply to the show-cause notice, the 2nd respondent passed the impugned order dated 8.5.1986 which was confirmed by the 1st respondent on 12.7.1990.
Aggrieved by the said orders, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Enquiry Officer's Report is based purely on surmises and conjectures and the findings are not based on any evidence; that the punishing authority as well as the appellate authority failed to independently consider the matter and the orders passed by them are not speaking orders; that the Appellate Authority failed to comply with the mandatory requirements of Rule 35 of the Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Co-operative Federation Ltd Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1983 (for short 'the Rules'); that the allegations made against the petitioner do not amount to mis-conduct; and that the impugned orders are arbitrary, illegal and opposed to the principles of natural justice.
The learned counsel has placed strong reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in AL Kalra v. P & E. Corpn.
of India Ltd, AIR 1984 SC 1361.
The learned counsel also contended that the imposition of punishment of stoppage of 2 annual increments with cumulative effect besides the recovery of the amount of Rs. 7,173.60 towards the loss of the cattle feed is in any case illegal and violative of Rule 27 of the Rules.
For this proposition, the learned Counsel relied upon a decision of this Court in MC Jain v. M.D.
Cement Corpn.
of India Ltd, 1990(7) SLR 744.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent has contended that the Enquiry Officer has given elaborate and cogent reasons in his report and rightly came to the conclusion on the basis of the evidence on record, that the charges have been proved; that the Publishing Authority as well as the Appellate Authority have concurred with the said findings and the reasons given by the Enquiry Officer in his report; that they are not required to elaborately discuss the findings or repeat all the reasons given by the Enquiry Officer in his report, that the impugned orders are perfectly valid and they do not call for any interference.
5.
As already noticed, the charges, framed against the petitioner are to the effect that the petitioner failed to take prompt steps to prevent the spoilage of the cattle feed which was brought to the notice of the petitioner on 231984; and that he was negligent in the performance of his duties, whereas the case of the petitioner is that when he inspected the feed godown on 25.2.1984, he found the cattle feed bags quite normal and there was no evidence of any possible damage; that when the Field Assistant approached him on 231984, he directed him to the Manager (Procurement) who was the officer directly incharge of the cattle feed with instructions to make a detailed inspection and segregation of the cattle feed bags; that he could not immediately visit the godown as he had a pre-arranged programme to preside over a Gram Sabha on 331984 and thereafter he had to undergo vasectomy operation on 531984 and consequently, he was on leave till 1331984; that the spoilage of the feed was entirely due to the causes beyond his control and he cannot be held in any way responsible for the same.
It is nobody's case that the petitioner was directly responsible for the alleged spoilage of the cattle feed.
Admittedly, the Manager (Procurement) is the person who is directly incharge of the cattle feed.
The petitioner is, no doubt, the Supervising Authority.
Though the Enquiry Officer has submitted a lengthy report, the findings recorded by him are mainly based on surmises and conjectures.
The whole basis of the report is that if prompt action had been taken, the spoilage of the cattle feed might possibly have been prevented or minimised.
At best, this is only a conjecture.
Nobody knows for certain whether loss could have been prevented or not.
The petitioner asserts that the loss was due to the internal combustion and chemical reaction which could not have been prevented and that in similar circumstances, the Federation has condoned the loss due to unforeseen circumstances which are beyond human control.
It is also stated that the erstwhile General Manager, Chittoor Dr. T Krishna Murthy who was also charge-sheeted along with the petitioner was exonerated on the ground that he was not directly responsible and the same consideration was not shown to the petitioner.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances, I feel that it was incumbent upon the 1st and 2nd respondents to apply their mind properly and pass reasoned orders.
The order dated 8.5.1986 passed by the 1st respondent merely states that the Management is satisfied that the charges levelled against the petitioner have been duly proved and after going through the explanation of the petitioner and the nature of the misconduct committed by him, the Management has, on a due consideration.
ordered that the petitioner's next two annual increments be withheld with cumulative effect besides recovering 20% of the loss i.e., Rs. 7,173.60 towards the cost of the cattle feed in instalments from his salary.
The said order does not contain any reasons whatsoever showing proper application of mind.
Similarly, the Appellate Authority also passed a very cryptic order merely stating that the appeal of the petitioner has been examined by the Board of Directors in its 81st Meeting held on 861990 and resolved to reject the appeal.
Rule 35 of the Rules lays down that the Appellate Authority shall consider whether the findings are justified or whether the penalty is excessive or inadequate and pass appropriate order within three months of the date of appeal.
A mere glance at the order of the Appellate Authority in the instant case reveals that the Appellate Authority has not complied with the requirements of the said Rule.
It is no doubt true that where the Punishing Authority and the Appellate Authority concur with the findings of the Enquiry Officer, they are not required to discuss elaborately the evidence or to repeat all the reasons given by the Enquiry Officer.
But, where the Enquiry Officer's Report as in the present case, is itself based mainly on surmises and conjectures and where the grievance of the petitioner is that the employer has condoned such lapses in other instances, the Punishing Authority and the Appellate Authority are expected to apply their mind independently and pass reasoned orders.
Unfortunately, in the present case, they failed to do so.
In AL Kalra's case while considering an identical rule as Rule 35 in the present case, the Supreme Court quashed the orders of the Disciplinary Authority as well as the Appellate Authority in that case on the ground that the orders passed by them did not contain reasons showing proper application of mind.
The Supreme Court observed :  "...
In order to ascertain whether the rule (Rule 35) is complied with, the order of the appellate authority must show that it took into consideration the findings, the quantum of penalty and other relevant considerations.
There is no material for showing that the appellate authority acted in consonance with its obligation under Rule 35..." For the aforesaid reasons, I am constrained to hold that the impugned orders passed by the respondents in this case are liable to be quashed.
In view of this conclusion.
it may not be necessary to go into the other question raised by the petitioner's counsel namely whether the order imposing two punishments is in violation of Rule 27 of the Rules or not.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the impugned orders are quashed.
There will be no order as to costs.
7.
It is represented that the petitioner has retired from service on 3061995 and so far, his pension and other benefits have not been settled on the ground that this writ petition is pending.
8.
Now that the writ petition is disposed of, the respondents will expeditiously settle the pension and other benefits legitimately due to the petitioner.
Order accordingly.