PK Jain, J - Can a government employee be denied promotion merely on the basis of an adverse remark recorded in his annual confidential report against which his representation is pending consideration ?
This is the short question which needs our consideration in this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner on being appointed as a Peon, vide orders dated 26.3.1982 passed by respondent No. 2, joined his duties as such in the office of the Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Taoru, District Gurgaon, with effect from 141982.
He passed his matriculation examination in the year 1984 and also fulfils the requisite qualifications required for the post of a clerk.
According to the instructions dated 10121991 (Annexure P.1) issued by respondent No. 1, 20% posts of clerks are to be filled up by promotion from Class IV employees who have improved their qualifications and passed Matriculation examination.
The petitioner is the seniormost class IV employee in the department.
He alongwith Sarvshri Khem Chand and Parmod Kumar appeared for a Type-test on 26111987 for being promoted as a Clerk.
According to the information of the petitioner, Shri Khem Chand and Shri Parmod Kumar have been promoted while ignoring the petitioner.
Several representations have been made for the consideration of his case for promotion but in vain.
By letter dated 23111992, the petitioner was informed that his case was under consideration but on 1451993 he was informed that there was no vacancy with the department.
The petitioner has challenged the action of the respondents in ignoring him for promotion to the post of a Clerk as being illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory, mala fide and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
He has sought a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his case for promotion to the post of Clerk from the date he became eligible and to pay consequential benefits arising therefrom.
3.
Notice was issued to the respondents.
In their written statement, the respondents have admitted that the petitioner is working as a Peon in the office of Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Taoru, and he is the senior most class IV employee in this department.
It has also been admitted that the petitioner has improved his qualification.
It has also been admitted that 20% posts of Clerks are to be filled up by promotion from amongst class IV employees.
It has been stated that the service record of the petitioner was not upto the mark and as such he was not promoted in the year 1987 when other Peons were promoted as Clerks.
It has been explained that there are adverse entries in the annual confidential reports of the petitioner for the period 1983-84, 1985-86 and 1986-87.
It has been stated that according to these adverse entries, the petitioner was found to be disobedient, indisciplined, not punctual and shirked work and as such he was not found fir for promotion.
It has been admitted that the representation made by the petitioner was received and he was informed vide letter dated 23121994 that his case was under consideration and due to non-existence of any vacancy, he could not be promoted to the post of Clerk.
In his replication, the petitioner has stated that the annual confidential report for the year 1983-84 was communicated to him after an inordinate delay i.e. on 1091987 and he made a representation against the adverse remarks, that the adverse remarks for the year 1985-86 were communicated to him on 1371987 and he immediately made a representation against those adverse remarks, and similarly the adverse remarks for the year 1986-87 were communicated to him on 1091987 and he made a representation against these adverse remarks on 2991987.
It has been further stated that all the three representations made by him are still pending with the respondents, and without deciding these representations made by the petitioner, these annual confidential reports cannot be acted upon to deny promotion to him.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
5.
The factual position as narrated above is not being disputed either in the pleadings or at the Bar.
In their reply to the replication, the respondents have admitted that the representations of the petitioner against the adverse remarks recorded against him in the annual confidential reports for the year 1983-84, 1985-86 and 1986-87 were received on 5101987, 1331987 and 1091987 and the same are still under consideration of the Authority.
It has also been admitted that the petitioner was ignored and two Peons junior to him were promoted on 26111987.
In other words, it stands admitted that on the day when the petitioner was ignored and his two juniors were promoted as Clerks, his representations against the adverse remarks recorded in his annual confidential reports for the aforesaid period were still pending under consideration with the Authority.
6.
There is no doubt that whenever an adverse entry is awarded to a Government servant, it must be communicated to him.
The object and purpose underlying the communication is to afford an opportunity to an employee to improve his work and conduct and to make representation to the Authority concerned against those entries.
If such a representation is made, it is imperative that the Authority should consider the representation with a view to determine as to whether the contents of the adverse entries are justified or not.
Making of a representation is a valuable right to a Government employee and if the representation is not considered, it is bound to affect him in his service career, for instance grant of increment, promotion etc.  7.
In Gurdial Singh Fiji v. State of Punjab and others, 1979(3) S.C.R. 518, the appellant therein was denied promotion on account of certain adverse entries against which he had made representation to the Government but for some reason or the other, those representations could not be considered or disposed of.
In view of these adverse entries, he was not selected for promotion.
While considering effect of non-consideration of the representation, the Apex Court observed :-  "The principle is well settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for some reason or another, not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant, though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified."
In Amar Kant Choudhary v. State of Bihar and others, 1984(2) SCR 299, the Supreme Court again emphasised that adverse remarks in a confidential report cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct and to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Unless the representation against the adverse entries is considered and disposed of, it is not just and fair to act upon those adverse entries.
The views expressed in these three cases have been reiterated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, 1950-1988(4) Recent Services Judgments 690.
It has been reaffirmed by their Lordships that unless an adverse report is communicated and representation, if any, made by the employee is considered it cannot be acted upon to deny the promotion.
The learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to controvert or dispute this proposition of law as enunciated by the apex Court.
The present case is squarely covered by the principle laid down in these decision of.
We accordingly allow this petition and direct the respondents to consider and dispose of the representation made by the petitioner within a period of 2 months from the date of receipt/production of a copy of this order and then to decide the case of promotion of the petitioner to the post of Clerk in accordance with law.