MS Liberhan, J - We have gone through the impugned order.
The only contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that a workman is entitled to twice his average daily wage for the day he has worked on any holidays allowed under Section 3 of the Punjab Industrial Establishment (National and Festival Holidays and Casual and Sick Leave) Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
It would be expedient to notice Section 5(2) of the Act, which runs as under:-  ``Where a worker works on any holiday allowed under section 3, he shall, at his option, be entitled to: (a) twice his average daily wage for that day, or (b) his average daily wage for that day and a substituted holiday with his average day wage on any other day within 90 days from the day on which he works.''
Reading of this Section makes it clear that a worker who has worked on any of the holidays defined by the Act, would either be entitled to twice his average daily wage or in the alternative, he will be entitled to one paid holiday and one daily wages.
The obvious meaning thereby is that a person who has worked, on any of the holidays allowed under section 3, would be entitled to double his daily wage as compensation for his work done on the holiday whether it is in the form of money or in the form of one paid holiday and his daily wage for that day.
The observations of the Labour Court and the finding recorded to the effect that in addition to the usual daily wage, for the aforesaid national and festival holidays, the workers are entitled to twice their daily wages, in other words, they are entitled to three daily wages for each of the aforesaid national and festival holidays, cannot be sustained.
2.
Principle of Interpretation, as established by law and accepted as such by the Courts, is that while interpreting a statute or a rule, the plain meaning of the words has to be given unless these are capable of more than one interpretation.
3.
As observed above, the rule reproduced hereinbefore is capable of no other interpretation.
The plain reading of the Rule provides that the workers will be entitled to twice their average daily wages for the national and festival holidays or in the alternative their average daily wages for that day and a substituted holiday with their average daily wages on any other day within 90 days from the day on which they had worked.
4.
Consequently, award dated 2191995, passed by the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the workers would be entitled to double the wages for the holiday or one average daily wage and a substituted paid holiday within 90 days at his option.
5.
In view of the observations made above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned award is modified to the above extent.
Petition allowed.