Lingaraja Rath, J - The petitioners were appointed as Managers by way of direct recruitment to the respondent No. 2 Bank on 14.12.1979.
The respondents 4 and 5 has been promoted from lower posts as Manager earlier than the petitioners, respectively on 21.6.1979 and 791979.
The petitioners are Post-Graduates, whereas the respondents 4 and 5 are Matriculates.
Since the respondents 4 and 5 were promoted on 2721989 as Assistant General Manger only because of their seniority, the present petition has been filed assailing the promotion on the ground of they being not eligible or qualified to be promoted because of lack of qualification prescribed for the post.
2.
The Registrar of the Co-operative Societies has the power under Rule 28(1) of the Andhra Pradesh Co-operative Rules, 1964 to prescribe the qualifications in respect of different categories of service in the Co-operative Societies and has the power under Sub-rule (3) thereof to pass order, for special reasons, relaxing the rules in respect of any paid officer or servant.
Two circulars were issued by the Registrar on 1531979 respectively numbered as R.C. No. 5199/79-CI(A) and RC.
No. 5199/79-CI(a).
In the first Circular the qualifications for the post of Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Development Officer, Manager, Executive Officer and Assistant Executive Officer was prescribed as Degree of any recognised university, a course of Co-operative Training in specified institutions and a pass in four tests i.e., Banking, Co-operative, Auditing and Book Keeping.
Similarly for the post of Accountants, Clerks Supervisors and Inspectors the qualifications of S.S.L.C./H.S.C.
and the same four tests were prescribed, yet notice was taken of the fact that Reserve Bank of India had suggested that direct recruitment may be made to a limited extent as it was expected that in normal course Officers by virtue of experience and qualification would rise to the level of senior level posts.
Taking note of the fact that a team of officers had suggested for relaxation of qualifications, the suggestion was accepted and relaxation was made in favour of in-service candidates, so far as the post of Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Development Officer, Manager, Executive Officer and Assistant Executive Officer are concerned, saying that when any vacancy arises in those categories, the persons in the next lower category may be given opportunity of promotion with due regard to their seniority provided they had the minimum service experience in the lower category of five years, two years, or one year respectively for Matriculate, Graduate or Post- Graduate.
In the Second circular issued on the same day, the posts of Secretaries referred to in the first circular was directed to be designated as Deputy General Manager in the rank of Category I Officers as per the Award.
The post of General Manager was recognised as the post above Category No.
I and the Category II posts were recognised as the post of Assistant General Managers with direction that three posts of Assistant General Managers in each of the 26 Central Co-operative Banks i.e., as relating to Banking, Administration and Development were to be created.
As regards the procedure to fill up the posts, the Circular provided, except for the posts of General Manager, Deputy General Manager (Administration) and Deputy General Manager (Banking), that either direct recruitment or promotion could be adopted.
For promotion, the qualifications already laid down in the other circular for the lower posts from which promotions were to be made were acknowledged, i.e., Graduation and higher cooperative training but, noting the views of the Reserve Bank that persons with lesser qualification in the lower category may by virtue of their experience rise to senior level posts and of the opinion of the team of officers, which was the Committee, the relaxation suggested were accepted in the following words :  "The above suggestion of the team of officers has been agreed to for filling up the immediate vacancies arising out of reorganization of the staffing pattern and necessary proceedings relaxing the academic training and other qualifications prescribed in special by-laws have been issued under Rule 28 of the Andhra Pradesh Cooperative Societies Rules, separately."
3.
There was directions of the vacancies arising in Category I of the award, except the posts of General Manager, Deputy General Manager (Banking) and Deputy General Manager (Administration), and all posts in Category II, to be filled up in accordance with the procedure.
The extracts of the two circulars as referred to would show, so far as post of Assistant General Manager is concerned, that the relaxation was required to be applied only to the immediate vacancies that arose at the time of or immediately after the issue of the Circular on 1531979 as it had been thought of by the Reserve Bank of India that experienced officers though had lesser qualifications yet could manage the senior level posts because of their experience.
4.
Mr. K Lakhsmi Narasimha, learned appearing for the petitioners, submits that as the respondents 4 and 5 basically were not Graduates and are Matriculates, they had not the qualifications to be promoted as Managers on 791979 and 21.6.1979 but as their promotions had been effected prior to the direct recruitment of the petitioners as Managers, they had no earlier occasion to challenge their promotion as Managers.
But the respondents 4 and 5 were not entitled to be promoted further as Assistant General Managers in respect of which post there was no relaxation and if at all there is any relaxation, that was also only in respect of the immediate vacancies but could not be resorted to for promotions to be made ten years after.
The apart, Mr. Narasimha points out that the very provisions of relaxation in Circular RC.
No. 5199/79-CI(A) was declared ultra vires Rule 28(3) of the AP Cooperative Societies Rules, 1964 in WP No. 16367 of 1987 decided on 7.7.1987 Hence, considered from whatever angle, the promotions of the respondents 4 and 5 on 2721989 as acting Assistant General Managers and the regular promotion of respondent No. 4 as such on 2761994 were wholly null and void.
The regular promotions had been made during the pendency of the writ petition which was filed on 331989.
Though counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondent-Bank, yet at the time of hearing no appearance is made either on behalf of the Bank or on behalf of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies.
Respondents 4 and 5 are however represented by Mr. K Srinivsa Murthy who submits, resisting the submissions advanced on behalf of the petitioners, that since the promotions of respondents 4 and 5 as Managers has been effected as early as 21.6.1979, no challenge to their promotions can be made in 1989 and writ petition is liable to be thrown out because of delay and laches.
It is further submission of his that if the promotions of the respondents as Managers are not assailable, their further promotion as Assistant General Manager is also not open to question as by their promotion as Managers, they belonged to common cadre of Managers along with the petitioners and for affecting promotions from that cadre no discrimination can be made.
The respondents have been validly promoted as Assistant General Managers because of their seniority in the cadre.
It is also submitted that the petitioners are themselves not eligible to be promoted as Assistant General Managers because even though they are post-graduates, yet they have not passed the four tests prescribed for promotion.
5.
I am unable to agree with the submission advanced of the petition being barred by delay and laches.
The appointment of the petitioners as Managers was subsequent to the promotion as such of respondents and hence after their appointment, the petitioners could not have filed a petition challenging the promotion of persons who had already been promoted by the time they were recruited.
It was hence legitimate for them to think that even though the promotion of respondents 4 and 5 had been made illegally, yet they would not be given a further premium on the illegality by superseding them in the matter of promotion as Assistant General Managers.
In the second Circular RC.
No. 5199/79-CI(a) of 1531979 the relaxation was applicable in respect of vacancies immediately arising out of the re-organisation.
It is not known as to whether the vacancies filled up by respondents 4 and 5 as managers arose out of the re-organisation so made.
But, at any rate, in view of the decision of this Court in WP No. 16367/87 on 7.7.1987, the promotions could not have been made if the judgment had been available at the time of the promotions.
Any decision of any Court of law on the validity of any law is not effective from the date of its pronouncement as the decision is only as interpretation and exposition of the law is existed at the time of its enactment.
The relaxation made by the Registrar in the second Circular hence must be taken to have been incompetent right from the inception.
But all the same, since the promotions were made and when made were thbought of as being made legally in accordance with the relaxation, they are not ipso facto liable to be disturbed because of the interpretation and declaration of the law as was given out by the court in its decision on 7.7.1987.
But that is so far as the vulnerability of the promotions of respondents 4 and 5 as Managers is concerned.
But so far as their promotions as Assistant General Managers is concerned, the law declared by this Court was very much operative and were to the knowledge of the authorities that their promotions as Managers was illegal when it was made.
They thus could not be considered for promotion to the next higher rank when they did not have the qualification even to hold the lower post.
The theory of non-discrimination within a cadre in the matter of promotion is not applicable as that proposition applies to when persons are validly recruited to one cadre from different sources.
If, however, the initial recruitment to the common cadre is invalidly made, the invalidity itself cannot be made the basis of a proposition of non-discrimination as nobody can be permitted to earn a premium on the basis of an illegality practised in his favour.
The petitioners hence are entitled to question the promotion of the respondents 4 and 5 as Assistant General Managers on the basis of their being basically ineligible even for the lower posts and consequently for the higher post and it was a matter for legitimate expectation for them to be considered for promotion as being the eligible candidates in the field because of their qualification.
It is however true that they are entitled to such consideration subject to or they being eligible as possessioing not only the educational qualification but also the training qualification prescribed.
6.
While such conclusions are reached, yet as about ten years have elapsed since the promotion of respondents 4 and 5 were made and they have been working as Assistant General Managers througout the period, it may very hard on their part to be faced with reversion as Managers.
Respondents 6 and 7 have been impleaded as respondents only because they were promoted as Managers, but they have not been promoted as Assistant General Managers yet.
In view of such circumstances, I direct, while allowing the writ petition, that the respondents 1, 2 and 3 would respectively consider the question of promotion of the petitioners as Assistant General Managers from the day respondent No. 4 was promoted as Assistant General Manager if they were otherwise eligible then to be considered for promotion.
If they were then not so eligible, they would be considered for promotion from the date they became, if at all, eligible.
But the consideration shall be confined only in respect to two posts as in lieu of the promotions of respondents 4 and 5.
I am informed that five supernumerary posts were created in 1994, as against which the promotion of respondent No. 4 was regularised on 2721989 and respondent No. 5 has since retired from service and that three supernumerary posts created are still vacant.
If the fact is so, the petitioners, if are to be promoted in accordance with the directions, are to be promoted against such posts, but that otherwise, the requisite number of supernumerary posts be created to accommodate them.
7.
Since the petitioners have actually not worked in the promotional posts, the promotion of any of them retrospectively, as now directed, is to be made with the payment of back-wages confined to only to 50% till today and to full pay from the date of the judgment.
Further the effect of the promotion would be to treat, the petitioners who may be promoted, as senior to respondent No. 4 in the rank of Assistant General Manager.
The Writ petition is accordingly allowed with the above directions.
No costs.
Petition allowed.