GC Garg, J - Harish Chander, respondent herein filed a suit for declaration that he is entitled to a Class-III post on clerical side on compassionate ground on account of death of his father, Mohan Lal, an employee of the Punjab Roadways.
Suit was decreed by judgment and decree dated 891993 and it was held that plaintiff was entitled to Class-III post of Clerk w.e.f.
2021985, with consequential benefits in terms of pay, allowances and promotion etc. and further a mandatory injunction was granted that the plaintiff be given the post and paid all arrears of pay and allowances w.e.f.
2021985 with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
Appeal thereagainst was partly accepted by the learned Additional District Judge, Faridkot and the judgment and decree passed by the trial court was modified.
It was held that the plaintiff will be appointed as Clerk within three months of the pronouncement of the judgment with no reduction in the salary being drawn by him as a Washer Boy and the salary in the scale of Clerk will be adjusted keeping the salary drawn by him as Washer Boy intact.
The State still felt aggrieved by the judgment and decree as modified by the appellate court and consequently filed the present appeal which was admitted for final disposal on 20.9.1995.
During the pendency of this appeal, the plaintiff took out execution and this prompted the defendant-appellants to move Civil Misc. 1528-C of 1995 for staying the execution proceedings.
2.
In response to the notice of Civil Misc., plaintiff put in appearance through Shri HC Arora, Advocate.
3.
During the course of hearing in Civil Misc., learned counsel for the parties agreed that the main appeal may itself be taken up for disposal as the dispute raised therein is of a petty nature and the plaintiff is suffering because of the delayed disposal of the appeal.
4.
It could not be disputed during the course of hearing that the plaintiff had been offered employment not on compassionate ground that in the normal course, as a Washer Boy by the Punjab Roadways and he is continuing in service as such.
The grievance of the plaintiff as already noticed is that he is entitled to appointment as a Clerk (Class-III post) with Punjab Roadways on compassionate ground under the policy of the State Government as his father died while in service.
His case for appointment on compassionate ground was not considered by the authorities though a period of more than ten years has gone by and he being entitled to appointment on compassionate ground, his case deserves to be considered at a very early date for such appointment.
To this contention of learned counsel for the respondent, learned AAG Punjab could not raise any serious objection.
He only submitted that judgment and decree of the courts below cannot be sustained and deserve to be set aside.
According to learned AAG, Punjab, a direction could not have been given by the courts below to appoint the plaintiff as a Clerk and direction could only be given to consider his case for appointment on compassionate ground under the policy framed by the State Government.
In my opinion, the contention has merit.
It could not be disputed during the course of hearing that the plaintiff is eligible for appointment as Clerk as he passed Matriculation examination even during the year 1984-85 and that he was entitled to be considered for appointment as a Clerk on compassionate ground at that time.
It has been so held by the courts below.
But as already noticed, a decree could be passed only to the effect that the State Government shall consider his case for appointment as a Clerk on compassionate ground within a time frame that may have been indicated by the courts below and the courts below could not straightaway direct his appointment as a Clerk that too from a retrospective date.
Learned Additional District Judge corrected the judgment of the trial court to a great extent but again fell into error by directing the State Government to appoint the plaintiff as a Clerk in the Transport Department.
5.
For what has been stated above, this appeal is allowed and the judgment and decree under appeal is modified and it is held that the plaintiff- respondent is eligible for appointment as a Clerk on compassionate grounds and the State Government shall now consider his case for appointment as such within a period of three months and if found suitable, the plaintiff shall be offered appointment clerk immediately thereafter.
It is, however, clarified that while considering this case for appointment, the authorities shall bear in mind that the plaintiff had been clamouring for appointment on compassionate ground for the last more than ten years and that he has already been held eligible for appointment as such.
It is further clarified that conditions of eligibility are to be kept in view as these existed during the year 1984-85 and not as exist today.
Civil Misc. also stands disposed of accordingly.