B Rai, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been preferred by the State of Punjab and another against the judgment and decree, dated November 25, 1991 of the Additional Senior Subordinate Judge, Sunam, which were affirmed by the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, vide his judgment and decree, dated September 25, 1992.
2.
Brief facts of the case may be recapitulated.
Jatinder Singh was appointed as Sub-Inspector, Cooperative Societies in the year 1970.
He was promoted as Inspector in the year 1981.
In the year 1984, Jatinder Singh was posted as Inspector, Primary Land Mortgage Bank, Sangrur and was given additional charge of Administrator of Bir Kalan Cooperative Agricultural Service Society, Bir Kalan, vide order dated August 10, 1984 and he worked as such from August 14, 1984 to October 20, 1984.
Village Bir Kalan is situated at a distance of about 15 K.Ms.
from Sangrur.
During this period, he was entrusted with the duty of compiling annual statements of Consumer Store, Sangrur and certain other bodies vide order, dated November 15, 1984 and that work was of much importance.
As such, he attended that work in compliance with the said order of the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies and on that count, he could not visit Bir Kalan from November 16, 1984 to December 6, 1984 and remained at Sangrur and Chandigarh during the aforesaid period.
It was further pleaded that he worked only as Inspector, Cooperative Societies with effect from December 21, 1984 as per order No. 6940-44, dated December 21, 1984 passed by the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
He received an order dated January 2, 1985 vide which he was placed under suspension by the Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
Case of Jatinder Singh is that Deputy Registrar was not his appointing and punishing Authority and, as such, could not place him under suspension.
On July 3, 1985 a show cause notice dated June 21, 1985 was served on Jatinder Singh by the Registrar through Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, containing six charges as enumerated in para 13 of the plaint.
The show cause notice was replied by him and each and every charge was explained as stated in Paras 14 to 26 of the plaint.
Sampuran Singh, Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Ludhiana, was appointed as an Enquiry Officer vide order, dated September 23, 1985, Exhibit D4.
According to Jatinder Singh, Enquiry Officer was appointed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, without application of mind to the reply submitted by him.
Sampuran Singh conducted the enquiry but before concluding it, he was transferred from Ludhiana to Chandigarh and in his place Deputy Registrar, Ludhiana, was directed to continue the enquiry and on the basis of the enquiry report which was signed and submitted later on, services of Jatinder Singh were terminated vide order, dated March 27, 1987, Exhibit D6.
3.
Feeling aggrieved, Jatinder Singh filed an appeal but the same was dismissed vide Exhibit D7.
According to Jatinder Singh, there was no evidence against him but the Enquiry Officer gave a report without considering the evidence on record.
Sampuran Singh, Enquiry Officer had been transferred from Ludhiana when the enquiry was not completed.
Then his successor was appointed as Enquiry Officer who, however, did not submit any report and report, in fact, was submitted by Sampuran Singh who had earlier conducted the enquiry.
That enquiry report was signed by Sampuran Singh as former Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Ludhiana.
Thereafter, order vide which the successor of Sampuran Singh was appointed as Enquiry Officer, was withdrawn.
According to Jatinder Singh, the report submitted by Sampuran Singh was without jurisdiction.
4.
Shorn of unnecessary details, it is necessary to note that according to the plaintiff, there were allegations of embezzlement and one Prem Kumar, ex-Secretary of the Society was involved in the matter along with other persons, namely, Ram Singh and Darbara Singh who were indicted for embezzlement, while Jatinder Singh was exonerated.
His grievance is that he was victimised at the instance of Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Sangrur, who wanted to help Prem Kumar.
The result was that services of plaintiff were terminated and his appeal, dated May 26, 1987 was kept pending by the Government.
Treating the pendency of appeal as equal to rejection of appeal, Jatinder Singh sought a declaration that his suspension and termination were illegal and that he was entitled to reinstatment with all consequential benefits and privileges along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
5.
The suit filed by Jatinder Singh was contested on behalf of the State of Punjab and Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
However, it was admitted that Jatinder Singh was appointed as Administrator of Bir Kalan Cooperative Agricultural Service Society, Bir Kalan, and as Administrator of the said Society, it was his bounden duty to spare time to manage the affairs of the said society.
According to the defendants (appellants herein), Jatinder Singh never represented that he was over-worked and could not discharge the duties of Administrator of the Society and charge thereof may be taken from him.
It was further pleaded that he was rightly suspended and the enquiry into the matter was held in accordance with the rules and his services were legally and validly terminated.
An objection was also taken that plaintiff had not served legal and valid notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure and the suit was bad for non-joinder of necessary parties.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have carefully gone through the material placed on the record.
7.
Mr. SK Sharma, Deputy Advocate-General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the appellants vehemently argued that both the Courts below erred in law inasmuch as they did not appreciate the evidence brought on the record.
They overlooked the enquiry proceedings, dated June 19, 1986.
The counsel submitted that Sampuran Singh Enquiry Officer had conducted the enquiry and proceedings were duly noted by the respondent; that the Enquiry officer had submitted the enquiry report after conclusion of the enquiry proceedings; and that the transfer of Sampuran Singh had no effect on the departmental enquiry.
He further stated that the procedure for conducting the enquiry was in accordance with the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1970.
The respondent was found guilty in the departmental enquiry and it had been established that the funds of the Society were embezzled.
He went on to say that the respondent having been found guilty of gross misconduct, his termination was valid and legal.
In the view of these submissions, the learned Deputy Advocate-General has made a prayer that the appeal may be allowed and the judgments and decrees of the Courts below which are based on conjectures and surmises set aside.
8.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondent took pains to stress that the judgments and decrees aforesaid of the Courts below are perfectly in order and no infirmity or illegality can be found in the same.
He urged that although there were allegations of embezzlement to the tune of Rs. 3,81,65035 during the tenure of respondent when he was Administrator yet no case having been found against Jatinder Singh respondent, he was exonerated and it was only on account of the victimisation at the hands of Deputy Registrar who wanted to help Prem Kumar, against whom Jatinder Singh had made a report about the embezzlement and was suspended.
The counsel pointed out that earlier said Prem Kumar was removed from service by the Managing Committee of the Society but later on he was reinstated by the Deputy Registrar, which was a clear-cut case of favouritism and against the norms of service rules.
9.
It is not disputed that in the first instance, Sampuran Singh, Deputy Registrar was appointed as Enquiry Office, who was later on changed as such, vide order, dated February 17, 1987 and the successor of Sampuran Singh was directed to take the relevant record relating to the enquiry proceedings from his predecessor Sampuran Singh and complete the enquiry at the earliest.
It was thereafter that Sampuran Singh submitted his report dated March 10, 1987 who was at that point of time functus officio.
Not only that, there was no communication from the successor of Sampuran Singh to the Appointing Authority to the effect that he had completed the enquiry and was only to write the report and he may be allowed to prepare and submit the report.
It was after Sampuran Singh had submitted the report on March 10, 1987 that the Office put up a note on March 31, 1987 that Sampuran Singh had completed the enquiry and submitted his report on March 10, 1987 and, therefore, the order changing the Enquiry Officer passed on February 17, 1987 was withdrawn.
It is also not out of place to mention here that Enquiry Report was not supplied to the respondent and the said report was supplied to him when he was not in service.
So, non-supply of the Enquiry Report runs quite counter to the principles of natural justice and that causes grave prejudice to the delinquent inasmuch as the respondent had not been afforded proper opportunity to assail the findings of the Enquiry Officer before the Punishing Authority.
Now, the question arises as to whether the Forty-Second Admendment in the Constitution of India has brought about any change in the position in the matter of supply of a copy of the report and the effect of non-supply of a copy of the report on the punishment imposed.
This point has been specifically dealt with by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 471.
Following observations of the Supreme Court are relevant in this behalf:  " ... ... ... With the Forty-Second Amendment, the delinquent officer is not associated with the disciplinary inquiry beyond the recording of evidnece and the subsmissions made on the basis of the material to assist the Inquiry Officer to come to his conclusions.
In case his conclusions are kept away from the delinquent officer and the Inquiry Officer submits his conclusions with or without recommendations as to punishment, the delinquent is precluded from knowing the contents thereof although such material is used againt him by the disciplinary authority.
The report is an adverse material if the Inquiry Officer records a finding of guilt and proposes a punishment so far as the delinquent is concerned.
In a quasi-judicial matter, if the delinquent is being deprived of knowledge of the material against him though the same is made available to the punishing authority in the mtter of reaching his conclusion, rules of natural justice would be affected.........................  Deletion of the second opportunity from the scheme of Article of Article 311(2) of the Constitution has nothing to do with providing of a copy of the report to the delinquent in the matter of making his representation.
Even though the second stage of the inquiry in Article 311(2) has been abolished by amendment, the delinquent is still entitled to represent against the conlcusion of the Inquiry Officer holding that the charges or some of the charges are established and holding the delinquent guilty of such charges.
For doing away with the effect of the enquiry report or to meet the recommedations of the Inquiry Officer in the matter of imposition of punishment, furnishing a copy of the report becomes necessary and to have the proceeding completed by using some material behind the back of the delinquent is a position not countenanced by fair procedure.
While by law application of natural could be totally ruled out or truncated, nothing has been done which could be taken as keeping natural justice out of the proceedings and the series of pronouncements of this Court making rules of natural justice applicable, to such an enquiry are not affected by the 42nd amendment.
We, therefore, come to the conclusion that supply of a copy of the inquiry report alongwith recomendations, if any, in the matter of proposed punishment to be inflicted would be within the rules of natural justice and the delinquent would, therefore, be entitled to the supply of a copy thereof.
The Forty-Second Amendment has not brought about any change in this position."
10.
In the light of the law laid down by the apex Court in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra), the impugned order has to be set aside, as the same is violative of principles of natural justice as the copy of the Enquiry Report had not been supplied to the delinquent before the impugned order was passed.
In this view of the matter, the enquiry proceedings as also the termination order, stand vitiated.
11.
No other point was raised or canvassed before me.
12.
In view of the discussion aforesaid, I find that the impugned order, dated March 27, 1987 Exhibit D.6 terminating the services of the respondent, has been rightly set aside by the Courts below and I affirm the same.
There being no merit in this Appeal, the same is hereby dismissed.
The respondent shall be entitled to all consequential benefits attached to his post.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.