SC Malte, J - This appeal is by the State of Haryana, taking exception to the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, Hissar, by which the order of termination of services of the plaintiff-respondent was held illegal and inoperative and the respondent was held to be in continuous service.
2.
The plaintiff - respondent was appointed as a 'Beldar' (Fieldman in the Department of Deputy Director Agriculture, Hissar.
The papers before me indicate than initially as per order Exhibit P.3 (which does not bear the date), the plaintiff-respondent was appointed as Fieldman for a period of six months.
Exhibit D-3 is the next order dated 2731974 which runs into following terms:-  "Shri Jagdish Chander who was working on ad hoc basis is hereby appointed on regular basis after the expiry of his first term of ad hoc appointment w.e.f.
271973 in the pay scale 70-2-80/3-95 on purely temporary basis.
His services will be terminated on the notice of one month on the either side provided it will be open to Government to pay in lieu of notice the salary for the period by which the notice falls short and simultaneously if he wishes to resign from the post he will do so by depositing one month's pay and allowances in lieu of the notice falls short.
He should produce the following certificate:- 1.
Medical fitness certificate on first entry into Govt. Service.
2.
Certificate to the effect that he has only one living wife, if married.
Sd/- KS Bindera  Farm Superintendent, Govt. Agri.
Farm, Hissar Ends.
No. 660-61/PF Dated 2731974 A copy is forwarded to the :- 1.
Shri Sukbir Singh, Block Officer, Govt. Agriculture Farm, Hissar.
2.
Shri Jagdish Chander, Fieldman for information and necessary action.
Sd/- Farm Supdtt.
Govt. Agri.
Farm, Hissar."
3.
The services of the plaintiff came to be terminated by notice that bears date 1451976.
It was informed that the plaintiff should take that notice as one month notice, at the end of which his services would stand terminated.
Pursuant to the said notice, a termination order was issued and the plaintiff-respondent was relieved of his employment on 1461976 Fore-noon.
The plaintiff challenged this termination order.
According to him the said termination order was issued by the authority not empowered to issue it.
It was further contended that it was a mala fide action due to animosity with Inspector in the Department.
It was contended that no opportunity was afforded to him to refute the charges against him.
It was contended that notice was in violation of the provision of Article 311 of the Constitution  4.
The defendant-appellants by written statement mainly contended that the termination order was quite in keeping with the terms and conditions of has employment.
It was submitted that the one month's notice before termination was served on the plaintiff as per the conditions of employment.
Thus, it was contended that since the appointment of the plaintiff was temporary and subject to termination by one month's notice, the termination was quite legal and proper.
The other contentions also came to be refuted.
5.
The trial Court was of the view that the appointment of the plaintiff was temporary and he thereby did not get any right to hold the post.
On this main finding, the trial Court dismissed the suit.
The plaintiff preferred appeal in the District Court.
The Additional District Judge, Hissar, who disposed of the appeal, found that though the appointment letter indicated that the appointment of the plaintiff was temporary, it was nonetheless subject to the condition that while terminating his employment, clear one month's notice should be served.
On facts he found that the notice of termination thus served on the plaintiff fell short by two days.
On this reasoning he allowed the appeal and decreed the suit by judgment dated 1931979.
Against that judgment this appeal has been preferred.
6.
In this Court on behalf of the appellants the Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, submitted that the appointment of the plaintiff was temporary and was liable to be terminated by one month's notice.
It was submitted that the notice was accordingly served and there was nothing illegal in the termination.
7.
On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, it was submitted that on facts it is clear that the notice was not for the full term of one month even as per conditions of employment.
It was further submitted that shortly after the judgment by the Additional District Judge, the plaintiff-respondent was reinstated in the service and since then till this date he is continuing in the service.
The Assistant Advocate General was not in a position to make a statement as to whether the plaintiff is still continuing in service.
8.
On going through the record of this case, In find that the initial appointment of the plaintiff-respondent was as a Fieldman.
The appointment letter at Exhibit P-3, however, does not indicate the year in which the said appointment was issued.
However, the matter does not rest on that appointment letter.
By subsequent appointment offer Exhibit D-3 dated 2731994, the plaintiff who was then working as a Fieldman on ad hoc basis, came to be appointed on regular basis, though temporarily, as indicated in the order reproduced in the earlier part of this judgment.
The admitted position, therefore, is that if at all the services of the plaintiff were to be terminated, at least one month's notice of termination should be served.
The papers before me indicate that thereafter by letter Exhibit D-1 dated 1441976 a notice was issued that the plaintiff should be terminated from service on completion of period of one month of the notice.
The further endorsement on Exhibit D-1 indicates that on 1641976 a copy of the said letter of termination had been sent to another department for information.
It, therefore, clearly appears that till 1641976 the said notice of termination was in the process of despatch.
The letter Exhibit D-2 indicates that the services of the plaintiff were terminated on 1451976, fore-noon.
It also states that as per letter dated 16..41976, a one months notice was served on the plaintiff to inform that he is being terminated at the end of he period of notice.
A mere calculation of these dates of issuance of notice and termination of employment would alearly indicate that a period of one month before issuing the termination order had not elapsed.
The learned Additional District Judge considered this aspect and found it as a matter of fact that termination notice was short by two days of completion of one month's notice.
The learned Additional District Judge relied on a ruling reported in 1974(2) SLR 224 Shri Ram Lal Sharma v. State of Himachal Pradesh and concluded that though the appointment of the plaintiff was temporary in nature, he was nonetheless entitled to proper notice before his services could be terminated as per the terms of appointment order.
I have gone through that ruling and find that the observations made in that ruling on the basis of facts therein would squarely apply to the facts of the present case.
I, therefore, find nothing illegal or wrong in the approach and conclusion arrived at by the Additional District Judge, Hissar.
9.
It may also be noted that as per submissions made by the Counsel for the respondent, the plaintiff-respondent is reinstated in the service soon after the judgment pased by the Additional District Judge, and since then till today he is continuing in the employment.
This is an additional factor to prevail upon me to conclude that no useful purpose now would be served by simply dilating on the academic aspect.
I, therefore, find no substance in this appeal.
Hence it is dismissed with costs.