RP Sethi, J (Oral) - On the basis of seniority list filed with the petition as Annexure P-1, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of appropriate direction to the respondents to consider his case for promotion as Clerk from the date respondent No. 4 who was admittedly junior to him was promoted as Clerk.
2.
In their reply, the respondents have justified the action of promotion of respondent No. 4, on the basis of Court order passed in C.W.P.
No. 2905 of 1992 decided on 9111992.
In that case respondent No. 4 had prayed for issuance of appropriate directions for his promotion and the Court disposed of his writ petition by holding:-  "The petitioner joined the post of Cycle Dak Runner, a class IV post, on 19th April, 1978.
At the time of joining service, he possessed the academic qualification of Higher Secondary.
Later on, during service he acquired the qualification of Bachelor of Arts.
Despite all this, he has not been considered for promotion from the post of Cycle Dak Runner to that of Clerk against the promotion quota.
In the written statement, though the factual position has been admitted, yet the impugned action is sought to be justified by pleading that the initial appointment of the petitioner as Cycle Dak Runner was not through the Employment Exchange.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the plea taken by the respondent is tenable in law.
It is wholly immaterial as to whether the original entry into service on a Class IV post was through the Employment Exchange or not.
Now, fourteen years have passed.
It is too late in the day for the respondents to deny promotion to the petitioner by taking the pleas, that the respondents committed the mistake by appointing the petitioner without the agency of Employment Exchange.
In fact, there is no such provision in the statutory rules that a person cannot be appointed otherwise than by the Employment Exchange.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Clerk against the promotion quota with effect from the date the post in the promotion quota fell due.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits flowing this promotion which benefits shall be released to the petitioner within a period of three months".
3.
A perusal of the judgment would clearly show that a direction was issued to the respondents to consider the case of the writ petitioner in that case for promotion to the post of Clerk against the promotion quota w.e.f.
the date the post in the promotion quota fell due.
Such direction envisaged the consideration of the case of the petitioner in accordance with the service rules and the provisions of law which impliedly meant the consideration of his case along the persons who were senior to him.
No direction was issued by the Court for promoting the respondent No. 4 ignoring the claim of other persons who were shown senior to him in the seniority list Annexure P-1.
It is true that the Annexure P-1 is the tentative seniority list but facts stated in it cannot be denied which sxhowed that the private-respondent was appointed as Peon on 2541978, admittedly after the petitioners were appointed to the aforesaid post.
In view of the judgment Annexure P-5, the respondents were under legal obligation to consider the case of the petitioners and others, if any, who were senior to private-respondent No. 4 for promotion to the post of Clerks.
Non-consideration of such case has taken away valuable right conferred upon the petitioners.
The petitioners have however not prayed for setting aside the order of promotion of respondent No. 4, and have prayed for only consideration of their cases from the date of aforesaid respondents were promoted upon existence of vacancy of clerk within its ambit.
4.
Under the circumstances, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Clerk along with other seniors, if any, against the promotion quota with effect from the date respondent No. 4 was promoted.
Appropriate order shall be passed within a period of three months.
Ordered accordingly.