THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed to quash the letter of the Chief Secretary dated 1751995 vide Annexure P-5 and the consequential order dated 21111995 vide Annexure P-6 reverting the petitioner from the post of Deputy Superintendent to the post of Assistant.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the office of Engineer-in- Chief, Haryana PWD (B&R) on the basis of the his selection by the Haryana Subordinate Service Selection Board.
The petitioner being a Backward class candidate claims that he is entitled to be promoted as Deputy Superintendent against the promotion quota for Backward Classes which was raised from 5 per cent to 10 per cent on 18.9.1979.
According to the petitioner roster points at 10, 16, 22, 32, 46, 56, 70, 76, 86, and 96 have been reserved for promotion of Backward Class employees and it is the further case of the petitioner that he has been promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent against the reserved vacancy at point No. 10 on 9111993.
Thereafter one Shri Som Nath Arora, 3rd respondent made a representation against the promotion of the petitioner.
Thereafter the 2nd respondent sought a clarification from the Chief Secretary.
By the impugned letter (Annexure P-6), the Chief Secretary clarified that where total posts are seven in a cadre, then Backward Class category employees cannot be granted the benefit of reservation because in this way the reservation percentage of Backward Backward Class category would exist more than 14 per cent whereas the reservation percentage of Backward Class category has been fixed at 10 per cent.
Challenging this letter of the Chief Secretary, the petitioner filed the present writ petition for quashing the same.
Subsequently, an order dated 21111995 was passed by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, PWD (B&R) vide Annexure P-7 reverting the petitioner from the post of Deputy Superintendent to the post of Assistant.
On the basis of the clarification issued by the Chief Secretary vide Annexure P-6, the petitioner is also claiming the relief for quashing of Annexure P-7.
3.
There is no dispute that there are only 7 posts of Deputy Superintendents available in the office of the 2nd respondent.
According to the order (Annexure P-7) when the total posts are 7 in a cadre, there cannot be any reservation for promotion amongst the Backward Class employees, but this view does not appear to be correct.
For the purpose of providing reservation, where number of posts is less, roster system has been introduced.
10 vacancies have been taken as a unit and all the reservation points for the Backward Classes and Scheduled Tribes have been fixed in the roster consisting of 100 vacancies.
Admittedly, in the roster of 100 vacancies taken as a unit, the roster points at 10, 16, 22, 32, 46, 56, 70, 76, 86 and 96 have been reserved for filling up from amongst the Backward Class candidates.
Thus 10 per cent quota will be fulfilled when roster of 100 vacancies will be completed.
When 7 posts are created at the initial stage, no Backward Class candidate will be entitled to promotion at that stage.
Thereafter if any vacancy exists either due to retirement of the persons already working or increase of strength or any vacancy arises for any other reason, then 10th vacancy in the roster may be filled up by the Backward Class candidates from amongst the Assistants.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that when there are 7 posts, no Assistant belonging to Backward Class category should be promoted and reservation policy is not applicable.
The very purpose of introducing the roster point is to take 100 vacancies as a unit and promote the Backward Class employees in those vacancies of 100 which arise from time to time.
Thus, it is clear that while filling up the posts, it is the vacancies which have to be taken into consideration and these vacancies have to be filled up according to the roster points.
In this view of the matter, I am fortified by the decision of the Apex Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 4224-25 of 1994 and Batch.
The learned Counsel for the respondents relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : 1995(2) SCC 745, but I am of the view that the said decision does not lay down the law differently.
It is pertinent to refer to the following observations in the said decision of the Supreme Court :-  "When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve categories and the candidates belonging to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserved posts.
On the other hand the reserve category candidates can compete for the non- reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India permits the State Government to make any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the Services under the State.
It is, therefore, incumbent on the State Government to reach a conclusion that the Backward Classes for which the reservation is made is not adequately represented in the State Services.
While doing so, the State Government may take the total population of a particular Backward Class and its representation in the State Services.
When the State Government after doing the necessary exercise makes the reservation and provides the extent of percentage of posts to be reserved for the said Backward Class then the percentage has to be followed strictly.
The prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply because some of the members of the Backward Class have already been appointed/promoted against the general seats.
As mentioned above, the roster point which is reserved for a Backward Class has to be filled by way of appointment/promotion of the members of the said class.
No general category candidate can be appointed against a slot in the roster which is reserved for the Backward Class.
The fact that considerable number of members of a Backward Class have been appointed/promoted against the general seats in the State Services may be a relevant factor for the State Government to review the question of continuing reservation for the said class, but so long as the instructions/rules providing certain percentage of reservation for the Backward Classes are operative the same have to be followed.
Despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the Backward Classes against the general category posts the given percentage has to be provided in addition.
We, therefore, see no force in the first contention raised by the learned Counsel and reject the same.
We see considerable force in the second contention raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
The reservations provided under the impugned Government instructions are to be operated in accordance with the roster to be maintained in each Department.
The roster is implemented in the form of running account from year to year.
The purpose of "running account" is to make sure that the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes get their percentage of reserved posts.
The concept of "running account" in the impugned instructions has to be so interpreted that it does not result in excessive reservation.
'6% of the posts are reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
In a lot of 100 posts those falling a Serial Numbers, 1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80, 87 and 91 have been reserved and earmarked in the roster for the Scheduled Castes.
Roster points 26 and 76 are reserved for the members of Backward Classes.
It is thus obvious that when recruitment to a cadre starts then 14 posts earmarked in the roster are to be filled from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes.
To illustrate, first post in a cadre must go to the Scheduled Castes and thereafter the said class is entitled to 7th, 15th, 22nd and onwards upto 91st posts.
When the total number of posts in a cadre are filled by the operation of the roster then the result envisaged by the impugned instructions is achieved.
In other words, in a cadre of 100 posts when the posts earmarked in the roster for the Scheduled Castes and the Backward Classes are filled the percentage of reservation provided for the reserved categories is achieved.
We see no justification to operate the roster thereafter.
The "running account" is to operate only till the quota provided under the impugned instructions is reached and not thereafter.
Once the prescribed percentage of posts is filled the numerical test of adequacy is satisfied and thereafter the roster does not survive.
The percentage of reservation is the desired representation of the Backward Classes in the State Services and is consistent with the demographic estimate based on proportion worked out in relation of their population.
The numerical quota of posts is not shifting boundary, but represents a figure with due application of mind.
Therefore, the only way to assure equality of opportunity to the Backward classes and the general category is to permit the roster to operate till the time the respective appointees/promotees occupy the posts meant for them in the roster.
The operation of the roster and the "running account" must come to an end thereafter.
The vacancies arising in the cadre after the initial posts are filled, will pose no difficulty.
As and when there is a vacancy, whether permanent or temporary in a particular post, the same has to be filled from amongst the category to which the post belonged in the roster.
For example, when the Scheduled Caste persons holding the posts at roster points 1, 7, 15 retire then these slots are to be filled from amongst the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes.
Similarly, if the persons holding the post at points 8 to 14 or 23 to 29 retire then these slots are to be filled from among the general category.
By following this procedure, there shall neither be shortfall nor excess in the percentage of reservation."
Thus it is clear that the candidates belonging to the Backward Classes shall be appointed/promoted against the vacancies reserved for them in the roster.
4.
In Union of India v. Virpal Singh Chauhan etc., 1995(4) SCT 695(SC) : AIR 1996 SC 448, the Supreme Court summarised the finding as follows :-  "(i) Once the number of posts reserved for being filled by reserved category candidates in a cadre, category or grade (unit for application of rule of reservation) are filled by the operation of roster, the object of rule of reservation should be deemed to have been achieved and thereafter the roster cannot be followed except to the extent indicated in para 5 of RK Sabharwal.
While determining the said number, the candidates belonging to the reserved category but selected/promoted on their own merit (and not be virtue of rule of reservation) shall not be counted as reserved category candidate.
(ii) The percentage of reservation has to be worked out in relation to number of posts in a particular cadre, class, category or grade (unit for the purpose of applying the rule of reservation) and not with respect to vacancies."
In this view of the matter, there is no dispute about the fact that the petitioner was promoted at roster point No. 10.
It is not the case of the respondents that all the roster points in the unit of 100 have been filled up and there is no other vacancy.
Admittedly, the first vacancy is at roster point No. 10 and the petitioner is the senior-most among the reserved Backward Class category candidates.
I, therefore, do not find any justification in the stand of the respondents that when total posts are seven in a cadre, then Backward Class category employees cannot be granted the benefit of reservation.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the letter of the Chief Secretary dated 1751995 and the consequential order of the Engineer-in-Chief dated 21111995 are liable to be quashed.
Accordingly, I quash the letter of the Chief Secretary bearing No. 22/58/94-3GS III dated 1751995 vide Annexure P-6 and the consequential order of the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, PWD (B&R) bearing No. 899/CII dated 21111995 vide Annexure P-7.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.