GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed with the following prayers :-  (i) to produce the complete records of the case; (ii) declaring that the petitioners are the employees of the Punjab Roadways and Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, and quashing Annexure P-1; (iii) declaring that the petitioners cannot be transferred unless all benefits as available to the employees of the Punjab Roadways are given to them; (iv) declaring that the petitioners are entitled to all the consequential reliefs flowing from the rules governing the employees of the Punjab Roadways; (v) this Hon'ble Court may also grant all the consequential reliefs in the nature of pension, bonus etc. and the arrears thereto; (vi) this Hon'ble Court may also pass any other order which it may deem just and fit in the circumstances of the case; (vii) the filing of the originals of annexures be dispensed with; (viii) the service of the writ petition in advance on the respondents be dispensed with; (ix) It is further prayed that pending the disposal of this writ petition, the respondents be restrained from permanently absorbing the petitioners as employees of respondent No. 3 and directing respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to treat the petitioners as their employees; (x) the costs of this writ petition may also be awarded to the petitioners.
2.
The record of the case shows that the petitioners were employees of the Punjab Roadways and were holding the posts of Conductors, Drivers, Mechanics, Inspectors and Clerks etc. On the basis of a policy decision taken by the Government in the year 1979-80 to transfer various bus routes to the Municipal Corporations of Ludhiana, Jalandhar and Amritsar, the buses of the Punjab Roadways were handed over to the Municipal Corporations along with the employees.
It is in this manner that the petitioners were transferred to the service of the Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar.
The petitioners say that despite their transfer to service of the Municipal Corporation, they continued to retain their lien in the services of the Punjab Roadways and have a right to be repatriated to their department because they do not want to continue in the service of the Municipal Corporation.
3.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the Government has reversed its policy and re-transferred the bus routes to the Punjab Roadways.
In an earlier litigation which went upto the Supreme Court, their Lordships directed re-absorption of 73 erstwhile employees of the Punjab Roadways.
While deciding the Civil Appeal No. 1219 of 1984 (State of Punjab and others v. Avtar Singh and others) on 311989, their Lordships directed that on retransfer to the Punjab Roadways, the employee concerned shall be assigned seniority which they originally held before their transfer to the Corporation.
4.
Today, Mrs. Tuli produced before the Court a copy of the letter dated 2791995 written to her by the Administrative Officer in the office of the Director, State Transport Punjab, Chandigarh, indicating that all the petitioners have been re-absorbed in the Punjab Roadways.
5.
In view of this development, the main relief claimed by the petitioners has been rendered infructuous and the writ petition now deserves to be disposed of with a direction that the petitioners shall be assigned seniority which they had originally enjoyed before transfer of their service to the Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar.
Ordered accordingly,  6.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Ordered accordingly.