Paritosh K Mukherjee, J - The writ petition can, itself, be disposed of since the plea taken by the petitioner is that the respondent No. 3 being Regional Director, Social Forestry, Vrij Bhumi, who has disposed of the representation of the petitioner, on the basis of earlier order passed by this Court, was not the competent authority.
2.
The plea taken in the impugned order, dated February 3, 1995, in my view, cannot be justified, as in the present case, the petitioner has been working for the last 9 years "without any break", as a Class III employee in the Forest Department.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the decision of this Court in the case of Prakash Narain Sirothiya v. State of UP, (1994) 3 UPLBEC 1737.
This was a case decided by Hon'ble Mr. Justice SK Keshote, wherein it has been held that claim of regularisation and equal pay for equal work by daily wages employees should be considered and their services should be regularised.
There are catena of decisions on this point.
See Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879.
Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD, AIR 1986 SC 584 : AIR 1986 SC 431.
4.
Learned Standing Counsel submitted that because of new policy being introduced for abolition of posts, and merger of Class III posts into Class IV posts, the petitioner has no right to remain in service.
5.
Having heard the rival submissions, I am of the view that the plea taken by respondents in the impugned order, by not allowing the petitioner to remain in service, cannot be justified in view of aforementioned decisions of Apex Court, as well as this Court, and in view of the fact that the petitioner has rendered service without any break for 9 years.
The plea that has been taken by the authorities regarding abolition of posts or merger of 9 posts is unsustainable.
6.
As the plea is taken in the impugned order that relevant authority is respondent No. 1, and not the respondent No. 3, as such respondent No. 2 is directed to consider the case of the petitioner within two months from the date of production of a certified copy of this order together with a copy of the writ petition, which may be treated as representation.
7.
In the meantime, the respondent authorities are restrained from dispensing with the services of the petitioner, who is discharging his duties till date i.e. 831995 and they also pay salary to the petitioner till final disposal of the petition, or the representation by respondent No. 2.
In case the respondent No. 2 is not inclined to regularise the services of the petitioner, he is required to give specific reason in support thereof so that the petitioner may be able to ventilate his grievances at subsequent stage.
Till disposal of the representation of the petitioner, the impugned order will not be given effect to.
With the aforesaid direction, the writ petition is finally disposed of.
Order accordingly.