Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner in this writ petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned order Annexure P-2 dated 30101995 whereby the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement from Government service has been declined.
He has also prayed for directions to the respondent-State to allow him to retire voluntarily from service forthwith.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as Sub Divisional Engineer on 13121969 and was further promoted as Executive Engineer on 3091976.
In October, 1978, he was reverted due to non- availability of vacancy and he was again promoted to the post of Executive Engineer in 1979 and since then he is continuing as such.
3.
On 181995, after completion of more than 25 years of service, the petitioner sought voluntary retirement in terms of Rules 5.32 (b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume II vide his request dated 181995, copy Annexure P-1.
However, the said request was turned down vide order dated 30101995, copy Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
The petitioner again represented and request was made to re-consider the order dated 30101995.
He also gave undertaking to the effect that he will not withdraw any amount accruable to him till the enquiry cases pending against him are finally settled.
The petitioner is also stated to have given a surety of a permanent Government employee of the rank of Executive Engineer.
The representation was made on 31101995, copy Annexure P-3 to the writ petition and reminder is dated 631996, copy Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
4.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the Engineer-in-Chief recommended his case which was further recommended by the Secretary and Minister concerned.
However, it has again been rejected at the level of the Chief Minister, Haryana though the petitioner has not been communicated the decision.
The instructions on the subject relied upon by the petitioner are dated 181980, copy Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
5.
The claim of the petitioner has been hotly contested by the State and it has inter alia been averred that though after completion of 20 years' qualifying service, the Government employee is entitled to seek voluntary retirement in terms of Policy instructions dated 181980, copy Annesure P-5, however, the competent authority has to consider the notice for voluntary retirement on the basis of provisions of para 2(vi) of the said instructions.
Since there are number of disciplinary/enquiry cases pending against the petitioner, so the competent authority took a decision not to grant the voluntary retirement to him and the decision was rightly communicated to him vide impugned order dated 31101995, copy Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
It has also been averred by the respondent that some of the disciplinary cases pending against the petitioner are of very serious nature and there is every likelihood of imposition of major punishment upon him.
So his request for seeking voluntary retirement cannot be accepted and there was no ground to review the orders passed by the Competent Authority earlier.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book minutely.
7.
Undisputedly there is a provision for seeking voluntary retirement on completion of 20 years qualifying service by a Government employee.
However, the said request is not acceptable automatically and requires the acceptance by the appointing authority both in terms of Rule 5.32(b)(2) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II as well as in terms of Para 2(vi) of the policy decision of the State as contained in letter dated 181980, copy Annexure P- 5.
Rules 5.32(b)(1) and (2) of the rules (supra) and Para 2(vi) of the policy instructions are reproduced as under :-  "532(b)(i) At any time a Government employee has completed twenty years' qualifying service, he may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appointing authority, retire from service.
However, a Government employee may make a request in writing to the appointing authority to accept notice of less than three months giving reasons thereof.
On receipt of a request, the appointing authority may consider such request for curtailment of the period of notice of three months on merits and if the same is satisfied that the curtailment of the period of notice will not cause any administrative inconvenience, the appointing authority may relax the requirement of notice of three months on the condition that the Government employee shall not apply for commutation of a part of his pension before the expiry of the period of notice of three months.
(2) The notice of voluntary retirement given under sub-rule (1) shall require acceptance by the appointing authority subject to Rule 22 of the Punjab CSR Volume II.
Provided that where the appointing authority does not refuse to grant the permission for retirement before the expiry of the period specified in sub-rule (1) supra, the retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry of the said period; Provided further that before a Government employee gives notice of voluntary retirement with reference to sub-rule (1) he should satisfy himself by means of a reference to the appropriate authority that he has, in fact, completed twenty years service qualifying for pension".
(Emphasis supplied) Para 2(vi) of Policy Instructions :  2(vi) A notice of voluntary retirement, given after completion of 20 years qualifying service will require acceptance by the appropriate authority, if the date of retirement, on the expiry of the notice would be earlier than the date on which the Government employee concerned could have retired from service under Clause (d) of Rule 326 of the Punjab CSR Volume I, voluntarily.
Such acceptance may be generally given in all cases except those (a) on which disciplinary proceedings are pending or contemplated against the Government employee concerned for the imposition of a major penalty and the disciplinary authority having organised to the circumstances of the case, is of the view that the imposition of the penalty of removal or dismissal from service would be warranted in the case; or (b) In which prosecution is contemplated or may have been launched in a Court of law against the Government employee concerned.
If it is proposed to accept the notice of voluntary retirement even in such cases, approval of the Minister-in-charge should be obtained in regard to Class I and Class II Government employees and that of the Head of the Department in the cases of Class III and Class IV employees.
8.
Thus, in terms of Statutory Rules as well as executive instructions acceptance of notice for voluntary retirement has been left upto the competent authority and it is not automatically that once the notice for voluntary retirement is submitted, it is deemed to be accepted.
9.
The petitioner has himself relied upon the Rule 5.32 and instructions Annexure P-5 (supra) and he cannot claim the relief over and above the said rules and instructions.
10.
It is also admitted case of the parties that number of disciplinary cases are pending against the petitioner involving huge amount of alleged loss to the Government running into lacs of rupees.
It is under these circumstances, the competent authority after taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances of the pendency of the disciplinary cases against him took the decision not to accept the notice for voluntary retirement.
11.
It was also argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner wants to contest the election for Legislative Assembly of Haryana, for which the last date for filing the nomination papers is 341996.
He also relied upon the case of one Sh. AK Chaudhary, Sub Divisional Engineer, whose resignation was allegedly accepted despite pendency of the disciplinary proceedings against him.
12.
It is patent on the record that in the notice for voluntary retirement dated 181995, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, no such ground of contesting of Assembly election was taken by the petitioner and the decision of the competent authority was even prior to the issuance of notification for assembly elections.
Moreover the Government employee cannot seek election to the State Assembly so long he is in service.
The ground of contesting the said Assembly election appears to be an after-thought only with a view to get rid of disciplinary cases pending against him.
The petitioner has failed even to disclose the name of the Constituency from which he wants to contest the election and even otherwise no such claim was lodged by him before the competent authority.
13.
So far the case of one Mr. AK Chaudhary, S.D.E.
as relied upon by the petitioner is concerned, there are no details of the said case before us.
Moreover, the State has distinguished that case on the ground that Mr. Chaudhary had resigned his post without any liability of the State whereas in the cases of voluntary retirement, the Government has to bear liability of retrial benefits.
Thus, the case of Mr. Chaudhary is of no help to the petitioner.
14.
There is no force in the plea of the petitioner that he would not claim any retiral benefits till the finalisation of the disciplinary cases and would also furnish surety etc.
It is well settled that no recovery can be effected from the GP Fund.
No cut in pension of a Government employee can be imposed except by way of punishment.
So there would be no estoppel against an employee because such an undertaking runs counter to the Rules.
15.
It is well settled that acceptance of a notice for voluntary retirement or otherwise is the duty of the executive and it is only by way of judicial review that the Court can lift the veil and grant indulgence in cases of mala fides or otherwise deserving ones.
16.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the present case, this Court is of the view that no case has been made out by the petitioner for judicial review of the action taken by the competent authority particularly when admittedly the action of the State is within four corners of the rules and instructions and the petitioner has himself admitted the pendency of number of cases against him and there are no mala fides against any functionary of the State.
17.
For the reasons stated above, we do not find any merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed accordingly.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.