GS Singhvi, J - Shri Boota Ram had filed this petition on 18111986 with a prayer that the respondents be directed to pay him interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the amount of arrears of pension and gratuity w.e.f 111980.
During the pendency of the writ petition, Shri Boota Ram died and, therefore, his legal representatives have been allowed to be brought on record.
2.
Late Shri Boota Ram retired from service on 31121979 while holding the post of Tehsildar (Sales) in the Rehabilitation Department of the State of Punjab.
Before his retirement, a case under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him on 17.1.1979.
He was prosecuted in the Court of Special Judge, Gurdaspur.
Vide his judgment dated 1191982, the Special Judge, Gurdaspur acquitted late Shri Boota Ram by giving him benefit of doubt.
3.
Due to pendency of the criminal case, retiral benefits payable to late Shri Boota Ram were withheld except the provisional pension which was sanctioned to him by the Financial Commissioner, Punjab on 19111981.
After his acquittal, Shri Boota Ram represented to the Government for payment of full pension and other post-retirement benefits.
It took almost four years to the respondents to pay the arrears of pension and gratuity to late Shri Boota Ram.
For this delayed payment, the petitioners have prayed for award of interest.
4.
In the written statement, the respondents have not denied the fact that late Shri Boota Ram was acquitted by the Court of Special Judge, Gurdaspur.
According to them, payment of gratuity was withheld in terms of Rule 22(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules and that all the dues payable to Shri Boota Ram have been released after his acquittal.
The respondents have pleaded that remaining amount of pension and gratuity was not paid to Shri Boota Ram due to pendency of the criminal case and also due to the pendency of case with the Vigilance Department of the Government.
A final report is said to have been submitted by the Vigilance Department sometime in the year 1985 and thereafter, the remaining amount of pension as well as gratuity was released on 311986 and 1611986 respectively.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record of the case.
6.
Under Rule 22(b) read with Rule 22(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, an employee who is facing a departmental enquiry or judicial proceedings at the time of retirement, is not entitled to be paid full pension.
Even in a case where the employee has retired, the Government is vested with a power to start proceedings under rule 22 (b).
In either of these cases, the Government servant has a limited right to receive provisional pension.
In terms of Rule 22(c), gratuity is not payable to an employee who is facing departmental enquiry or judicial proceedings.
Therefore, in view of the fact that Shri Boota Ram was being prosecuted in the Court of Special Judge, Gurdaspur for an offence under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and Section 161 of the Indian Penal Code, the respondents were justified in not paying him full pension and also in withholding his gratuity.
However, after his acquittal, there remained no justification for not paying the remaining pension and gratuity to late Shri Boota Ram.
The mere fact that the respondents were considering the possibility of initiation of departmental proceedings against Shri Boota Ram cannot be treated as a legal justification for withholding the amount of pension and gratuity.
The vigilance enquiry, if any, pending with the Government can, at the best, be treated as preliminary enquiry and not departmental enquiry as envisaged under Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules and, therefore, the pendency of the vigilance case with the departmental authorities could not be made a ground for denying the benefits which became payable to Shri Boota Ram immediately after his acquittal on 1191982.
7.
The pension and gratuity payable to an employee has been recognised as his property right by the Apex Court in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1971 SC 1409.
This view has been reiterated in State of Kerala and others v. MP Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356.
Although the property is no more recognised as a fundamental right of a citizen by virtue of Article 31-C of the Constitution of India the citizen is entitled to have his property protected against unlawful action of the State.
Therefore, even after 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, no person can be deprived of his property except by due process of law.
In this case, the withholding of remaining amount of pension payable to late Shri Boota Ram and amount of gratuity after 1191982 does not have any sanction of law and therefore, it must be held that late Shri Boota Ram had been deprived of his property without the authority of law.
For such denial, late Shri Boota Ram was entitled to be compensated by award of interest.
In my opinion, the ends of justice would be met by directing the respondents to pay interest to the legal heirs of late Shri Boota Ram with effect from the date of expiry of two months calculated from 1191982 i.e. the date on which late Shri Boota Ram was acquitted by the learned Special Judge, Gurdaspur.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay the legal representative of late Shri Boota Ram interest at the rate of 12% per annum with effect from 10.11.1982 to the date of the actual payment of remaining amount of pension and gratuity.
The amount of interest shall be calculated and paid to the legal representatives of late Shri Boota Ram within three months from the date of submission of a certified copy of his order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.