MS Liberhan & ML Koul, JJ.
- The merit is the pole star for admission in the professional colleges.
Precedently it has come to stand, keeping in view the different standards of different colleges and Universities wherefrom the candidates pass the qualifying examinations.
Candidates have to take the entrance test, which is at present said to be the best mode for evaluation of their comparative merit.
Admittedly the entrance test was held for admission to the Medical Dental Courses by the Mahrishi Dayanand University without including the seats of the respondent College.
Undisputably out of total 60 seats for the Session 1995-96, 51 seats are lying vacant which have to be filled up on merit.
2.
It would be too late in the day to say that merit should be judged only on the basis of marks secured by the students in the eligibility examination and no entrance test should be held as would delay the commencement of the course.
3.
In our view, in the facts and circumstances stated above holding of entrance test would be the best mode to test the comparative merit of the students for admission to the course, particularly when students are and would be similarly situated.
Commencement of the course is already belated.
Thus efflux of time for 1995-96 Session is of no relevance at this stage; keeping the peculiar situation in the case in hand belated commencement of the course would be the same for all the students to be admitted for the Colleges for the Session 1995-96 irrespective of the fact whether admission is made on the basis of merit determined on the basis of marks secured in the qualifying examination or on the basis of entrance test.
Delay of few days would not result in irreparable loss in studies as the examinations are to be held only after the students have undergone a particular course in accordance with the rules and Regulations of the University.
Even the admission made on the basis of merit eligibility examination would suffer from the same fault i.e. part of the Session is already over as put by the counsel for the petitioners.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in C.W.P.
No. 350 of 1993 decided on 1181995 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court while directing the Karnataka Government to admit the students against 15 per cent quota meant for open seats on the basis of merit in eligibility qualifying examination.
The judgment cited is not pari materia with facts of the case in hand.
Firstly, it does not lay down as a law that for belated admission only mode to test the merit would be only from the marks secured in the eligibility examination.
Secondly, the order was passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court keeping in view the facts and circumstances of that case i.e. where admission was to be in the class where 85 per cent students have already commenced their studies and session was already in progress.
Herein whole class still has to commence their studies rather admissions to the whole class has still to be made.
Thus the interim order was passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case where admission is to be made against 15 per cent seats only.
On the case in hand, all the seats are lying vacant and the entrance test was not held along with the Common Entrance Test held in July, 1995, by the Mahrishi Dayanand University for admission to the Dental College where the petitioners are now seeking admission.
5.
In our view, in totality of facts and circumstances, the ends of justice would be fully met if respondent No. 3 is directed to hold the entrance test within 30 days, by giving an advertisement inviting applications within a week in daily English Newspapers regionally as well as nationally.
We order accordingly.
Copy of the order be given dasti.
This writ petition is disposed of.