GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - Selection made by respondent No. 3 for appointment to the costs of Junior Engineer (Civil) in P.W.D.
Public Health, Department of Haryana Government in pursuance of advertisement Annexure P-1 is under challenge in this petition.
2.
The first ground of challenge is that the Selection Board has committed an illegality in interviewing the candidates for a period of three minutes only and that when whole selection is based on interview sufficient time should have been given to the candidates for the purpose of interview.
Second ground of challenge is that the selection has been made on the basis of an unspecified criteria and last one is that the Board has acted in an arbitrary manner while making selection.
3.
In our opinion the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the short ground that the petitioner has not impleaded those persons as party- respondents to the writ petition who have been selected and appointed on the recommendations of respondent No. 3.
In the absence of these candidates it is neither possible nor justified for this Court to make any enquiry regarding validity of selection or the action taken by the competent authority on the recommendations of the Selection Board.
4.
The principles of natural justice which are required to be followed even by administrative and quasi-judicial authorities are binding on this Court while making adjudication of the claim made in the petition.
Ordinarily this Court cannot pass any order prejudicially affecting the rights of the persons who are not parties to the proceedings in the writ petition.
5.
Even on merits, we find that the criteria adopted by respondent No. 3 was not arbitrary or unreasonable.
Mr. Surya Kant has placed before us the details of distribution of the marks under the various heads namely, qualifications, essential qualifications, higher qualifications, experience sports, curricular activities and viva voce.
Only 20 marks were earmarked for viva voce out of 100.
The said criteria of ear-marking 20 marks for viva voce in our considered view cannot be said to be illegal or arbitrary.
Reliance in this respect can be placed on the authorities of the Apex Court in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, 1981(2) S.L.R.
56 and Mr. Abid Asghar v. State of Bihar and others, 1993(5) S.L.R.
799.
6.
In our opinion the writ petition is without substance and deserves to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition dismissed.