TS Doabia, J - The brief facts for the purpose of this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India be noticed as under :  2.
According to the respondent-Bank the petitioner No.2 was working on part time basis and was getting one half salary.
(There is dispute regarding this.
The petitioners submit that the petitioner No.2 was working on full time wages.
For this reliance is being placed on Annex-P/5).
Vide Annexure R/1 the petitioner No.2 was posted at Aswal Branch of the Bank.
The petitioner No.2 joined at Aswal Branch and is working there.
He wants to stay on at Aswal.
It be further seen that as per the Bank, one Babulal was working at the above branch at Aswal.
He was transferred at his request to Turari in the district of Gwalior.
Later on he withdraw his request and he wanted to remain at Aswal.
The counsel for the Bank submits that as the request transfer of Babulal to Turari was withdrawn he was re-posted at Aswal.
This led to the transfer of the petitioner No.2 from aswal to a place known as Semai.
A vacancy had arisen at Semai as one RR Shirke has transferred to Turari.
This was again a request transfer.
The petitioner No.2 was accordingly shifted from Aswal to Semai.
This transfer from Aswal to Semai is being challenged in this petition on the following grounds :-  (i) That as per the transfer policy (Annexure P-7) a member of the sub-staff has to be transferred from one branch to another in the same city.
Relevant para.
33. be noticed.
It reads as under :-  "33 Sub-staff Regional Office should ensure that wherever at a place, the Bank has got more than one branch/office, the sub-staff are rotated from one branch/office to another branch/office.
to start with, sub-staff who have completed more than 5 years of stay at a particular branch/office may be transferred to another branch/office in the same capacity i.e. a Deftary working in a branch/office 'X' may be transferred as Deftary in 'Y' branch/office at the same station".
(ii) Reliance is also placed on Paragraph 536 of the Sastry Award.
This reads as under :-  536.
"We direct that in general the policy should be to limit the transfers to the minimum consistent with banking needs and efficiency.
So far as members of the subordinate establishment are concerned there should be no transfers ordinarily and if there are any transfers at all they should not be beyond the language area of the person so transferred.
We further direct that even in the case of workmen not belonging to the subordinate staff, as far as possible there should be no transfer outside the State or the language areas in which an employee has been serving except, of course, with his consent.
In all cases the number of transfers to which a workman is subject should be strictly limited and normally it should not be more then once in a year.
We are unable to accept the demand that residential accommodation should be provided by the bank at the new station.
The demand for a special house allowance is also rejected."
(iii) The further argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that even if it is presumed that the transfer to Aswal was good then there cannot be a second transfer.
Thus the transfer to Semai is being assailed on this additional ground also.
(iv) The further argument raised by the counsel for the petitioner is that the option exercised by Babulal cannot be permitted to be withdrawn.
3.
The stand taken by the Bank is that the initial movement from Gwalior (Sikandar Kampu) was not a transfer but was a posting order on promotion, the petitioner having been appointed in a regular grade.
According to the Bank, the petitioner No.2 has now been placed in the scale of Rs.815-1520.
It is, however, submitted that the Babulal had withdrawn his option, there was no option but to transfer the petitioner to Semai.
4.
As has been consistently held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court, transfer in a Government service is an ordinary concomitant and incident of service, an employee who is appointed in a particular cadre of transferable posts his transfer from one place to another is an ordinary incident of service and it does not result in alteration of any conditions of service to his disadvantage.
The transfer is a normal feature in service and no one has a right to remain at a particular post or for a particular period.
The norms or the policy is for the guidance of the officers authorised to effect and regulate the transfers.
Immunity against transfers would amount to gagging the right of the administration to administer and right of the employer to get work at the time and place of his choice and according to the administrative exigencies of the employer, which he wants to meet.
The above observation find support from a decision of Supreme Court of India reported as R Varadha Rao v. State of Karnataka and others, (1986) 4 SCC 131.
5.
Again in Bank of India v. Jagjit Singh Mehta, 1992(1) SCT 161 (SC) : (1992) 1 SCC 306 it was observed :-  "There can be no doubt that ordinarily and as far as practicable the husband and wife who are both employed should be posted at the same station even if their employers be different.
The desirability of such a course is obvious.
However, this does not mean that their place of posting should invariably be one of their choice, even though the preference may be taken into account while making the decision in accordance with the administrative needs.
In the case of all-India services, the hardship resulting from the two being posted at different stations may be unavoidable at times particularly when they belong to different service and one of them cannot be transferred to the place of the other's posting.
While choosing the career and a particular service, the couple have to bear in mind this factor and be prepared to face such a hardship if the administrative needs and transfer policy do not permit the posting of both at one place without sacrifice of the requirements of the administration and needs of other employees.
In such a case the couple have to make their choice at the threshold between career prospects and family life.
After giving preference to the career prospects by accepting such a promotion or any appointment in an all-India service with the incident of transfer to any place in India, subordinating the need of the couple living together at one station, they cannot as of right claim to be relieved of the ordinary incidents of all-India service and avoid transfer to a different place on the ground that the spouses thereby would be posted at different places... No doubt the guidelines require the two spouses to be posted at one place as far as practicable, but that does not enable any spouse to claim such a posting as of right if the departmental authorities do not consider it feasible.
The only thing required is that the departmental authorities should consider this aspect along with the exigencies of administration and enable the two spouses to live together at one station if it is possible without any detriment to the administrative needs and the claim of other employees."
6.
Again in Union of India v. SL Abbas, (1993)4 SCC 357 : 1995(4) S.C.T.
455 it was held that executive instructions dealing with transfers are in the nature of guidelines only.
7.
The policy of transfer contained in the Sastri Award on the question of transfer came up for consideration before the Supreme Court of India in Canara Banking Corporation.
Ltd. v. Vittal, 1963 Labour Law Journal.II S.C. 353. wherein it was observed as follows :  "In our opinion, there is considerable in force both these contentions.
It will be noticed that in making the directions as regard the transfer of workmen the Sastri Award drew a distinction between workmen belonging to the subordinate staff and others.
As regards members of the subordinate staff, the direction was to the effect that there should be no transfers ordinarily and there was absolute prohibition against transfers beyond the language area of the persons concerned.
The words used for the purpose are"... if there are any transfers at all, they should not be beyond the language area of the person so transferred."
As regards these "workmen the award did not say that" as far as possible transfers should not beyond the language area of the person so transfered."
It is easy to see that here the prohibition was absolute.
When they go on to consider the case of members of workman not belonging to the subordinate staff, the the tribunal however use markedly different language and preface the direction with the words "as there should be no transfer outside the state of the language area in which he is serving except of course, with his consent" by the words "as far as possible."
It is not possible to consider this direction as amounting to absolute prohibition without ignoring the words "as far as possible."
It is clear that these words were deliberately used to leave it to the banks to decide on a consideration of the necessities of its business interests whether a transfer of a workman not belonging to the subordinate staff outside State or the language area in which he had been serving could be avoided or not, and directing that where possible it should be avoided.
We are satisfied the Labour Court was in error in holding that transfers outside the State or the language area can be made only with the consent of the employees.
What the clause means is that with consent such transfers can of course be made, otherwise they should be avoided as far as possible."
8.
I find no merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that Shastri Award puts any embargo on the rights of the bank to transfer the petitioner from one place to another without his consent.
Otherwise also, reading of paragraphs 534, 535 and 536 of the Shastri Award makes it clear that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that he cannot be transferred without his consent cannot be sustained.
Penultimate result reached in the award is in paragraph 536 wherein it was observed that the policy of transfer should be limited to the minimum consistent with the Banking needs and efficiency.
It was observed that ordinarily there should be no transfer beyond the language area of the person so transferred and the number of transfers ordinarily should not be more than once in a year.
All other demands were rejected.
9.
In the present case it cannot be said that there is breach of any provision of Shastri Award or of any other policy referred to above.
First of all the posting of the petitioner at Aswal is not a transfer.
It is a posting on promotion.
The present posting from Aswal to Semai is no transfer.
This is as per the Administrative exigencies.
The transfer is within language area.
No fault can be found with this.
10.
So far as withdrawal of option by Babulal is concerned, again no fault can be found with the same.
The bank transfers an employee on the basis of a roaster prepared as per options.
Once a change comes and an employee refuses to avail of the chance, then he has no right to exercise option and exposes himself to the transfers as per policy of the Bank.
This is precisely what is the stand of the Bank.
11.
The petition is without merit and is dismissed.