Asok Kumar Chakravarty, J - The case of 117 employees having been directed by the Central Government, Industrial Tribunal, Asansol in its award dated .......... to be considered for absorption by the petitioner-company as and when such appointment would occur.
The said company has come up against with the decision challenging legality and validity of the award.
2.
The facts of the case are as follows :-  The respondents were workmen and permanent employees of Begunia Colliery owned by the Oriental Coal Company (P) Ltd., before nationalisation.
They were retrenched from service in 1964 by their erstwhile employer.
It was alleged that their employer closed down the Begunia Colliery by not working in the mine.
The Begunia Colliery was nationalised along with other coking coal mines and the collieries and they started functioning from 1974.
Immediately thereafter the respondents approached the management of the Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. for their re-employment.
Eventually they were not appointed though some of the retrenched employees along with good number of new employees were appointed.
3.
The respondents-workmen thereafter raised a dispute through their representatives.
Attempts of conciliation failed.
The matter was sent to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India and ultimately the said ministry referred the following dispute to the Tribunal for adjudication :  AWARD The Government of India in the Ministry of Labour in exercise of the powers conferred on them by Clause (d) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2A) of section 10 of the Industrial Disputes, Act, 1947, has referred the following dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication vide Ministry's Order No. L-20012 (127) 88-D.I.V.B./IR (C.II) dated the 17th July, 1990.
SCHEDULE ``Whether the management of Begunia project of M/s. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., PO Barakar, Dist.
Burdwan, was justified in denying re-employment to S/Sri Kanhaiya Bind and 114 others (Annexure-D) retrenched workmen ?
If not to what relief the concerned workmen are entitled and from what date ?''
4.
The petitioner-company's case was that the respondents cannot be said to be the retrenched employees of Begunia Colliery inasmuch as none of them continued to remain on roll of the said colliery after 1764 as they had received all retrenched benefits under Section 25-FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It was also alleged that the dispute having not been sponsored by any union or by any substantial number of workers on the roll of the colliery the dispute is not an industrial dispute and it is also not covered by Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act to make individual dispute into an industrial dispute.
It was further alleged that the respondents have no right to employment either under old Section 17 or under the amended provision of Section 17 of the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972.
5.
The Ld.
Tribunal held that under provisions of Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, any dispute between individual workmen and his employer about retrenchment etc. shall be an industrial dispute.
In respect of the availability of the benefit of the provisions of old Section 17 of the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation), Act, 1972, he held that the respondents were not entitled to the benefit of the said provisions in view of the substitution of the said section with retrospective effect.
He, however, held that the company has discriminated in favour of some of the retrenched employees of Begunia Coal Mines without giving the corresponding benefit to the respondents and that such treatment to the set of employees in preference to others is not justified from moral view point.
He accordingly directed re- employment of the respondents to future vacancies depending on their age and eligibility.
6.
The aforesaid findings of the Learned Tribunal Judge was challenged by Mr. PP Ginwalla, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-company on the ground that the respondents cannot claim to be retrenched employees of Begunia Colliery after they received compensation under Section 25-FFF on account of the closing down of the undertaking.
He also contended that there cannot be an application of Section 2-A of Industrial Disputes Act inasmuch as the respondents were not retrenched workmen of the company on the ground as stated above.
He also contended that the benefit arising out of the provisions of the old Section 17 is not available to the respondent as the said Section was substituted by its replacement by a new section which has got nothing to do with such appointment.
He lastly submitted that the tribunal could not act as a benevolent despot and since it is bound by statutory provisions it cannot act beyond statutory limits.
7.
Mr. AP Chatterjee, learned counsel for the respondent, submitted that the term `retrenchment' is wide enough to include within its ambit the services of those workmen who have been rendered jobless due to the closure of the undertaking.
He further submitted that the respondents were retrenched employees of the Begunia Colliery, which was admittedly nationalised.
Retrenched employees are also workmen as defined in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
He frankly conceded that in view of the amended provisions of Section 17, the benefit of the old Section 17 is no longer available to his clients.
The respondents, submitted Mr. Chatterjee, are entitled to re-employment under the provisions of Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
He accordingly submitted that the Learned Tribunal rightly directed the petitioner company to absorb the respondents subject to their eligibility about the age and physical fitness.
8.
Heard the submissions of the learned counsel on both sides.
Admittedly, the Begunia Colliery closed down its business on 1764 as a result of which the company had to pay the respondents compensation under Section 25-FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The question is whether the loss of job in such circumstances, shall constitute `retrenchment' in service.
The expression dismissal discharge and retrenchment connote the termination of the service of employees by an employer.
The only difference between dismissal or discharge and retrenchment seems to be that while in the former two cases the actions are taken by the employer against the employees for commission of acts of misfeasance and malfeasance while in the case of the latter the workman loses his job on account of a closure of an undertaking amounts to retrenchment.
9.
Regarding the contention that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of the provisions of Section 17, Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972.
Mr. Chatterjee frankly conceded that he agreed with the finding of the learned Tribunal that the respondents are not entitled to any benefit of the said Section 17 in view of the substituted provision of the said section which has been made applicable from the date of the promulgation of the Act.
The present Section 17 having no concern with the appointment of retrenched workmen that provision is quite irrelevant consideration in this matter.
10.
The main contention of Mr. PP Ginwalla, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that there is no industrial dispute between the parties in terms of Section 2-K of the Industrial Disputes Act, Section 2-K reads as follows :-  ``Industrial dispute'' means any dispute or difference between employer and employers or between employers and workmen or between workmen and and workmen which is connected with the employment or the non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person''.
According to Mr. Ginwalla, it is no doubt true that the respondents were employees of Begunia Colliery.
But the management of the said colliery having closed down their business in 1964, the question of the respondents being regarded as the employees of the petitioner-company, was never incorporated by nationalisation, does not and cannot arise.
What was taken over by the nationalisation of the coking coal mines, according to him, was the property of the Begunia Colliery in respect of which the respondent cannot have any claim.
It was further submitted by Ginwalla that provisions of old Section 17 of the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972, having been amended by the insertions of new Section 17, it has got nothing to do with the considerations of treating of old employees of private undertaking as employees of the petitioner-company.
The question of treating them as workmen under the petitioner-company cannot arise.
He also referred to the provisions of Section 9(1) of the said Act which reads as follows :-  ``Every liability of the owner, agent, manager or managing contractor of coking coal mine or coke oven plant, in relation to any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of such owner, agent, manager or managing contractor, as the case may be, and shall be enforceable against him and not against the Central Government or the Government Company.''
Mr. Ginwalla accordingly submitted that even in spite of the fact that property of the Begunia Colliery was nationalised by the petitioner-company still then such nationalisation did not vest the respondents with any right to claim themselves as employees of the petitioner-company.
There being thus no relationship of employer and employees between the petitioner-company and the respondents the question of considering them as dismissed or retrenched employees does not arise at all.
11.
It is in the above context that the submission of Mr. Chatterjee that the respondents are entitled to the employment as and when the vacancies arise in respect of Begunia Colliery under the petitioner-company under Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act has got to be considered.
Section 25-H of the Act reads as follows :-  ``Where any workmen are retrenched, and the employer proposes to take into his employ any person, he shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, give an opportunity to the retrenched workmen who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re-employment, and such retrenched workmen who offer themselves for re-employment shall have preference over other persons''.
On a plain reading of this section it will be at once clear that it pre- supposes re-employment of retrenched employees of any company or undertaking who have been retrenched due to surplus or when the closed unit is reopened.
In the instant case, as I have shown above, there being no scope for consideration of the respondents as the retrenched employees of the petitioner-company the benefit of the said Section 25-H shall not be available to the respondents.
12.
Thus upon careful consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case and the position of law in this matter I find that there is substantial force in the contention of Mr. Ginwalla that there being no relationship of employer and employee between the petitioner and the respondents and there being thus no scope for consideration of the respondents being treated as retrenched employees of the petitioner company, as a consequence of which there was no `industrial dispute' between the parties, that the respondents shall not be entitled to any legal relief in this matter.
LLearned Tribunal having also given to such finding, though on different reasons I find no reasons to disagree with the learned Tribunal in so far as the legal aspect of the case is concerned.
13.
Even in spite of his finding that the respondents shall not be entitled to any legal relief in this case still then the Learned Tribunal having proceeded to grant such relief of re-employment on certain conditions upon consideration of moral aspect in this matter that it is necessary for consideration how far that part of the finding is justified.
Learned Tribunal, also upon consideration of the fact that some of the retrenched employees of the Begunia Colliery having already been appointed by the petitioner company, held that by such appointment excluding the respondents the company had made discriminatory treatment against the respondents which is not permissible under the law.
14.
Mr. Ginwalla, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-company, submitted that there was no question of discrimination between different groups of retrenched employees because there was no relationship of employer and employees between the parties at any point of time.
He submitted that it is true that some of the retrenched employees of Begunia Colliery were appointed.
But they having been appointed as new recruits upon consideration of their eligibility for such appointment afresh it cannot be considered as discriminatory.
He further submitted that there is no scope for moral consideration in directing the appointment of the respondents by the petitioner-company and the tribunal clearly acted beyond his jurisdiction by issuing such direction.
According to him the only question for consideration by the tribunal was whether the respondents had the legal rights to get such appointment and since it was found in the negative by the learned Tribunal he ought not to have granted the relief to the respondents.
For this purpose he referred to the decisions in Bidi, Bidi Leaves and Tabacco Marchant Association v. State of Bombay, reported in AIR 1962 SC 486, where it was held that no doubt the powers of the tribunal are wide enough but such tribunals, being the creatures of statute cannot exercise power in excess of the statutory provisions and they cannot act as benevolent despot.
He also submitted, in this connection, that by the impugned order the Learned Tribunal has imposed a new obligation upon the petitioner-company which he is not entitled to do under the law.
He referred to the case of NMC Spinning & Weaving Company v. Textile Labour Association, reported in AIR 1961 SC 867 in support of the contention.
15.
Mr. AP Chatterjee, learned counsel for the respondents further submitted that, what the learned Tribunal meant by saying `moral aspect' of the case was actually the consideration of the question from the view point of fairplay and justice.
For this purpose he referred to the decision Cawnpore of Tannery v. S Guha, reported in AIR 1967 SC 667, wherein it was held, that surplus hands of any company should be given preference over new appointments as the principles of justice and fairplay required the same.
It appears that principles had obtained the statutory recognition in section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947.
This decision is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case because as I have shown above, the respondents cannot be treated as the retrenched workmen of the petitioner- company, they being not under the employment of the company either actually or through process of law at any point of time.
Further, the Oriental Coal Company under whom the respondents were workmen, having closed down its business in 1964 for good but the respondent employees having obtained their retrenched benefit under Section 25-FFF their re-appointment could not be justified even from the view point of justice and fairplay.
For this purpose reference may be made to the case of ACAI Society v. Workmen, reported in AIR 1962 SC 1489.
This is a case of transfer of an undertaking where the employees obtained retrenchment compensation under Section 25-FF of the Act.
In that case it was held that ``double benefit in the form of the payment of compensation and immediate re-employment cannot be said to be based on any considerations of fairplay or justice.
Fairplay and justice obviously mean fairplay and social justice to both the parties.
It would, we think, not be fair that vendor should pay compensation to his employees on the ground that the transfer brings about termination of their service and the vendee should be asked to take them back on the ground that the principles of social justice required him to do so.''
It was further held in this case that acceptance of any retrenchment compensation and claim of re-employment is inconsistent with the very basis of concept of retrenchment compensation.
They lose their claim of re-employment in the transferee undertaking on the principle of justice and fairplay.
16.
Reference to this case was made in answer to the contention of Mr. Chatterjee that justice and fairplay required their re-appointment.
The instant case, however, is entirely different.
There being no relationship of employer and employees at any point of time either in fact or by operation of law between the parties the question of application of the principles of fairplay and justice or the application of Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for directing the re-employment of the respondents does not and cannot arise.
17.
Mr. Chatterjee finally submitted that this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction should not interfere with the order passed by the learned Tribunal in this case.
This contention of Mr. Chatterjee, I am afraid, is also devoid of any substance.
The writ Court will certainly interfere where the Subordinate Tribunals Act in violation of the statutory provisions or Act in excess of the jurisdiction not vested upon them by law.
The writ Court can ill-afford to approve any order passed arbitrarily in utter violation of statutory provision causing injustice to either of the parties.
The order passed by the learned Tribunal being thus subject to judicial review the writ Court shall certainly interfere to set aside such patently unjust award.
18.
In the aforesaid circumstances, the award cannot stand and is accordingly set aside.
19.
A writ in the nature of mandamus to accordingly issue commanding the respondents from enforcing or taking any steps for enforcement of the impugned award.
There would be no order as to costs.
20.
As prayed for, xerox copies of this order be handed over to the learned Advocates for the parties on usual undertakings.
Order accordingly.