Ashok Bhan and Sat Pal, JJ.
- In this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the promotion of Rajinder Kumar Sethi, respondent No. 3, to the post of Chief Supervisor (Drilling) and has also prayed for a direction to the official respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the said post.
2.
Prior to May 11, 1993 the promotion to the post of the Chief Supervisor (Drilling) was governed by administrative instructions, contained in the letter, dated 12th September, 1977, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The relevant portion from the said instructions is reproduced herein below :-  Sr. No.
Designation of the post Academic qualifications & experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience if any, for appointment other than direct recruitments.
xx xx xx xx 20.
Chief Supervisor (Drilling) (i) B.Sc.
Agri.
Engg.
(ii) Hindi upto matric(iii) Six months experience of Mechanised cultivation private/Govt.
organisation BY PROMOTION from the Blasting Supervisors/Well Supervisors/Sectional Officers (Mechanical)/Drilling Incharge.
3.
On 11th May, 1993, rules for filling the said posts came into force and these rules were called the Haryana Subordinate Agricultural (Group `C') Services Rules, 1993.
The relevant portion for promotion to the above mentioned post under these rules is also reproduced herein below :  Sr. No.
Designation of post Academic qualification and experience if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
(B) AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING CADRE : + + + 2.
Chief Supervisor (Drilling) ... Five years' experience as Blasting Supervisor, Well Supervisor, Drilling Incharge or Sectional Officer (Civil/Mechanical).''
4.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that two posts of Chief Supervisor (Drilling) had fallen vacant before the coming into force of the rules of 1993 and against one of these posts, respondent No. 3, who was not found eligible to be considered for this post has been promoted as Chief Supervisor (Drilling) vide order, Annexure P-3, whereas the petitioner, who was eligible to be considered for the said post has not been considered.
He further, submitted that since the post had fallen vacant before coming into force the rules of 1993, the promotion to this post ought to have been made in accordance with the criteria laid down in the administrative instructions (Annexure P-1).
In support of this submission, he placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, 1983(1) SLR 789 and two judgments of this Court in Surjit Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 580 (P&H) : 1991(5) SLR 467 and Jagdish Chander v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) SCT 29 (P&H) : 1994(5) SLR 98.
5.
Mr. Verma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 submitted that respondent No. 3 prior to his promotion as Chief Supervisor (Drilling) was holding the post of Supervisor (Biogas) and the petitioner is holding the post of Section Officer (Mechanical).
He further submitted that a joint seniority list for the aforesaid posts and certain other posts is being maintained by the Department and the petitioner was much junior to respondent No. 3 in the said joint seniority list.
He, therefore, contended that the petition was devoid of any merit and should be dismissed.
6.
We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah's case (supra) and the Full court decision in the case of Jagdish Chander (supra) the promotion to the post of Chief Supervisor (Drilling) was required to be made in accordance with the guidelines laid down in the administrative instructions contained in Annexure P-1 as admittedly the post had fallen vacant prior to the coming into force of the rules of 1993.
In terms of these instructions, the post of Chief Supervisor (Drilling) could be filled up by promotion from the Blasting Supervisor/Well Supervisor/Section Officer (Mechanical)/Drilling Incharge.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner was holding the post of Section Officer (Mechanical) and possessed the requisite qualification and as such he was entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Chief Supervisor (Drilling) and on the other hand respondent No. 3, who had been promoted to the said post vide Annexure P-3 was not holding the post of Blasting Supervisor or Well Supervisor or Section Officer (Mechanical) or Drilling Incharge.
In view of this, respondent No. 3, who has holding the post of Supervisor (Biogas) was not entitled to be considered for the post of Chief Supervisor (Drilling).
The promotion of respondent No. 3 vide Annexure P-3 is therefore, illegal and liable to be set aside.
For the reasons recorded herein above, we set aside the order of promotion of respondent No. 3, to the post of Chief Supervisor (Drilling) (Annexure P-3) and direct the official respondents to fill this post after considering the eligible persons in accordance with the administrative instructions contained in Annexure P-1.
The parties are, however, left to bear their costs.
Order accordingly.