T S Doabia, J - Heard counsel.
Two prayers have been made by the petitioner in this petition.
These are :  (i) that, he should be given some work of light nature; or (ii) that, he be given pension in terms of Pension Scheme, copy whereof is annexure P/7.
These reliefs have been denied by the respondents.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was working as lineman with the respondents-Board.
He met with an accident while on duty.
On account of injury sustained by him, his left hand below elbow joint was amputated.
His right knee also suffered an injury.
This made him unfit to walk.
He has to walk now with the help of crutches.
The accident took place on 291985.
His services were brought to an end by giving him one month wages in lieu of notice by order, annexure P/13.
This order reads as under:  ``The services of Shri Ratanlal s/o Naktoo, Line Asstt.
Gr.
II who met with non-fatal electrical accident on dated 2985 and lost his 70% earning capacity and consequent of his continuous ill health and inability to discharge his duty under the Board on account of his permanent physical invalidity is hereby terminated w.e.f.
24.3.1987 AN and in lieu thereto he will be paid one month's wages.''
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as the petitioner's services were terminated by giving him one month's wages, he would be deemed to be in service till 24th of April, 1987.
According to him, during this period, the Board could recall its order.
On this interpretation, according to him, he would be deemed to be in service and entitled to benefit of pension scheme.
He has also submitted that the order annexure P/13 suffers from the vice of legal mala fide inasmuch as the officer who passed the order was aware of the fact that with effect from 1st of April, 1987, pension scheme is likely to come into force and the order annexure P/13 was passed with indecent haste.
Learned counsel for the petitioner with a view to substantiate his plea with regard to his first argument has placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court reported as Narendra Kumar Chandla v. State of Haryana and others (AIR 1995 SC 519).
In this case, the concerned employee was working with Haryana State Electricity Board.
On having been afflicted with the malady of cancer his right arm had to be amputated.
He became unfit to render service for which he was appointed.
This employee was held entitled to be dealt with, with compassion.
In para 7 of the judgment it was observed :-  ``Article 21 protects the right to livelihood as an integral facet of right to life.
When an employee is afflicted with unfortunate disease due to which, when he is unable to perform the duties of the posts he was holding the employer must make every endeavour to adjust him in a post in which the employee would be suitable to discharge the duties (sic) as a carrier attendant is unjust.
Since he is a matriculate, he is eligible for the post of LDC for LDC apart from matriculation passing in typing test either in Hindi or English at speed of 15/30 words per minute is necessary.
For a Clerk, typing generally is not a must.
In view of the facts and circumstances of this case, we direct the respondent-Board to relax his passing of typing test and to appoint him as a LDC Admittedly on the date when he had unfortunate operation, he was drawing the salary in the pay scale of Rs. 1,400-2,300.
Necessarily, therefore, his last drawn pay has to be protected.
Since he has been rehabilitated in the post of LDC we direct the respondent to appoint him to the post of LDC protecting his scale of pay of Rs. 1,400-2,300 and direct to pay all the arrears of salary.''
The present case is on better footing.
The petitioner suffered an injury while on duty.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the amputation was not on account of some accident having taken place during the course of employment.
Taking note of the aforementioned decision I am of the view that petitioner is entitled to the relief of reinstatement and accordingly direction is given to the respondent-Board to appoint him on such post, where he can do light job.
The respondents-Board will take steps with a view to re-employ the petitioner within a period of two months.
The petitioner shall however be not be entitled to any back wages during the period he was kept out of employment.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated that the petition is barred by limitation.
According to him, had the petitioner gone before the Labour Court then his claim would definitely have been barred by limitation.
It may be seen that this is a case where there is a continuing wrong.
Again the relief which has been granted to the petitioner is to the effect that he should be given appointment without back wages.
As such, the preliminary objection is overruled.
Coming to the question as to whether the petitioner is entitled to pension.
Had he continued for another one week he would have been entitled to pension.
The plea that the order annexure P-13 was passed a week before the schemes was to come into force cannot be ignored.
The orders would therefore suffer from legal mala fide and the petitioner would be entitled to pension also.
This petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.