GS Singhvi, J - In this joint petition, petitioners Madan Gopal, Azad Singh, Anand Parkash and Shiv Kumar Shastri have prayed that the respondents be directed to consider their claim for appointment on the posts of Sanskrit teachers advertised by Annexure P.1.
2.
Petitioners have stated that each one of them has passed Matric from the Haryana School Education Board, Shastri examination from the Maharashi Dayanad University, Rohtak, and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit from the same University.
They have also passed MA in Sanskrit.
In pursuance of advertisement Annexure P.1 issued by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (for short `the SSS Board') on 2231994, each of the petitioners applied for the post of Sanskrit teacher.
The respondent-Board treated the petitioners ineligible and accordingly rejected their candidature.
Petitioners have pleaded that they possess the qualifications prescribed for the post of Sanskrit teacher because each one of them has passed Shastri examination and has also passed B.Ed.
course from the MD University, Rohtak, with Sanskrit.
Reference has been made by the petitioners to the instructions issued by the Government vide Annexure P2 showing that persons possessing higher qualifications than the minimum qualifications prescribed for a post will be deemed to be eligible for that post.
Their further plea is that after passing Shastri examination there is one year's training of Shiksha Shastri conducted by Rashtriya Sanskrit Sanasthan, New Delhi, and such training is recognised by the Haryana Government.
Petitioners have stated that the respondents have without any legal justification deprived them of their right to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit teachers.
They have further pleaded that the action of the respondents amount to discrimination resulting in violation of their fundamental right of equality before law.
3.
No reply to the writ petition has been filed by the respondent and, therefore, the averments made in the petition will have to be treated as correct.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has drawn our attention to order dated 17.3.1993 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 14803 of 1991 (Raj Kalan and others v. State of Haryana) to show that an Experts Committee constituted by the Government to decide the question of equivalence of the qualifications in the context of the qualifications prescribed in the advertisement has come to the conclusion that qualifications of persons like the petitioners shall be treated as sufficient to meet the requirement of the prescribed qualifications.
5.
In a number of similar cases this Court has held that persons who have passed Shastri examination from a recognised University and who have passed B.Ed.
examination with Sanskrit will be deemed to have acquired the requisite qualifications as prescribed in Annexure P. 1.
It has been held by the Court that the Language Teacher Course (O.T.)
from the Haryana Education Department is not superior to the B.Ed.
Course with Sanskrit from MD University and there is no justification declaring those as not possessing the requisite qualifications who have passed Shastri and B.Ed.
Courses with Sanskrit.
In view of the above, we hold that the petitioners have been wrongly treated as ineligible for recruitment to the posts of Sanskrit teachers.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to treat the petitioners as eligible candidates for appointment on the posts of Sanskrit teachers.
Petitioners have already been interviewed in pursuance of the interim direction given by the Court on 2051994.
Therefore, the respondents should now declare their result, if not already declared, and in case the petitioners or any one of them is found to be meritorious the respondents are directed to appoint him and given service benefits as per merit lists.
Petition allowed.