GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has claimed fixation of her pay in the pay scale prescribed for the post of Lady Health visitor.
She has prayed for issue of a writ of mandamus to fix her pay in the said pay scale with effect from the date of her joining that post, i.e. 2341984.
2.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that she had joined service as Auxiliary Nurse Midwife on 621970.
After having undergone six months' promotional training for the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female) the petitioner was adjusted and posted as Lady Health Visitor at the Primary Health Centre, Ordhan, district Sirsa vide order annexure P-1 dated 20121983.
She continued to perform the duties as Lady Health Visitor till the issue of order annexure P-4 dated 841991, whereby she was promoted as Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female) in the pay scale of Rs. 1,400-2,600.
Petitioner has submitted that she had joined her duty as Lady Health Visitor with effect from 2341984 and continuously discharged the duties of that post till the issue of the order of her promotion.
She has pleaded that after having called upon her to discharge the duties of the post of Lady Health Visitor, the respondents were under an obligation to pay her the salary in the pay scale prescribed for that post and by not paying salary to the petitioner in that pay scale her right to equal pay for equal work has been infringed.
Petitioner has placed reliance on an order dated 3091991 passed by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 12344 of 1991 (Usha Sharma v. State of Haryana and another).
3.
Writ petition has been opposed by the respondents.
They have pleaded that the petitioner has been regularly promoted as Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female) vide order dated 841991 and she would get salary in the pay scale prescribed for that post with effect from the date of her promotion.
Respondents have further pleaded that the petitioner was sent for six months' training and was posted as Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female) without regard to seniority of others and she had volunteered to accept the higher post without emoluments.
Respondent's case is that merely because the petitioner has discharged the duties of higher post, she is not entitled to be paid salary in the pay scale of the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female).
4.
On the basis of the undisputed facts, which have come on record, it is clear that before the issue of the order of her promotion, the petitioner had continuously worked as Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female)/Lady Health Visitor for a period of over 10 years.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner was assigned the duties of the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor/Lady Health Visitor in addition to the duties of her own post.
It must, therefore, be held that for a period of over 10 years the petitioner continuously discharged the duties and shouldered the responsibilities of a higher post.
In this situation there remains little justification for not paying salary to the petitioner in the pay scale prescribed for that post.
The principle of equal pay for equal work which is embodied in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India has been treated as an integral part of the doctrine of equality and, therefore, after having called upon the petitioner to discharge the duties of a higher post independently, the respondents could not with any valid justification deny her salary in the pay scale of that post.
Other persons holding those posts were given the regular pay scale prescribed for that post and, therefore, there was no justification for not paying salary to the petitioner in the pay scale of the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female)/Lady Health Visitor.
By doing so the respondents have clearly discriminated the petitioner and have violated her fundamental right of equality.
5.
The aforesaid conclusion, however, does not automatically lead to a direction to the respondents to pay to the petitioner arrears of salary.
Despite the fact that the petitioner started working as Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female)/Lady Health Visitor with effect from 2341984, she did not make any representation to the respondents till 23.3.1993 to be paid salary in the pay scale of the higher post.
The writ petition has been filed before this court on 30.11.1993 and there is no satisfactory explanation of this long delay in the filing of the writ petition.
Therefore, there is no justification for issue of a direction to the respondents to pay to the petitioner arrears of salary.
In my opinion, the ends of justice would be met by directing the respondents to fix the pay of the petitioner in the pay scale of the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female)/Lady Health Visitor with effect from the date of her joining the duty and to give her notional benefit of fixation of pay along with benefit of revised pay fixation in the scales which were enforced between 2341984 and 841991.
6.
In the result the writ petition is partly allowed.
The respondents are directed to fix the pay of the petitioner in the pay scale prescribed for the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female)/Lady Health Visitor with effect from 2341984 and to give her notional benefit of fixation of pay till the date of issue of the order of her promotion.
The petitioner shall be given notional benefit of increments which she would have earned in the regular pay scale from 2341984 and onwards.
It is, however, made clear that in case the department, after an enquiry, comes to the conclusion that any person senior to the petitioner was left out from being given the post of Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Female)/Lady Health Visitor at the time of issue of order dated 20121983, this order of the Court shall not give any benefit to the petitioner.
Necessary action shall be taken by the Government within a period of four months from the date of submission of a certified copy of this order.
Costs made easy.