Harmohinder Kaur Sandhu, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 6174 of 1993 and Civil Writ Petition No. 16191 of 1993.
2.
The petitioner Mr. IM Sharma, who is Zonal Manager of UCO Bank which is wholly owned by the Government of India, was posted at Chandigarh after his transfer from Bangalore in June, 1991.
Earlier he was transferred from Jaipur to Bangalore in May, 1990.
As per policy circular issued by the respondent-Bank vide Circular No. CHO/POS/17/78 dated 30th May, 1988 governing the transfers of the officers, ordinarily no officer was to be transferred from his place of posting before the expiry of three years from the date of his posting except in difficult centres where the stay was not to be more than two years.
After his transfer to Chandigarh the petitioner expected to complete the normal tenure of three years in terms of policy circular referred above, but he was again ordered to be transferred and sent on deputation to the Jaipur-Nagpur Aanchlik Gramin Bank, Jaipur (hereinafter referred to as the Gramin Bank) as Chairman of that Bank without his consent vide order dated 1151993 copy of which is Annexure P/1.
Gramin Bank is a body corporate having perpetual succession and common seal and an independent entity having its own cadre.
In terms of Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, the sponsor banks were under obligation to provide managerial and financial assistance to the Gramin Bank for a period of five years from 1976.
The petitioner alleged that obligation on the sponsor banks did not authorise the banks to send their officers to the Gramin Bank against their consent on deputation.
He was neither senior most nor the junior most officer in his cadre and a pick and choose policy was adopted and no criteria was followed for sponsoring the officers on deputation.
Since the transfer of the petitioner on deputation was against settled law that one could not be sent on deputation outside his cadre against his consent and this being his third transfer during the last three years and being violative of the policy guidelines the petitioner made representations on 2051993 (copy Annexure P/2) and 25.5.1993 (copy Annexure P/5).
These were rejected vide orders Annexures P/3 and P/6 respectively.
On these allegations the petitioner filed his writ petition for quashing the impugned orders dated 1151993 Annexure P/1 whereby he was sought to be sent on deputation as Chairman of the Gramin Bank, Jaipur, without his consent and also for quashing the orders Annexures P/3 and P/6 whereby his representations against the order Annexure P/1 were rejected.
3.
In the written statement reliance was placed on staff circular Annexure P/11 to show that even under the Deputation Rules consent for transfer/appointment was not required as his transfer was in pursuance to the statutory obligation cast on the respondents.
Thereafter, the petitioner moved an application for amendment of the writ petition which was allowed.
By way of amended writ petition he assailed the circular Annexure P/11.
It was averred that staff circular No. 16/82 dated 2321982 Annexure P/11 was not sustainable in law.
It was ultra vires of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, as it made provision for sending the officers on deputation outside their cadre without their consent.
The petitioner also raised an additional plea that his transfer was mala fide as prior to his joining as Zonal Manager at Chandigarh one Shri MS Aulakh was the Zonal Manager and his son-in-law Shri KS Tiwana worked as Senior Manager of Sector 22-D branch of the Bank.
He had detected a number of cases involving fraud and irregularities when Shri MS Aulakh was the head of Chandigarh Zone, regarding which he reported to his senior officers and suggested various remedial measures to safeguard the interests of the bank.
Shri KS Tiwana was the Vice-President of the UCO Bank Officers Association, Chandigarh.
Respondent No. 2 adopted a pick and choose policy and without adopting any criteria, succumbed to the pressure of Shri Aulakh and Shri Tiwana through the General Secretary of the Central body of the Association who was one of the Directors on the Board of the Bank and, thus, he was transferred as Chairman of the Gramin Bank without his consent.
4.
During the pendency of the above mentioned Writ Petition an order dated 18121990 was issued by respondent No. 2 directing the petitioner to hand over the charge of Chandigarh Zone to Shri KS Nagra, Zonal Manager of the UCO Bank N.E.
Zone, Guwahati, who was transferred as Zonal Manager, Chandigarh, vide order Annexure P/14.
It was also mentioned therein that order was without prejudice to the decision in the pending writ petition.
Passing of this order led the petitioner to file the second writ petition No. 16191 of 1993 whereby he assailed the order Annexure P/14 issued by respondent No.2 directing him to hand over the charge of Chandigarh Zone to Shri KS Nagra.
5.
The allegations of the petitioner have been controverted by the respondents in their reply.
It was contended that the Parliament enacted the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 with a view to develop rural economy and under Section 11 of this Act the sponsor bank was to appoint an individual as Chairman of a Regional Rural Bank from amongst its officers after consultation with the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (The National Bank in short).
A statutory duty was cast on them to appoint Chairman of the Gramin Bank at Jaipur and transfer of the petitioner was made in pursuance to that obligation, in consonance with the UCO Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979.
The transfer was made in consultation with the National Bank.
In pursuance of the instructions issued by the Union of India, names of three officers were sponsored on the basis of overall assessment of their work and conduct and selection was made on that basis in consultation with the National Bank.
Names of nine more officers were also sponsored for other three Regional Rural Banks.
So far as transfer policy for officers was concerned, clause (1) of the same provided that placement of officers in Scale IV and above will be purely according to exigencies of administration and suitability of persons and transfer of the petitioner was made in view of the administrative exigencies and suitability of the petitioner for the post in consultation with the National Bank.
No consent of an employee was required to be taken in exercise of statutory duties.
It was denied that any pick and choose policy was followed or that any pressure was exercise by Shri MS Aulakh or Shri KS Tiwana through General Secretary of the Association.
Rather Shri MS Aulakh had already retired in July, 1991, while respondent No. 2 joined the petitioner on 15.4.1992 and had never met Shri Aulakh nor was personally acquainted with him.
The matter against Shri KS Tiwana was being investigated by the CBI and the allegations regarding mala fides were imaginary and false.
6.
In the replication all the contentions of the respondents were refuted by the petitioner and it was asserted that his transfer as Chairman of the Gramin Bank was not in pursuance of any statutory obligation of the respondent-Bank nor it was in accordance with the policy guidelines of the bank governing the transfers and postings of the officers at various levels.
As a matter of fact the transfer was mala fide at the instance of respondent No. 2 by way of colourable exercise of power and was ordered at the instance of vested interests.
The provisions of Section 11 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 did not cast any obligation on the sponsor bank to appoint only its own officer and the Chairman could be any individual irrespective of his qualifications and age particularly in view of the fact that Gramin Bank was a body corporate with perpetual succession and common seal having independent entity.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 in order to show the conditions of service of the petitioner reads as follows :-  "(2) Save otherwise provided in sub-section (1), every officer or other employee of an existing bank shall become, on the commencement of this Act, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Corresponding new bank and shall hold his office or service in the bank on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if the undertaking of the existing bank had not been transferred to and vested in the corresponding new bank and continue to do so unless and until his employment in the corresponding new bank is terminated or until his remuneration, terms or conditions are duly altered by the corresponding new bank."
8.
Section 19 of this Act enables the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank to make regulation not in consistence with the provisions of the Act or any scheme made thereunder after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government to provide for all matters for which provision was expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act and in exercise of powers conferred by Section 19 read with sub-section (2) of Section 12 referred above, the Board of Directors of UCO Bank in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous sanction of the Central Government made Regulations that is UCO Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979, which came into force on 1st day of July, 1979.
It was urged that these regulations made no provision for sending any officer of the Bank on deputation without his consent although Regulation 23(v) provided for payment of deputation allowance.
It reads as under :-  "On and from 1.11.1987, if an officer is deputed to serve outside the bank, he may opt to receive the emoluments attached to the post to which he is deputed.
Alternatively, he may in addition to his pay, draw a deputation allowance of 12% of pay maximum Rs. 700/- and such other allowances he would have drawn had he been posted in the bank's service at that place."
9.
It was urged that although this regulation provided for payment of deputation allowance, there was no rule or regulation according to which an officer could be transferred outside the cadre and more so without his consent.
There was no dispute that Gramin Bank was a separate entity outside the Cadre and the order deputing the petitioner to perform the function of Chairman of that bank against his consent was not justifiable.
A reference was made to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 according to which every Regional Rural Bank was a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal with power subject to the provision of the Act to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and may sue and be sued in its name.
In support of his contention the learned counsel placed reliance on Dr. Ashok Kumar Roy v. The United Bank of India and others, 1990(II) Banking Cases 489.
In this case also the petitioner who was an officer of United Bank of India was appointed as Chairman of Gour Gramin Bank after approval was taken from NABARD for a period of three years and it was held that without obtaining option from the petitioner or without his consent he could not be posted as Chairman of Gramin Bank even though the United Bank could post an officer of the bank as Chairman of the Gramin Bank, under Section 11(1) of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, on taking approval of the NABARD yet if the concerned officer did not consent to such posting the bank could not force him to join that post when he was not willing to accept the post.
This judgment was, however, assailed in a Letters Patent Appeal, which was decided on 27.7.1993 and all points raised in the appeal were left open to be adjudicated in a more appropriate case.
So, this authority relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, does not advance the case of the petitioner that his consent was necessary before he was transferred and appointed as Chairman of the Gramin Bank at Jaipur.
10.
In support of his argument that the petitioner could not be sent on deputation as Chairman of the Gramin Bank without his consent, the learned counsel also placed reliance on 1977(2) S.L.R.
551, Bhagwati Prashad Gowardhan Dass Bhatt v. State of Gujarat, 1989(3) S.L.J.
49, Jawahar Lal Nehru University v. Dr. KS Jawatkar and 1987(2) S.L.R.
672, Tilak Raj Bhalla v. State of Punjab and others.
All these cases were determined on the basis of statutory provisions applicable to those cases.
11.
The question to be determined in the present case is whether the rules and regulations governing the service condition of the petitioner envisaged his transfer on deputation without his consent.
The Gramin Bank to which the petitioner has been sent as a Chairman was incorporated with a view to develop rural economy by providing for the purposes of development of agriculture, trade, commerce, industry and other product activities in the rural areas, credit and other facilities particularly to small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers, artisans and small entrepreneurs under the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976.
UCO Bank is the sponsor bank.
Section 11 of the Act imposes a statutory duty on the sponsor bank to appoint any individual to be the Chairman of the Regional Rural Bank and in pursuance to powers under Regulation 50 of 1979 Regulations, instructions as contained in Annexure P/11 were issued.
Regulation 50 of UCO Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979 reads as under :-  "The Managing Director may, from time to time, issue such instructions or directions as may in his opinion be necessary for giving effect to or carrying out the provisions of these regulations."
As per Annexure P/11 clause 22 of Staff Circular Letter No. 39/81 was amended to read as under :  "An officer shall be deputed outside the Bank ordinarily with his consent except where specifically provided for in these rules.
He shall be given a letter of offer for this purpose and deputation shall be made after he gives his acceptance to such offer.
Consent given for deputation to an organisation outside the Bank, shall not be withdrawn except with the prior concurrence of the Bank.
No such consent shall be obtained in case of deputation to Bank's teaching establishment, Banking Service Recruitment Board, DIC and any other organisation not attracting deputation allowance.
Further provided that no such consent shall be obtained in case of deputation to institution like RRBs, Farmers Service Societies etc. where the deputation has to be made as per instructions of the Government, RBI etc. or in the interest of the Bank notwithstanding that deputation allowance is paid in such cases.
In other words, the consent of an officer shall not be obtained in cases where there is either no choice or very little choice for the Bank except to depute its officers."
Section 12(2) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, clearly provided that service conditions had to be laid down by the bank after its takeover and 1979 Regulations were framed as per procedure laid down in Section 19.
Admittedly, there is no provision in the Act or in the regulations which provide for taking of consent before sending a person to deputation and procedure for deputation is laid in the instructions issued vide Annexure P/11.
The provisions contained in Annexure P/11 are not in contravention of the Regulations and these are only supplementary to the same.
As these are consistent with the rules and only fill in the gap, these are valid.
The Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 1910, specifically laid down as under :-  "We proceed to consider the next contention of Mr. NC Chatterjee that in the absence of any statutory rules governing promotions to selection grade posts the Government cannot issue administrative instructions or such administrative instructions cannot impose any restrictions not found in the rules already framed.
We are unable to accept this argument as correct.
It is true that there is no specific provision in the rules laying down principle of promotion of junior or senior grade officers to selection grade posts.
But that does not mean that till statutory rules are framed in this behalf, the Government cannot issue administrative instructions regarding the principle to be followed in promotions of the officers concerned to selection grade posts.
It is true that Government cannot amend or supersede statutory Rules by administrative instructions, but if the rules are silent on any particular point Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed."
In the instant case the rules were silent as regards the obtaining of consent of an officer before sending him to a deputation post.
So the instructions contained in Annexure P/11 were issued to supplement the rules which were not inconsistent with the rules already framed.
The challenge of the petitioner to Annexure P/11 being ultra vires the regulations is not sustainable in view of the judgment of this Court as reported in 1980(1) S.L.R.
381, KK Jagia v. The State of Haryana.
12.
The authorities relied upon by the petitioner are clearly distinguishable.
In the case of Bhagwati Prashad (supra) transfer of a Sub- Inspector of Police was made in Civil Defence Organisation as Instructor without his consent and it was held that Police Act and Civil Defence Act were different Acts and officials governed by Police Act could not be transferred against posts under Civil Defence Act.
This authority is of no avail as there was no rule or instructions which could empower the employer to send a person on deputation without consent, but in the present case admittedly, Regulation No. 23(V) talks of deputation which clearly means that a person can be transferred to outside cadre and the instructions Annexure P/11 fill up the gap.
The authority 1989(3) S.L.J.
49 is also of no consequence as the Hon'ble Supreme Court in that case was not dealing with deputation but transfer of an employee permanently to some other employer.
Similarly, the case of Tilak Raj Bhalla (supra) is also of no avail as there were no rules envisaging transfer to an ex-cadre post without consent.
The contention of the petitioner, thus, that he could not be deputed as Chairman of the Gramin Bank at Jaipur without his consent is devoid of merit.
13.
The next point urged on behalf of the petitioner was that exercise of power in this case was arbitrary and no proper criteria was followed.
But, the learned counsel failed to show either in the pleadings or otherwise as to how exercise of power of transfer to Regional Rural Bank was arbitrary.
In Para No. 17-A of the written statement it was maintained that a specific criteria was laid down by the National Bank directing the sponsor bank to recommend Scale-IV officer to be the Chairman of the Regional Rural Bank having less than 100 branches and Scale-V officer for appointing as Chairman of Regional Rural Bank having more than 100 branches.
The transfers were made on the directions of the National Bank.
Annexures R/1 shows that criteria laid down by the National Bank was followed and three names of Scale V officers were recommended for selection as Chairman of Jaipur - Nagaur Aanchlik Gramin Bank and name of the petitioner was selected out of the three.
Similarly, three names each were recommended for other rural banks.
The selection was made by the National Bank and the contention of the petitioner that he was selected because his name was at No. 1 does not appear to be sound because the National Bank selected the petitioner, whereas for other rural banks the persons whose names appeared at Serial No. 3 were selected.
The name of the petitioner was recommended keeping in view his service record and his bio-data in the prescribed form as also the bio-data of other persons whose names were recommended was sent to the Deputy General Manager of the National Bank.
The names of the officers were recommended keeping in view the larger interests of the administration.
Simply because the officer felt unhappy because the new post did not give him the same amplitude of powers which he had while holding the old post does not make the transfer arbitrary.
So long as the transfer is made on account of exigencies of administration and is not from a higher post to a lower post it would be valid and not open to attack.
1974(1) S.L.R.
497, EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and others is an authority on this point.
14.
Lastly, it was urged on behalf of the petitioner that his transfer was mala fide.
Malice was attributed to respondent No. 2 on the allegations that Shri MS Aulakh who was the Zonal Manager and his son-in-law Shri KS Tiwana, who was Senior Manager in Sector 22 branch, exerted pressure on him for transfer of the petitioner on account of his having detected embezzlement and fraud in the bank.
In support of this contention a number of letters alleged to have been written by the Union against the petitioner were placed on record.
These letters, however, have no bearing on the present case and the allegations are misconceived on the face of it.
In the writ petition initially filed there were absolutely no allegations of mala fide and this version was set up for the first time after permission to amend the writ petition was granted.
Respondent No. 2 has submitted his affidavit wherein he alleged that Shri MS Aulakh retired in July, 1991, while he joined the bank on 15.4.1992 and he never met Shri MS Aulakh.
He did not remember having met Shri KS Tiwana and, thus, the allegations were denied.
The petitioner has failed to prove the allegations and has sought to draw certain presumptions which are of no consequence.
It is, thus, not made out that the transfer of the petitioner was made due to mala fides or bias.
In fact three names were sent for the appointment of Chairman of the Gramin Bank and the name of the petitioner was selected as he was considered suitable.
Posting of the petitioner as Chairman neither reduces his salary or perks nor his status.
Rather he is to get a deputation allowance over and above his salary.
15.
For the reasons recorded above we find no merit in both the writ petitions and the same are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.