Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Multipurpose Health Worker, is aggrieved by the order dated November 20, 1994 by which it has been held that he is ``not entitled to the rent free accommodation'' and a direction for the recovery of house rent at the rate of 5% of his pay has been given.
This decision has been given by the Department on a representation submitted by the petitioner which was ordered to be decided within two months by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated September 21, 1994 in Civil Writ Petition No. 13383 of 1994.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was initially recruited as a Basic Health Works in the Health Department.
In January, 1985, the Government of Haryana promulgated the Services Rules governing the condition of service of various categories of Class III employees.
By Rule 9, the nomenclature of posts of Basic Health Workers, Surveillance Workers, Sanitary Supervisors, Vaccinators, Family Planning Field Workers, B.C.G.
Technicians, TB Multipurpose Workers and Superior Field Workers, was changed and all these employees were designated as Multipurpose Health Workers (Male).
Accordingly, the petitioner came in the cadre of Multipurpose Health Workers (Male).
All the persons holding different categories of posts were brought on a common seniority list and placed in an identical scale of pay.
On November 27, 1986, the Government framed Rules under Article 309 so as to amend the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part II in so far as these were applicable to the State of Haryana.
It was inter alia provided that rent free accommodation or house rent allowance at the rate of 10% of the pay or the rent paid whichever is less, shall be admissible to the Family Welfare Extension Educators and Family Welfare Field Workers.
In other words, out of the common cadre of Multipurpose Health Workers, the persons belonging to the categories of Family Welfare Extension Educators and Family Welfare Field Workers were held entitled to rent free accommodation.
3.
The petitioner who was posted at the Community Health Centre, Pehowa in District Kurukshetra, was allotted accommodation at Bodhni.
He was not being charged any rent for the accommodation.
The accounts of the Department for the period from January, 1993 to December, 1993 were audited.
The auditors pointed out that the petitioner was not entitled to rent free accommodation and as such, the rent due from him ought to be recovered.
On coming to know of this objection, the petitioner made a representation dated May 30, 1994.
He followed it up by filing a petition in this Court.
This petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated September 21, 1994.
It was directed that the representation be decided within two months by passing a speaking order and no deduction from the salary of the petitioner should be made in the meantime.
Vide order dated November 20, 1994, the representation was rejected.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court.
The petitioner avers that ``the Government of Haryana letter dated 271186 on the basis of which the audit report and the order dated 201194 have been passed is illegal on the face of it and non-est in the eye of law because on the date of (the) issuance of this letter i.e. 271186 there existed no cadre of Family Welfare Field Workers etc. as these cadres were merged in 1985 vide Annexure P 1 and designated as Multipurpose Health Workers.
Once these cadres have been merged, joint pay scale given and a joint seniority list drawn and made effective, no discrimination regarding the rent free accommodation can be made on the basis of their previous cadres prior to the said merger.''
On this basis, the petitioner prays that ``order dated 271186 passed by the Government of Haryana (Annexure P 4), audit report dated 10294 (Annexure P. 2) and order dated 201194 (Annexure P. 5) passed by Respondent No. 2'', be quashed.
4.
We have heard counsel for the petitioner.
He has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, it has been contended that the benefit conferred by a statutory rule cannot be taken away by an executive order and secondly, it has been submitted that the impugned orders are discriminatory and thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
We find no merit in either of these contentions.
5.
It is true that the benefits conferred by a statutory rule cannot be taken away by an executive order.
However, in the present case, we find that the statutory rules promulgated on January 8, 1985 do not provide for the allotment of rent free accommodation.
Prima facie, in matters not governed by the statutory rules, it would be open to the competent authority to issue executive orders and unless it is shown that such an order impinges upon a provision made in the statutory rules, it would be valid and legally enforceable.
Furthermore, in the present case, we find that even the impugned provision made vide Notification dated November 27, 1986 was a rule under Article 309.
By these rules, the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume I Part II, were amended.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the benefit conferred by a statutory rule has been taken away by an executive order.
In fact, after the issue of 1985 rules, the Government has made a provision under Article 309 relating to the allotment of rent free accommodation or the grant of house rent allowance.
Consequently, it is clear to us that the factual premises on which the argument has been raised, is non-existent.
As a result, the contention raised by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
6.
As for the ground of discrimination, a perusal of 1985 rules shows that various categories of posts including those of Family Planning Field Workers were merged to form the cadre of Multipurpose Health Workers (Male).
The petitioner belongs to this cadre.
His seniority and further promotion etc. are governed by the Rules of 1985.
However, these rules do not contain any provision regarding the allotment of Government accommodation much less than rent free accommodation.
There is no provision even relating to the payment of House Rent Allowance.
In regard to allotment of rent free accommodation etc., the employees are governed by the provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Service Rules as applicable in the State of Haryana.
In these rules, the Government has made an amendment by the Notification of the year 1986, wherein it has been provided that persons who are posted as Family Welfare Field Workers shall be entitled to rent free accommodation.
It appears that this provision has been made keeping in view the nature of duties etc.
Persons who have to work in the field so as to propagate measures of family welfare, are given rent free accommodation.
Apparently, their duties are different from those of the persons posted in the Hospitals, Dispensaries or Health Centres.
If for such a class of employees who have to go from place to place to propagate measures to control the rising increase in population, the Government has chosen to provide an incentive in the form of rent free accommodation, it cannot be said that the action is either arbitrary or discriminatory.
The merger of various categories of posts to form one cadre for the purposes of determination of seniority and further chances of promotion, does not mean that they are equal for all purposes or that the actual differences that exist amongst them have been obliterated completely.
It is well settled that, the Government can create a classification.
To be valid, the classification should have a rational relationship with the object sought to be achieved.
In the cadre of Multipurpose Health Workers (Male), the class of persons who are working as Family Welfare Fields Workers, has been given an additional benefit.
This appears to have been granted to provide an incentive.
We do not find this classification to be either unfair or as suffering from the vice of discrimination.
Accordingly, we find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed in limine.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.