M. Katju, J.- This writ petition has been filed for a mandamus directing the respondents to let the petitioner resume his duty and pay to him salary regularly.
On 25.11.1994 I granted the learned standing counsel two weeks to file counter-affidavit, but since then three weeks have expired and yet no counter-affidavit has been filed.
In the circumstance I am presuming the allegations in the writ petition to be correct and I am disposing of the civil petition finally.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as class IV daily wages employee in October, 1983 in the department of Education by the Secretary of Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad, UP Allahabad.
He claimed regularisation and filed a petition before the UP Public Services Tribunal which was decided in his favour.
However, despite the order of the Public Services Tribunal he was not treated as a regular employee.
Aggrieved he filed a writ petition in this Court which is referred to in paragraph 3 of this petition.
In this petition an interim order was passed on 1111991, by this Court that as long as the petitioner is retained in service he shall be paid the same salary which is payable to the regular employees and he shall also be paid his arrears within two months.
On the basis of the order dated 1111991 the petitioner was paid full salary as regular employee and he was also paid the backwages till 591994.
On 691994 the petitioner was implicated in case Crime No. 516 of 1994 under Section 419, 420, 467, 468, 470 and 471, I.P.C. and taken into custody on 691994 as per the first information report which is Annexure-1 to the petition.
The petitioner was released on bail on 1291994.
He received a letter dated 1291994 vide Annexure-3 to the petition from the respondents stating that he was absent without leave from 691994 and he should give the reasons for his absence.
In reply the petitioner wrote a letter dated 13.9.1994 stating that he had been arrested on false allegations and he has been released on 1291994.
He stated that there was none else in his house and he requested that he be allowed to resume his duty.
However, although the petitioner continuously approached the respondents to allow him to join duty but they did not permit him nor did they pay him salary for September, 1994.
A true copy of his representation in this connection is Annexure-4 to the petition.
It appears that respondents are treating the petitioner as deemed to be under suspension under Rule 49A (2) (a).
By an amendment application the petitioner has challenged the validity of Rule 49-A(2)(a) of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.
Rule 49-A(2)(a) states that "A Government servant shall be deemed to have been placed or as the case may be, continued to be placed under suspension by an order of the appointing authority (a) with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in custody, whether the detention is on criminal charge or otherwise for a period exceeding forty eight hours".
In my opinion, this rule is wholly arbitrary.
A Government servant may not have been able to obtain bail within 48 hours of his arrest and this may be due to no fault of his.
Hence, to treat a Government servant as put under suspension automatically because he was in custody for 48 hours is in my opinion wholly arbitrary.
No doubt it is open to the authority concerned to pass a positive order of suspension but such a deeming provision is wholly arbitrary and unjustified.
The scope of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India have been greatly expanded by the Supreme Court in recent time and now the reasonability test pervades the entire Constitution as held in the case of Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597.
In my opinion it is wholly unreasonable to treat a government servant as automatically under suspension just because he is in custody for 48 hours after his arrest.
3.
As already stated above, a government servant may not be able to get bail within two days of his arrest for reasons beyond his control i.e. if there is strike in the court, or if there is a holiday or for some other reasons, hence, I am of the clear opinion that Rule 49-A(2)(a) is violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India and it is hereby declared null and void.
Consequently this petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner within thee weeks or production of a certified copy of this order before the authority concerned and pay him salary regularly.
However, it is open to the concerned authority to pass a positive order of suspension if the said authority so, deems fit after applying its mind to the facts of the case.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.