Suhas Chandra Sen, J - This is a writ petition by some of the employees of Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority (hereinafter described as CMDA).
An association has been formed by the employees called ``CMDA'' Employees Joint Action Committee.
It has been alleged in the present writ petition that the petitioners state that the instant writ petition is intended to safeguard the interest of public at large and the interest of the serving employees of CMDA.
The petitioners also state that the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority is a statutory body created by the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority Act, 1972 (since repealed and replaced by West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 which came into effect on and from 16.1.82 and it has been vested with powers to carry on business of public importance which is fundamental to the life of the community.
In other words, CMDA cannot act arbitrarily and capriciously and in contravention of Rules/Regulations and procedures of appointment, promotion, retirement etc. set down by the authority nor CMDA can disregard the Government Policy in this regards.
2.
It has further been alleged that while making appointment (s) CMDA cannot go against the policy of the State Government nor can it violate any provisions of Recruitment Regulations and/or Recruitment Rules of its own or of the State Government.
Any appointment must strictly adhere to the rules relating to - (a) age limit (i.e. working age limit beginning with lower limit of 13 years and upper limit of 58 years, (b) eligibility criteria and (c) method of recruitment including selection procedure etc.
The case of the petitioners is that among the fleet of directly recruited employees of CMDA there are different specialised groups like Engineers, Architects, Planners, Economists, Statisticians, Geographers, Social Scientists etc. along with Secretarial, Administrative and Accounts personnel.
In fact, there is no dearth of appropriate manpower resource among the directly recruited employees of CMDA to carry out the assigned tasks.
However, with the plea of non- availability of expertises in some functional areas CMDA inducted deputationists of more than 700 which in fact curtailed the promotion benefit of the directly recruited employees of CMDA.
Even after 23 years of creations CMDA cannot and should not induct personnel on deputation since ``deputation'' as a concept and as a policy of ``Infact Protection'' is not only undesirable in the instant case and against public policy but also it curtails the service benefits of the directly recruited employees of CMDA.
Petitioners submit further that ``deputation'' as a concept and as a policy is intended to build-up in house expertises of a newly born organisation and as such `deputation' is a short-run phenomenon but its perpetuity in CMDA is a myth.
3.
The respondents have not denied that superannuated employees are being re-employed by the CMDA.
It has been conceded that about 80 super-annuated employees have been re-employed.
According to the respondents it has been done because of the exigency of the circumstances as the existing employees have not acted or acquired the necessary qualifications for their employment.
4.
This contention of the respondents is not tenable.
My attention has been drawn to cases where CMDA has retained services of an employee even when serious criminal charges have been levied by the Government against the employee himself.
In particulars it has been mentioned that one S K Roy was appointed a Director of Planning in 1974 although he had no requisite qualification in planning which was essential for the post at that material time.
He was, therefore, lifted to the post of Director General of Planning and Development in 1979 S K Roy did not have the requisite qualification for this post also.
For some unknown reason even after superannuation S K Roy has been retained in the Department.
But the most serious allegation is that there is a criminal case pending before the 5th Special Court, Calcutta under Sections 420 and 120(B) of I.P.C.
This criminal prosecution was instituted by the Government in 1985.
Inspite of this serious criminal charge which is pending and involves public money S K Roy's tenure is further extended from time to time.
While the criminal case is pending the records of the criminal case are sent for and examined by the Court.
5.
No explanation has come forward as to how such a curious thing could happen.
A public body is extending tenure of a person after superannuation while serious criminal charges have been brought against him for abuse of public funds.
6.
The respondents did not place candidly before the Court any material in connection with the criminal case.
Ultimately, the case records of the Criminal Court had to be brought to find out the truth.
7.
These facts indicate that superannuated persons are not being retained for public purpose but for ulterior reasons.
8.
I am of the view that this writ petition must succeed and there will be an order restraining the respondents from extending tenure of service of superannuated persons in any manner whatever henceforth.
9.
Operation of the order is stayed for a period of a fortnight.
Let a xerox copy of this Order be given to the learned Advocate for the respondents on usual undertaking.
Petition allowed.