THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was appointed as Constable in the District Police, Bathinda in the year 1976 and in December, 1986, he was sent on deputation to the Intelligence Bureau as Security Assistant and he joined duty in the Intelligence Bureau on 23rd April, 1987.
While working in the Intelligence Bureau, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Junior Intelligence Officer, Grade-II which is equivalent to the post of Head Constable in the Police Department.
In the year 1993, the Assistant Director of Intelligence Bureau called for the willingness of the deputationists whether they wanted to be absorbed in the Intelligence Bureau.
The petitioner submitted his willingness, but no action has been taken.
Thereafter in the year 1996 the willingness of the deputationists was again called and the petitioner gave his willingness on 20th July, 1996.
His application was forwarded by the Assistant Central Intelligence Officer recommending for the absorption of the petitioner in the Intelligence Bureau.
Again on 3171997, the willingness of the petitioner was asked and he gave his willingness to be absorbed on 391997.
According to the petitioner, he has been working in the Intelligence Bureau since 23rd, April, 1997 and he has been asked for his willingness for the Intelligence Bureau having been promoted therein, but the petitioner has been reverted and repatriated to his parent department by the impugned letter dated 5111997 and he was directed to be relieved from Intelligence Bureau from 30111997.
Therefore, the petitioner is seeking to quash the order of reversion and repatriation and also for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to absorb him in the Intelligence Bureau.
2.
There cannot be any doubt that a deputationist has no right to be absorbed.
Simply because the petitioner has been working in the Intelligence Bureau for a decade, it does not give him any right to be absorbed.
It is useful to refer to the decision of the Apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Inder Singh and others, 1998(2) SCT 765 (SC) : 1997(8) SCC 372 wherein it has been held as follows:-  "The concept of "deputation" is well understood in service law and has a recognised meaning.
"Deputation" has a different connotation in service law and the dictionary meaning of the word "deputation" is of no help.
In simple words "deputation" means service outside the cadre or outside the parent department.
Deputation is deputing or transferring an employee to a post outside his cadre, that is to say, to another department on temporary basis.
After the expiry of period of deputation the employee has to come back to his parent department to occupy the same position unless in the meanwhile he has earned promotion in his parent department as per the Recruitment Rules.
Whether the transfer is outside the normal field of deployment or not is decided by the authority who controls the service or post from which the employee is transferred.
There can be no deputation without the consent of the person so deputed and he would, therefore, know his rights and privileges in the deputation post.
The law on deputation and repatriation is quite settled as we have also seen in various judgments which we have referred to above.
There is no escape for the respondents now to go back to their parent departments and working there as Constables or Head Constables as the case may be."
In view of the above decision, the petitioner cannot claim absorption as a matter of right.
3.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner further argued that some of his juniors have been promoted in the parent department and on repatriation he has to work under his junior as Constable only.
But the petitioner will be entitled to be promoted on the principle of "next Below Rule".
It has been held by the Supreme Court in State of Mysore v. MH Bellary, AIR 1965 SC 868, as follows :-  "The service of an officer on deputation in another department is treated by the rule as equivalent to service in the parent departments and it is this equation between the services in the two departments that forms the basis of rule 50(b).
So long therefore, as the service of the employee in the new department is satisfactory and he is obtaining the increments and promotions in that department, it stands to reason that the satisfactory service and the manner of its discharge in the post he actual fills, should be deemed to be rendered in the parent department also so as to enable him to promotions which are open on seniority-cum-merit basis.
What is indicated here is precisely what is termed in official language the "next below rule" under which an officer on deputation is given a paper promotion and shown as holding a higher post in the parent department if the officer next below him there is being promoted."
Thus it is clear that whenever an employee is on deputation to another department and has been repatriated to his parent department, he is entitled to all the service benefits which his junior has been given in the parent department.
If the junior of the petitioner has been promoted, the petitioner also must get promotion from the date when his junior has been promoted on the basis of "next below rule".
4.
The learned Counsel for the State of Punjab namely the Ist respondent argued that the petitioner has not undergone the Lower School Course so as to enable him to get promotion as Head Constable in his parent department.
But according to the learned Counsel for the petitioner; he has not been sent to Lower School Course and no option has been given to him for undergoing the said Course and no intimation even has been given to him before sending his juniors to Lower School Course.
If that is the case, no fault can be found with the petitioner.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner got promotion as Junior Intelligence Officer Grade-II in the Intelligence Bureau which post is equivalent to the post of Head Constable in the Police Department.
There is nothing adverse against the petitioner in the Intelligence Bureau where he worked for a decade.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to be promoted as Head Constable especially when his junior has been promoted in the Police Department which is his parent department.
6.
I, therefore, direct respondents 1 and 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for giving him promotion in the parent department from the date on which his junior has been given promotion in the Police Department.
If for any reason, it is found that the petitioner cannot be promoted, he should be given an option to seek voluntary retirement since admittedly the petitioner has put in more than 20 years of qualifying service.
The Apex Court in the State of Punjab and others v. Inder Singh and others (supra) observed as follows:-  "It is no doubt really harsh on the respondents to be sent back after they have served the CID for number of years in higher rank though on ad hoc basis and now when they go back they have to work either as Constables or Head Constables.
It was submitted before us that an employee could seek voluntary retirement after putting in 20 years of qualifying service and that the High Court in the impugned judgment gave option to the respondents to seek voluntary retirement while still working in the CID holding higher ranks.
This option can, however, be limited to only those respondents who have put in 20 years of qualifying service as per the relevant Rules.
In our opinion, the High Court was justified in giving such an option to the respondents to seek voluntary retirement.
At the time when special leave petitions were filed against the impugned judgment of the High Court, this Court directed that status quo be maintained while staying the impugned judgment of the High Court.
The High Court in the writ petitions filed by the respondents granted stay of the orders of repatriation.
After the impugned judgment, there was order of status quo by this Court.
In this view of the matter, the respondents continued to be in the CID.
We affirm the impugned judgment of the High Court to the extent that the respondents who put in 20 years of qualifying service in their parent departments and in CID would be entitled to seek voluntary retirement from the ranks they are holding in CID and the period of qualifying service would be counted upto the date of this judgment.
The respondents, who do not accept such option and those respondents who have not put in 20 years of qualifying service would have to revert back to their parent departments.
It is in fact an admitted position that Constables on deputation to CID have reached higher ranks and retired from CID in those ranks.
A hope, though not true, is instilled in officers like the respondents that they would continue in the CID holding higher ranks till the age of superannuation.
The conduct of the appellants of now suddenly asking the respondents to go back to their parent departments when they have put in best years of their lives in the CID would appear to be rather unjust.
It would have been more appropriate for the appellant to repatriate the respondents after the expiry of the initial period of deputation or at least they should have been told the consequences of their continuing on deputation and sudden repatriation.
It would also be more appropriate, considering the fact that the deputation in CID could be for any number of years, that the rules are amended and a separate cadre is created in CID to absorb the officers, if they are on deputation for a number of years.
It is submitted before us that Constables who have come on deputation to CID retired while holding higher ranks in CID and they earned their pension on the basis of holding higher ranks though the pension was being paid by their parent department.
This may be on the basis of relevant pension rules as applicable in the State.
Now, if the respondents go back to their parent department and work there as Constables or Head Constables, their emoluments would be reduced considerably and they would be deprived of getting higher pension when they retire.
Considering the whole aspect of the matter, we affirm the order of the High Court to the extent that option be given to all those respondents who have put in 20 years' qualifying service to seek voluntary retirement from the CID in the ranks they are holding and they will be deemed to have worked in CID upto the date of this judgment.
The option shall be given in 30 days."
Therefore, respondents 1 and 2 are directed either to promote the petitioner from the date when his junior has been promoted by relaxing the passing of Lower School Course under Rule 13.8 of the Punjab Police Rules or permit the petitioner to seek voluntary retirement on the basis that he has been working as Head Constable.
This exercise shall be done within 30 days from today without fail.
7.
Subject to the above directions, the writ petition is disposed of.
No order as to costs.