GS Singhvi, J - In this joint petition, the petitioners have prayed for issue of direction to the respondents to count the service rendered by them in privately managed Government aided schools before taking over of the same by the Punjab Government for reckoning of 8 years and 18 years of experience for awarding proficiency step-up increments, senior scale/selection grade as well as pensionary benefits.
2.
Petitioners were employed as Headmasters, Social Studies teachers, Art and Craft teachers, J.B.T.
teachers, Clerks, Peons, Chowkidars etc. in various schools which were being aided by the Government of Punjab before their take-over by the Government.
3.
In order to protect the conditions of service of the employees of the aided institutions, the Government of Punjab enacted the Punjab State Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 and framed rules known as Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
At the same time, it has issued various notifications and circulars for counting of the service rendered by the employees of private schools before their take-over by the Government for various benefits including the grant of proficiency step-up increment, selection grade etc.  4.
Petitioners have claimed that despite its own policy decisions, the Government has not counted their past service for various benefits, including grant of selection grade, proficiency step-up increments etc.  5.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents by pleading that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefits in view of the conditions incorporated in the documents by which the schools were taken over by the Government.
6.
It is not necessary for me to discuss the points of law raised in the writ petition at length because the learned Assistant-Advocate General was fair enough to concede that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. NN Swamy, AIR 1977 SC 1237, RL Marwaha v. Union of India, JT 1987(3) SC 292 and RK Gupta v. Union of India, JT 1987(4) 157, and a decision of this Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 1346 of 1991 (Dev Dutt Kaushal v. State of Punjab, 1991(3) SCT 225(P&H)) decided on 21101993, the petitioners cannot be denied the benefits of their service in the erstwhile schools for the purpose of grant of senior and selection grade, proficiency step-up and for post retiral benefits.
7.
Keeping in view the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the cases quoted above as well as the Judgment of this Court this petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to count the services rendered by the petitioners in the privately managed Government aided schools for the purpose of reckoning 8 years and 18 years of experience for award of proficiency step-up increments, senior scales/selection grades and for all post retiral benefits.
Necessary steps for grant of such benefits shall be taken by the respondents within a period of six months.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.