GR Majithia, J - The petitioners, who are Constables in Police Force, have challenged the Standing Order under Rule 1320 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, Vol, II (for short, the Police Rules) governing selection of Constables by the Departmental Promotion Committee, for list B-1 for undergoing Lower School Course, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Police Constables are posted in each district of the State of Punjab and their inter se seniority is maintained district-wise.
They are eligible to appear in the promotion test for being brought on promotion list B-1 in Form 137.
The eligibility criteria for appearing in the test is mentioned in Rule 13.7 of the Police Rules.
The petitioners appeared in the written, parade and viva voce tests, but could not attain the comparative merit of 600 selected candidates.
They have challenged the prescription of 25% marks for interview in the B-1 test.
In the Standing Order, under paragraph IV, following test and marking system has been laid down :  "IV TEST AND MARKING SYSTEM :  (i) The written test in Law would be conducted in accordance with the syllabus as given in Appendix 'A' (in the case of constables of P.A.P.
and Commando and 'C' (in the case of Constables of district Police and GRP) and shall carry, 50 marks.
(ii) Test in parade shall carry, 10 marks.
(iii) Interview, 25 marks.
(iv) Length of Service and Examination of service records, 15 marks.
The test at all the places will be held on the same date in the last week of January every year.
The date and time of test shall be fixed by the DG-cum-IGP.
The qualifying marks in the Written Test only will be 50 per cent."
3.
The only question which arises for consideration is :  whether prescription of 25% marks for the interview is valid.
This question is no more res integra.
In C.W.P.
No 16871 of 1989 (Jaipal Singh, etc. v. The State of Punjab, etc.) decided by a Division Bench of this Court on January 30, 1990, the selection of Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police was challenged on the ground that 33% marks were prescribed for viva voce test.
The Bench, after examining the entire case law, came to the conclusion that 33% for viva voce test were valid and upheld the selection.
4, Somewhat similar question came up for consideration in C.W.P.
No. 2849 of 1985 (Surinder Kumar Arora v. Union of India and others), decided on June 3, 1993.
In that case, the validity of Item 2-B (b) of the promotion policy for officers of the Punjab National Bank dated March 25, 1981 framed in terms of Regulation 17 of the Punjab National Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979 was challenged.
The challenge was made in the following circumstances :  5.
The Promotion Policy provided for two modes of promotion from Junior Management Grade Scale-I to the Middle Management Grade Scale II, viz, selectivity and seniority.
The vacancies in the Middle Management Grade Scale II were to be filled up by process of selectivity and seniority in the ratio of 40 :60 respectively.
In that case, the challenge was to the second channel, viz. selection by seniority.
For selection by seniority, the following criteria was prescribed for assessment of the candidates.
"B.
Seniority.
Eligibility :  In terms of Regulation 18(5) of the PNB (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979, officers promoted as officers Incharge/Asstt.
Managers this Promotion Policy came into force, will rank for seniority higher than the Accountants and Technical/Specialist Officers in Scale I  Officers other that the above category of Officers Incharge/Asstt.
Managers in Scale I with minimum of 7 years of satisfactory service as an officer will be eligible.
Eligible candidates will be called for (sic)  Performance - 45  - Interview (to assess job and general and potential for shouldering higher responsibilities).
30  - Educational qualifications 15  - Seniority 10  - Additional marks for Branch experience 10  (a) Performance 45 marks.
The basis for evaluation of performance will be the same as given under item 2A(b) under selectivity process.
(b) Interview 30 marks  (The minimum qualifying marks in interview will be 10) (c) Educational Qualifications Max.
Marks 15 - Non-matric Nil - Matric 2 - Pre-University 1 Additional - Higher Secondary 3 - Inter 1 Additional - Degree 3 Additional - Post-graduate (only once) irrespective of number of subjects 1 Additional - Commerce or Business Administration (either at Degree or Post-graduate level) 1 Additional - CAIIB (Each Part) 2 Additional - MBA/CA/Cost Accountancy 3 Additional One additional mark will be allotted for each first Division obtained in Graduate/Post-Graduate degree.
(d) Seniority 10 marks One mark for each completed year of service or part thereof which is not less than 6 months in Scale I (e) Additional marks for Branch experience Max.Marks 10 Every completed year of service or part thereof which is not less than six months as an officer in Branch/Pay Office shall carry two additional' marks, subject, however, to the condition that total marks under this category shall not exceed 6.
"Every completed year of service or part thereof which is not less than six months as an officer in a Branch/Pay office in a rural area will carry two additional marks.
The maximum marks under this category shall not exceed  Candidates qualifying through the above process will be listed in order of merit on the basis of their aggregate marks awarded as above".
6.
Minimum qualifying marks shall be 50.
For the interview 30 marks were prescribed and an officer seeking promotion from Junior Management Grade-I to the Middle Management Grade Scale II had to obtain minimum 10 marks in the interview.
If he failed to obtain minimum 10 marks out of 30 marks prescribed for interview, he was not eligible for selection.
Prescription of minimum qualifying marks in interview was deleted.
The only question which survived for consideration was whether the Bank was justified in prescribing 30 marks for interview.
The Bench upheld the validity of prescription of 30 marks for interview.
The Bench, relying upon a judgment of the apex Court in State of Andhra Pradesh and another v. Sadanandam and others, 1989 Supp.
(1) SCC 574, came to the conclusion that it was not for judicial bodies to sit in judgment over the wisdom of the executive in choosing the mode of recruitment or categories from which the recruitment should be made as they are matters of policy decision falling exclusively within the purview of the executive.
7.
In State of UP v. Rafiquddin and others, A.I.R. 1988 S.C. 162, the apex Court was examining the validity of Rules 19, 21 and 22 of the UP Civil Services (Judicial Branch) Rules, 1951.
35 marks were prescribed by the Public Service Commission for viva voce test under Rule 19 ibid as it stood in the year 1970 prior to the amendment of 1972.
The prescription of 35 minimum qualifying marks for the viva voce test by the Public Service Commission as envisaged under the proviso to Rule 19 was assailed and the argument was repelled by the apex Court observing thus :  "The Commission had therefore power to fix the norm and in the instant case it had fixed 35 per cent minimum marks for viva voce test.
The viva voce test is a well recognised method of judging the suitability of a candidate for appointment to public services and this method had almost universally been followed in making selection for appointment to the public services.
Where selection is made on the basis of written as well as viva voce test, the final result is determined on the basis of the aggregate marks.
If any minimum marks either in the written test or in viva voce test are fixed to determine the suitability of a candidate the same has to be respected.
Clause (ii) of the proviso to Rule 19 clearly confers power on the Commission to fix minimum marks for viva voce test for judging the suitability of the candidate for the service.
We do not find any constitutional legal infirmity in the provision."
In the instant case, the Departmental Promotion Committee was to determine the suitability of a police constable for being brought on promotion list B-1.
Selection was not to be made on the basis if seniority, but on the basis of selectivity, which pre-supposes that the Departmental Promotion Committee has to select the Constable for being brought on promotion list B-1 who is more meritorious that others and this is what has been done in this case by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to some judgments which deal with the law on the proportion between the written test and interview or evaluation of confidential entries and personality test.
Distinction appears to have been drawn in interview held for a competitive examination or admission in educational institutions and selection for higher post.
Efforts have been made to eliminate scope of arbitrariness.
In the former by narrowing down the proportion as various factors are likely to creep in, but same factors cannot be applied where the selection authority has to assess the suitability of a person or the higher post, apart from other parameters for the viva voce test.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in petition and the same is dismissed.
Civil Misc. No. 1296 of 1993 praying for amendment of the writ petition is also dismissed.
Petition dismissed.