GS Singhvi J - By this order I am disposing of CWP Nos. 10414, 8258 and 8557 of 1993 because an identical question of law arises for determination by the Court.
2.
Tor the purpose of this decision, it is sufficient to give a brief reference to the facts of C.W.P.
No. 10414 of 1993.
This is a petition filed by eleven petitioners, first six of whom possess the qualification of Matric with ITI other petitioners in this petition possess the qualification of ITI All the petitioners were appointed as T Mates in the service of the Public Works Department of the Government of Haryana in various divisions after they had been selected by the Executive Engineer concerned on the basis of requisitions sent to the Employment Exchange.
On the basis of their qualifications, the petitioners were given the benefit of revised pay scales of Rs. 1200-2040/- prescribed for technical persons having qualification of Matric with ITI and grade of Rs. 950-1400 prescribed for persons having qualification of ITI only.
After over two years, the Superintending Engineer (Mechanical Circle) P.W.D.
(B&R) Karnal, asked the Executive Engineer to issue notices to all the T Mates to show cause as to why order granting them revised pay scales be not recalled and they be not fixed in the scale of Rs. 750-940.
Petitioners have questioned the legality of this notice on the ground that once the benefit of revised pay scales has been given to them on the basis of their qualifications, it is not open to the respondents to take any action for withdrawing that benefit.
Petitioners have also pleaded that all other persons having the qualification of Matric with ITI have been given the benefit of grade of Rs. 1200-2040 and those having ITI without Matric have been given benefit of grade of Rs. 950-1400 and, therefore, there is no justification for giving a different treatment to the petitioners.
3.
In other two writ petitions, petitioners say that they have passed ITI examination in the concerned trade before their appointment as T Mates and they have been given the benefit of revised ay in the grade of Rs. 950-1400.
They too have felt aggrieved by the action of the respondents in seeking to refix their pay in the grade of Rs. 750-940.
4.
Respondents have justified their action on the premise that no qualifications have been prescribed for appointment to the post of T Mates under any rule and, therefore, benefit of the notification dated 2331990 issued by the Finance Department of the Government of Haryana could not have been given to the petitioners.
Respondents have pleaded that petitioners belong to Class-IV category of employees and the revised pay scale admissible to the persons holding posts in the cadre of Class-IV employee is Rs. 750-940.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
A look at the contents of notification dated 2381990 of which reference has been made in paragraph 6 of Civil Writ Petition No. 10414 of 1993 shows that for technical posts a common pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 has been prescribed and it is admissible to the persons working on technical posts in various department and who were having minimum educational qualifications prescribed as Matric with ITI Certificate/Polytechnic.
Similarly, grade of Rs. 950-1400 is admissible to those possessing qualifications of ITI only.
Perusal of Annexures P-1, P-3, P-4 and P-6 filed with C.W.P.
No. 10414 of 1993 further shows that the Executive Engineer concerned who had sent the notification containing requisition for the posts of T Mates to the Employment Exchange had clearly indicated that qualification for T Mate should be ITI In Annexure P-7 issued by none else than the Superintending Engineer, Mechanical Circle, P.W.D.
(B&R), Karnal, it is clearly indicated that T-Mate should be ITI pass.
All the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 10414 of 1993 have been recruited to the service after their names were sponsored by the concerned Employment Exchange in response to the notifications sent by the concerned Executive Engineers.
Though similar notifications have not been placed on record in the other two petitions, the statement made by the petitioners in those writ petitions that they possess qualification of ITI has remained uncontroverted.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents may be correct in arguing that no statutory rules have been framed by the Government for making recruitment against the posts of T Mates and, therefore, qualifications cannot be said to have been prescribed by the statutory rules.
However, mere absence of statutory rules cannot lead to an inference that no qualifications have at all been prescribed.
It is well settled that in the absence of statutory rules, the Executive has the power to issue administrative instructions/orders for regulating recruitment and the conditions of service of the civil posts.
Articles 166(3) of the Constitution of India confers such administrative powers on the Government.
Therefore, even though statutory rules do not prescribe qualifications for recruitment to T Mates, the appointments made by the concerned Executive Engineer after sending a requisition to the Employment Exchange or otherwise on the basis of specified qualifications is sufficiently indicative of the fact that qualifications have been prescribed by executive decision.
7.
Learned Deputy Advocate General has not been able to show as to how the Executive Engineer has made recruitment on the posts of T Mates without there being any qualification.
In fact the stand taken by the respondents belied by the fact that in the standing orders issued by the department qualification for the post of T Mates has been prescribed as ITI pass in respective trade or three years experience in the trade concerned.
These qualifications have been enumerated in Annexure-D contained in Technical Memo No. 6/88 containing rules and instructions for running and unkeep of vehicles and other machinery working in Public Works Department (Building and Roads), Haryana.
This document has been published under the authority of the Government of Haryana and, therefore, there is no reason to believe that these are not the prescribed qualifications.
To me it is clear that by virtue of Annexure-D, appended to the Technical Memo No. 6/88, the department has prescribed the qualifications for appointment on the post of T Mate and precisely for this reason the Executive Engineer had incorporated these qualifications in the various notifications sent by it to the Employment Exchange.
It is thus clear that each of the petitioner had been recruited with the qualification of ITI and some of qualification of Matric with ITI Therefore, no illegality can be said to have been committed by the Superintending Engineer or by the Executive Engineer concerned in granting them the benefit of pay in the grade of Rs. 950-1400 and Rs. 1200-2040 respectively.
In fact, the action which has now been initiated by the respondent-Superintending Engineer is wholly illegal apart from being arbitrary and discriminatory.
I am forfeit in taking this view by the decision of this Court in Balbir Chand v. State of Haryana, 1994(2) R.S.J.
509, wherein a learned single Judge has directed the Government to give pay scale of Rs. 950-1400 to the persons possessing the qualification of ITI/Polytechnic Certificate.
The Court has held that once a person has been recruited with the qualification of ITI/Polytechnic Certificate, the Government cannot deny him the benefit of pay scale in the grade of Rs. 950-1400.
In C.W.P.
No. 7928 of 1993 (Ram Kishan and three others v. State of Haryana), a Division Bench of this Court issued a direction on 1121993 for fixation of the pay of the petitioners according to their qualification of Matric with ITI  8.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed.
The notices issued by the respondents seeking revision of the pay of the petitioners are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
The respondents are restrained from revising the pay scale of the petitioners.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.