Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is a person who had been enrolled or commissioned in any of the three Wings of the Indian Armed Forces prior to the proclamation of the Emergency on October 26, 1962 and joins a civil post in the State of Punjab after his discharge/retirement from the Armed Forces, entitled to the benefits of pay and seniority etc. under the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 ?
This is the short question that arises in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined the Indian Army on September 23, 1961.
He was released from the Army on December 16, 1978.
Thereafter, he joined service as a clerk in the office of the District & Sessions Judge, Amritsar on February 19, 1980.
Soon after his appointment, the petitioner submitted a representation for the grant of benefits towards increments and seniority etc. under the 1965 Rules.
The petitioners' claim having not been decided, he approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 14860 of 1993.
On March 15, 1994, a Division Bench of this Court directed the District & Sessions Judge to decide the petitioner's representation within two months.
Vide order dated June 30, 1994, the learned District Judge has rejected the petitioner's representation.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
3.
In response to the notice of motion issued by this Bench, a written statement has been filed by the respondent.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had joined the office on February 29, 1980 and he had submitted his application on February 9, 1982.
On this premises, it has been averred that "there is delay in the filing of the petition."
On merits, it has been stated that the petitioner had joined service as a clerk in the office of the respondent on February 29, 1980 and not on February 19, 1980.
The benefits under the 1965 Rules are available only to the persons who had joined service during the operation of the proclamation of Emergency and not to those who had joined prior thereto.
The respondent has placed reliance on the decisions in Dhan Singh and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) SCT 137 (SC) : 1991(1) SLR 200, Nirmal Singh v. Punjab State Electricity Board and Another, 1992(1) SCT 126 : 1992(1) SLR 24 andRam Niwas v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(1) SLR 76.
On this basis, it is prayed that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
4.
We have heard Mr. Baldev Raj Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. RK Joshi, for the respondent.
5.
At the outset, it is apt to notice Rule 2 of the 1965 Rules.
It reads as under :-  "2.
Definition - For the purposes of these rules, the expression `military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including service as a warrant officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962, or such other service as may thereafter, be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service.
6.
A perusal of the above provision shows that the period of service `rendered' by a person during the operation of the Proclamation of Emergency made by the President on October 26, 1962 as an enrolled or commissioned member of the Indian Armed Forces qualifies to be treated as `military service'.
Even if a person had joined Army prior to the Proclamation of Emergency and had continued to serve after its cessation on January 3, 1968, the period of service rendered by him from October 26, 1962 to January 8, 1968 falls within the above provision and has to be treated as `military service'.
As a result, the benefits of increments, seniority and pension etc. as admissible under Rule 4, are due to him.
7.
On behalf of the respondent, it has been contended that the benefit under Rule 4 is admissible only to such persons as had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the Emergency and not to others.
Reliance in support of this contention has been placed on the three decisions as noticed above.
8.
Before proceeding further to consider these decisions, it is apt to notice that the State of Haryana in exercise of its powers under Article 309 of the Constitution, issued a notification on August 9, 1976 by which the definition of `military service' was amended with retrospective effect from November 1, 1966.
It was provided as under :  "2.
Definition - For the purpose of these rules the expression `military service' means the service rendered by a person, who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on October 26, 1962 in any of the three wing of the Indian Armed Forces (including the service as a Warrant Officer) during the period of the said emergency or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purpose of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
9.
A plain reading of the above provision shows that the State of Haryana had specifically decided to grant the benefit of military service only to such persons as had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency.
As such, the benefit was clearly confined to the particular class and was not available to those who had been enrolled in the Indian Army prior to the proclamation of the Emergency.
The distinction between the Rules as prevalent in the State of Punjab and the State of Haryana, is thus, clear.
While in the State of Punjab, the benefit is a admissible to a person who has rendered service during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency which by necessary implication means that he may have been enrolled even earlier, it is not so in the case of employees in the State of Haryana wherein the benefit is available only if the person had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of Emergency.
Since the Rules has not been amended by the State of Punjab, the provision as introduced by the State of Haryana can have no application to the persons serving in the State of Punjab.
In our view, there is a basic distinction between the provisions as made by the two States.
As a result, the rules prevalent in the State of Haryana can have no application to the employees in the State of Punjab.
10.
It is in the background of this basic distinction that the question raised in the present case has to be considered.
11.
The petitioner had admittedly rendered service during the proclamation of Emergency.
After his release from the Army, he had joined a civil post in the State of Punjab.
In our view, he was entitled to the benefits of military service as envisaged under Rule 4.
12.
In Dhan Singh's case (supra), the contention raised before their Lordships of the Supreme Court was that the amendment created an artificial classification amongst the military personnel which was arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
This contention was negatived and it was held that "the young persons who have joined the military service during the national emergency and those who were already in service and due to exigencies of service had been compelled to serve during the emergency form two distinct classes".
Thus, Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 959 and 1159 of 1989 were dismissed.
However, so far as the present case is concerned, this question does not arise at all.
As already noticed, the State of Punjab has not created a classification as had been done by the State of Haryana.
Consequently, the rationale of the decision in Dhan Singh's case is not at all attracted to the facts of the present case.
Similarly, even in Ram Niwas's case (supra), the learned Single Judge had rightly followed the decision in Dhan Singh's case and held that the benefit was not admissible to a person who has joined the Army before the proclamation of Emergency.
On this basis, the writ petition of Ram Niwas was allowed and the benefit granted to the respondent was annulled.
Learned counsel for the respondent can, thus derive no advantage from these decisions.
13.
This brings us to the consideration of the decision in Nirmal Singh's case (supra) on which primary reliance has been placed by the learned District Judge.
This was a cage of an employee of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
The rules of 1965 as prevalent in the State of Punjab were admittedly applicable.
In spite of this, the learned Single Judge disagreed with the view taken by GR Majithia, J in Hem Raj Gupta and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board, 1990(6) SLR 592 and following the decision in Dhan Singh's case, held that "the concessions available under the rules are only for the period of emergency to those who had joined the Indian Army during the period of emergency and served the country during that period".
We are unable to accept the view taken by the learned Judge.
The plain distinction in the language of the rules as applicable in the two States was not brought to the notice of his Lordship.
We over-rule the decision in Nirmal Singh's case.
14.
Mr. BR Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the decisions in the case of Satish Chander Saini v. The State of Punjab and others, 1990(1) RSJ 85 and Moti Singh v. District & Sessions Division, 1992(3) SCT 312.
We are of the opinion that the view taken in these two cases is correct.
15.
No other point was urged.
16.
Accordingly, we answer the question posed at the outset in the affirmative and hold that a person who joins a civil post in the State of Punjab, is entitled to the benefit of military service rendered by him during the operation of the proclamation of emergency from October 26, 1962 to January 8, 1968 even if he had entered to military service prior to such declaration.
17.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed.
The impugned order is set aside.
The respondent is directed to re-determine the petitioner's pay and seniority by giving him the benefit of the service rendered from October 26, 1962 to January 8, 1968.
Consequential benefits shall follow.
Petition allowed.