S.H.A.
Raza, J - The factual matrix in short compase is that after the petitioner was retired on 31101989 he was served with a notice dated 711992 purporting to be one under the provisions of 351(a) of the Civil Service Regulations, in which it was indicated that while the petitioner was working as Chief Medical Officer, Deoria in the year 1979-80, he committed certain irregularities.
The petitioner submitted a reply against the said notice/charge-sheet.
No doubt departmental proceedings even after retirement of a public servant can be initiated under para 351 (a) of the Civil Service Regulations, but (sic) be initiated only in respect of an event which took place not more than four years before the institution of such proceedings.
Admittedly the events for which the notice was issued in the year 1992, happened in the year 1979-80.
Hence, it was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that his pension cannot be reduced under the aforesaid provisions.
2.
Learned Standing counsel submitted that under Rules 470(b) of the Civil Service Regulations a discretion has been conferred on the authority sanctioning pension to reduce the pension on the ground the pensioner's service has not been thoroughly satisfactory.
In the case of Vishunath Prasad v. Uttar Pradesh Services Tribunal No. IV and others, Hon'ble Mr. Justice M L Bhat, reported in 1993 Lab.
Indian Cases 1771, opined :  "The finding with regard to question of services not being satisfactory of any employee is not left to the whim of the authority.
If an authority without any basis or foundation thinks it proper that the services of an employee during his tenure have not been thoroughly satisfactory, he cannot, by giving such a finding without any material being there, order to reduction of pension under the said Article.
Exercise of discretionary power is required to have legal limits.
The discretionary power conferred on an authority to reduce pension has to strike suitable balance between executive efficiency and protection of the rights of citizen.
Use of arbitrary power or use of unfettered discretion are not countenanced by any Court.
Discretionary power is to be exercised reasonably and in accordance with the spirit and letters of the Statute conferring such powers.
For invoking Article 470(b) of the C.S.R.
by any authority for the purpose of ordering reduction of pension, two considerations are inherent in the said Article.
Firstly, the authority has to satisfy itself on the basis of material, that the services of a person who claims pension, were not thoroughly satisfactory.
Secondly, while arriving at a conclusion that the service of an employee was not thoroughly satisfactory, the authority has to furnish material, evidence or any report on which he has formed his opinion, to the person concerned who is likely to be effected by his order under Article 470(b) of C.S.R.
In order to make Article 470(b) workable it is necessary that unfettered discretion conferred by this Article on an authority is exercised within the limits of law and satisfaction about the service of an employee not being satisfactory thoroughly is assumed on the basis of evidence and before that evidence is acted upon the employee likely to be affected by the order in that action is given opportunity of being heard.
These are the rudimentary requirements which are to be followed before the discretion under Section 470(b) is exercised by any authority."
3.
No counter-affidavit has been filed by the State in spite of several opportunities.
There is nothing on record to show that how the authority which issued the notice formed an opinion that the service of the petitioner was unsatisfactory.
Only this much has been stated in the notice, dated 711992 issued by the Principal Secretary that while holding such a responsible post the petitioner violated the rules and caused financial loss to the Government and was involved in act of misconduct during the period 1979-80.
No material or any evidence or any report on the basis of which such an opinion was formed, has been indicated in the said notice.
The allegations against the petitioner pertains to the year 1979-80.
The authorities did not take any action against the petitioner till he retired on 31101989.
Even the present notice was given after about two years of the retirement of the petitioner.
In the case of S Ramarao v. Financial Corporation of India, reported in 1991 All India Services Tribunal, page 33, the after employee being acquitted was reinstated.
Thereafter departmental enquiry was initiated against him on the same charges.
As the enquiry was initiated belatedly, the Hon'ble, Supreme Court quashed the departmental enquiry on the ground of delay.
In the case of AP Augustine v. Superintendent of Post Offices reported in 1984(2) S.L.R.
163, it was held that the enquiry cannot be conducted on the belated charges.
In the case of BR Singh v. Union of India, reported in 1989(4) SCC 710, wherein the appointment of the driver was cancelled after conviction and the enquiry was initiated after three years, the Hon'ble Supreme Court quashed the enquiry for that reason,  4.
In view of the aforesaid situation we are of the view that on the basis of the events which took place in the year 1979-80, it was not all proper for the opposite parties to have issued a notice purporting to be one under the provisions of Rules 351(a) and 470(b) of the Civil Service Regulations to the petitioner.
As observed above, there existed no material or evidence or any report against the petitioner to arrive at a conclusion that his working was unsatisfactory, hence invocation of Rule 470(b) of the C.S.R.
was not justified.
The petitioner was given selection grade on 951990.
If the work would have not been satisfactory, he would have not been given selection grade.
Hence we are of the view that the case of the petitioner does not fall within the aforesaid rules and notice issued against him is vitiated.
It is strange that even after giving such a notice the authorities kept mum and even after a lapse of about three years they did not hold and complete the enquiry as envisaged under the aforesaid rules.
5.
In spite of the orders passed by this Court to release at least 90% of the pension, the State Government did not pay the same to the petitioner who served the department throughout his life and is being unnecessarily harassed by not giving his pensionary benefits.
How a man under the compelling circumstances after the retirement can sustain, probably the opposite parties have no consideration we are of the view that the opposite parties are guilty of callousness and inhuman approach in not releasing the pensionary benefits.
6.
In view of the aforesaid situations the writ petition succeeds.
A writ in the nature of the certiorari quashing the notice, dated 711992 purporting to be one under Rule 351 (a) and 470(b) of the C.S.R.
is issued as well as the departmental enquiry is quashed.
A writ in the nature of mandamus to release the pensionary benefits and other benefits to the petitioner forthwith is also issued.
Petition allowed.