Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who is an Ex-Havaldar and was discharged from the Army on September 20, 1961, prays for the quashing of the order dated March 20, 1992 by which his claim for the grant of pension was declined on the ground that he had not completed the 15 years qualifying service.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner had admittedly served the Army from December 11, 1939 to May 2, 1947 for a period of seven years' and 43 days.
He had been served the Army from November 12, 1948 to April 1, 1956 and from September 21, 1956 to September 21, 1961.
He had, thus, served the Indian Army for a total period of 19 years' and 284 days.
However, while passing the impugned order, the respondents did not take into account the period of service rendered by the petitioner from November 12, 1948 to April 1, 1956 on the ground that it was "a short service engagement."
It is the admitted position that according to the instructions issued by the Army authorities, this period had to be taken into consideration with effect from August 31, 1968.
3.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
It has been averred by way of preliminary objection that the petition suffers from the vice of laches.
It has been further averred that his service documents have already been destroyed.
However, according to the respondents, "his war service rendered with Jat Regiment for the period from 11 December 1939 to 2 May 1947 and short service rendered with Jat Regiment for the period from 12 November, 1948 to 1 April, 1956 were not countable towards pension/gratuity in DSC."
On this premises, it has been claimed that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of pension.
4.
At the hearing of the case, it has been admitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that in similar circumstances, Civil Writ Petition No. 2215 of 1991 (Mehnga Ram v. Union of India and others) was allowed by this Court on January 7, 1992.
Mr. SK Pippat, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has candidly admitted that in view of this position, even the petitioner's claim deserves to be accepted.
The only contention raised by the learned counsel is that in the present case, a specific objection with regard to delay having been raised, the writ petition should be dismissed.
5.
As for the objection regarding delay, it deserves to be mentioned that the petitioner having become entitled to the grant of pension, the respondents were under a duty to pay it.
They having wrongly with held the amount of money due to the petitioner, cannot be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong and deny the payment to him.
Admittedly, no third party rights had come into existence.
No prejudice has been caused to the respondents by the action of the petitioner in approaching this court after a long time.
Still further, it is the admitted position that his representation for the grant of pension was only rejected vide order dated March 20, 1992.
6.
Taking the totality of circumstances, into consideration, I find no ground to deny the relief to the petitioner.
On merits, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had completed more than 19 years' of service.
Under the Regulations, pension is admissible to a person on completion of 15 years' of service.
The petitioner is, consequently, entitled to the grant of pension.
His claim deserves to be allowed, in view of the decision in Mehnga Ram's case.
It may be further mentioned that learned counsel for the parties are agreed that LPA No. 574 of 1992 filed by the respondents against the judgment in Mehnga Ram's case, has already been dismissed.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to compute and pay the pension admissible to the petitioner, within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has approached this Court long after his discharge, it is held that he would not be entitled to the payment of any interest on the amount of pension which may be found due to him.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.