AP Rakesh Chowdhry, J - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 685, 1129 and 1282 of 1994 and arising out of substantially identical facts and raising common questions for decision.
2.
Admission to MBBS, BDS and BAMS in various Govt.
Colleges in the State of Punjab is regulated by the State Government.
Admissions are made on the basis of a common entrance test, called PMT.
Seats are reserved for various categories of students.
The present writ petitions relate to admission to MBBS/BDS Courses for the session commencing 1993.
Prospectus was published in May 1993 by the Punjabi University, Patiala, which was entrusted with the duty of holding the PMT as well as finalising the admissions.
The last date for receipt of applications was June 15, 1993.
PMT was held on July 10, 1993.
Apart from 15 per cent of the total seats which were to be filled on all India basis to be conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, the remaining seats were subject to reservations specified in the prospectus.
The various categories of reservation included backward classes to the extent of 5 per cent.
There was a total number of 350 seats in three Medical Colleges of the State for MBBS and 80 seats for BDS.
In these writ petitions we are not concerned with BAMS seats.
The petitioners belong to one or the other Backward Classes.
Candidates applying for a seat in the Backward Classes category were required to produce a certificate in the prescribed form with regard to being within the family income of the ceiling limits as notified by the Department of Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, Punjab, from time to time.
It is common ground that at the relevant time the notification in force as dated November 6, 1974 (Annexure P-3/A to CWP Nos. 685 of 1994).
The ceiling of income was Rs. 6,000/- per annum.
Admitted case of all the three petitioners in these writ petitions is that even though they belonged to one or more of the backward classes, they applied for admission against the general category.
They could not apply for admission to the backward classes category on account of the fact that the father of petitioner in CWP No. 685 and that of petitioner in CWP No. 1282 were in government service and their income was more than the ceiling limit fixed at the relevant time.
The third petitioner, Rupinder Jeet Kaur, also submitted only a certificate regarding her being a member of one of the backward classes but she did not file the requisite income certificate.
Sumit Pal Singh (Petitioner in CWP No. 685) appeared under Roll No. 4209 and secured 17775 marks in PMT.
Rupinder Jeet Kaur (petitioner in CWP No. 1129) appeared under Roll No. 12177.
She secured 158 marks (according to written statement she secured 157 marks).
Arshdeep Singh (petitioner in CWP No. 1282) appeared under Roll No. 10402 and secured 17025 marks.
The grievances of the petitioners are :  (1) As per the Prospectus the number of seats available for backward classes category was 5 per cent of the total number of seats and it was not open to the authorities to work out the number of seats for the said category after deducting 15 per cent seats for being filled on all India basis.
(2) Action of the authorities in adjusting one seat from out of the classes category to the aforesaid 15 per cent quota, purporting to act in compliance with the direction of the Supreme Court in Surabh Mathur etc. v. Director General of Health Services and another, CWP No. 48 of 1993 dated July 23, 1993, was illegal inasmuch as there was no warrant to take away a seat from the said reserved category without touching the other reserved categories.
(3) The ceiling limit regarding income having been quashed by a Divisional Bench of this Court in CWP No.10271 of 1993 decided on November 17 1993, the petitioners were entitled to be considered in the aforesaid reserved category irrespective of the fact that they did not file the requisite backward classes certificate with the condition of the ceiling of income.
3.
A number of candidates challenged the income amount of Rs. 6,000/- fixed under Government notification Annexure P-2 dated November 6, 1974.
The Writ petitions were allowed by a Division Bench comprising MS Liberhan and HS Brar, JJ.
by order dated November 17, 1993.
The Bench quashed the condition with respect to production of certificate of income for getting admission against the quota reserved for backward classes.
It was left open to the State to fix a fresh economic criteria after taking into consideration relevant factors.
It was further stated that the admissions for the session 1993-94 for the candidates having competed against the reserved quota of backward classes shall be granted according to the merits obtained by the candidates in the PMT irrespective of the income of their parents.
Following the above judgement, the authorities issued public notice including a notice published in The Tribune dated December 17, 1993, calling upon backward classes candidates to produce their backward class certificates in the office of the Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala, on December 23, 1993, for verification of the original certificates.
The petitioners having failed to secure admission filed the present writ petitions.
4.
The pleas raised in the written statements filed in these writ petitions are substantially common and it will, therefore, be sufficient to refer to them from the written statement filed in CWP No. 685.
The petitioner had not applied for admission against the reserved category of backward classes.
In fact, the petitioner had applied only against the general category seat.
The petitioners claim for reserved category at a later stage cannot be considered.
It was further pleaded that in CM No. 34 of 1994 in CWP No. 10885 of 1993 a Division Bench of this Court had clarified that candidates who had applied for the PMT under the reserved category of backward classes alone were entitled to be considered for admission to the seats belonging to that reserved category.
It was further stated that the interview for admission to MBBS/BDS Courses took place on 23rd and 24th August, 1993, and the classes actually commenced from 31st August, 1993.
All seats including seats relating to backward classes category had been filled in leaving no vacant seat.
The petitioners could not be, therefore, given any relief at this stage.
The other pleas of the petitioners were controverted.
5.
The first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that 5 per cent seats reserved for Backward Classes category are to be worked out on the basis of the total number of seats in the various Medical Colleges of the State.
According to the respondents, on the other hand, from the total number of seats, 15 per cent seats have to be deducted for the all India quota and it is only on the basis of the remaining seats that 5 per cent seats have to be worked out for the reserved category in question.
The contention of the respondents must be accepted.
Para 41 of the Prospectus under the Chapter 'Distribution of Seats' gives the details of seats available in the various Medical Colleges.
These are : MBBS - 350 and BDS - 40.
Para 41 is followed by the following note :  "15% of total seats will be filled on All India basis through a test to be conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education (for MBBS/BDS only)."
The above paragraph is followed by paragraph 42, 43, 44 and finally 45, which lays down reservation of seats for various categories noted therein to the extent mentioned against each.
In (ii) is the category Backward Classes and the extent of reservation mentioned there against is 5 per cent.
It will be seen that the note below paragraph 41 refers to total seats.
No such word has been used in para 45.
It follows that 15 per cent seats for All India quota are to be worked out on the basis of the total number of seats mentioned in para 41 and reservation in favour of the various categories dealt with in para 45 is confined to the remaining seats.
6.
In compliance with the direction of the Supreme Court in the case already referred, the State Government adjusted one seat, which resulted in reduction of one seat relating to Backward Classes category.
This was notified by the State Government by notification Annexure P-1 dated July 15, 1993.
It was on the basis of this adjustment that further process of admission was completed and the classes started towards the end of August 1993.
The present petitions were filed towards the later part of January 1994.
If the petitioners felt aggrieved, it was open to them to challenge the notification Annexure P-1.
That being so, the challenge cannot be entertained at this belated stage, so as to upset the admissions already made out on the basis of the notification Annexure P-1.
7.
Even at the risk of repetition, it may be emphasised that while quashing the ceiling limit of income, it was made clear by the learned Judges of the Divisional Bench in CWP No. 10271 of 1993 that admission for the Session commencing 1993-94 relating to reserved category of backward classes shall be confined to candidates who had competed against that reserved quota and as per merit obtained by them in the PMT.
Substantially same view was taken by another Divisional Bench, of which I was a member, while disposing of CH No. 34 of 1994 in CWP No. 10885 of 1993, dated January 7, 1994, Annexure R-2.
In other words, admission was to be given only to candidates who had applied for a seat in the Backward Classes category and as per merit obtained in the PMT.
Applying that criterion, the admitted case of the three petitioners before me is that they did not apply for the reserved category of Backward Classes candidates.
They have, therefore, no case, on merits.
8.
In any case, it has not been brought to my notice that any person of the category in question having secured lesser marks than any of the petitioners has been given admission.
No case has, therefore, been made out for the grant of writ of mandamus or any other direction in any nature of mandamus.
9.
Finally, the aspect of delay cannot be lost sight of.
Delay assumes greater significance in the context of professional colleges where course of studies includes practicals or other work hi the nature of practicals compared to other non-professional courses.
The various material dates have already been noticed.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no merit in these writ petitions.
These are accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.