AL Bahri, J - Challenge in this writ petition is to framing of charge-sheet Annexure P/5 dated February 4, 1992.
The petitioner, JS Sanghera, Superintending Engineer, joined service in 1961.
From time to time he was duly promoted and finally in May, 1988, he was promoted as Superintending Engineer.
In September, 1988, there were unprecedented heavy rains and floods, resulting in loss of human lives, cattle and crops.
In Ferozepur circle, there was damage to the embankments of the canal to the extent of 500 kilometre length.
The petitioner was to undertake the repair work of the Ferozepur canal circle.
In the newspaper of September 1989, there were news of false allegations of irregularities committed in the construction work aforesaid.
Vigilance Wing of the Irrigation Branch and the Chief Engineer (Vigilance) held separate preliminary enquiries.
The petitioner was also associated.
However, nothing against the petitioner was brought out in the inquiry.
On the basis of the inquiry report, charge-sheets were served upon 4 Executive Engineers, 10 Sub-Divisional Officers and 50 Junior Engineers.
Though no charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner, yet he was conveyed certain remarks vide letter dated December 5, 1989, which were incorporated in his annual confidential report.
Annexure P/1 contains such remarks.
Annexure P/2 was also served upon the petitioner, which is dated January 12, 1990, calling upon his explanation.
Vide order dated May 18, 1990, the petitioner was ordered to be retired premature under Rule 3(1) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
Copy of the order is Annexure P/4.
The petitioner challenged the aforesaid order in Civil Writ Petition No. 10333 of 1990, which was allowed on April 30, 1991.
Thus, the petitioner was reinstated and joined as Director, R.S.D.D., Chandigarh, on August 22, 1991.
It was on February 4, 1992, that a charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner about the irregularities committed during 1977-79, while using the sand which was not upto the mark for construction.
Specifically the charge-sheet is related to the following two matters :  "(1) For not making adequate arrangement for the procurement of specified quality of sand and allowing the use of sand of low FM for manufacture of concrete for construction of Shah Nehar Barrage resulting into avoidable expenditure of Rs, 3,88,558/- due to excess consumption of Cement.
(2) For including the item of washing of sand in the N.I.T.
resulting into infructuous expenditure of Rs. 16,245/-"  Annexure P/5 is the charge-sheet.
The petitioner submitted his reply on December 21, 1992.
Thus, in this writ petition the petitioner prays for quashing of the charge-sheet and proceedings initiated thereon after lapse of about 15 years of the alleged irregularities.
2.
On notice of motion having been issued, written statement has been filed on behalf of the official respondent, inter alia, admitting the broad facts, however, explaining delay in framing the charge-sheet.
Annexure R/1 contains a calendar of events explaining the delay.
The petitioner submitted replication, inter alia, asserting his stand as taken in the petition.
3.
The matter has already been considered by the Full Bench in Jagir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) SLR 1 : 1993(2) SCT 128 (P&H).
After referring to the entire case law, it was observed as under :-  "It is no doubt correct and reasonable also, that departmental proceedings initiated against the employees should be finalised expeditiously.
Expeditious disposal helps the employer as well as the employees as it removes uncertainty about the future career of the employees and lessens the financial burden in most of the cases, where the employees are either placed under suspension or their promotions etc. are deferred during the pendency of the inquiry.
But, for how many months a particular departmental enquiry can be allowed to continue and after the expiry of how many months the approval of the Head of the Department, the Secretary to the Government/the Chief Secretary, the Minister Incharge, or the Cabinet (Council of Ministers) has to be obtained or not, is purely for the employer to consider.
In that process the delinquent employee cannot be associated nor does he have any say in the matter.
If the State Government have issued certain guidelines for the guidance of the various Departments or the disciplinary authorities to impress upon them the necessity of finalising the Departmental proceedings expeditiously or even within a fixed period, it does not mean that after the expiry of that period, a right in law accrues to the employee to approach the Court of law for the enforcement of those guidelines.
The employee may, in a fit case, approach the Court for the quashing of the proceedings, if the pendency of the enquiry has otherwise been protracted and delayed to an unreasonable extent by the employer himself."
4.
In Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1993(4) SLR 655 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
563(Pb.
& Hry.)
: 1993(1) I.L.R.
377, again similar view was taken.
The matter was also considered by the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh, 1990(2) Judgments Today 54.
In para 4 of the judgment, it was observed as under :  "The irregularities which were the subject matter of the enquiry is said to have taken place between the years 1975-1977.
It is not the case of the department that they were not aware of the said irregularities, if any, and came to know it only in 1987.
According to them even in April, 1977 there was doubt about involvement of the officer in the said irregularities and the investigations were going on since then.
If that is so, it is unreasonable to think that they would have taken more than 12 years to initiate the disciplinary proceedings as stated by the Tribunal.
There is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in issuing the charge memo and we are also of the view that it will be unfair to permit the departmental enquiry to be proceeded with at this stage.
In any case there are no grounds to interfere with the Tribunal's orders and accordingly we dismiss the appeal."
5.
There is no period prescribed for initiating disciplinary proceedings, but all the same delay in initiating such a step must be bona fide.
It is only in a case that delay which has accrued has caused prejudice to the employee that the Court will intervene but the factum of prejudice would have to be established by the aggrieved party, otherwise charge would not be dropped merely on account of lapse of time.
It is in this context that the facts in the present case are to be appreciated to know if by lapse of time the right of the petitioner to defend himself has been prejudiced, and if so, to quash the proceedings.
Annexure R/1, calendar of events relied upon by the respondent indicates that it was in November, 1981 that a complaint was received regarding the irregularities aforesaid.
Report of the Chief Engineer (Vigilance) is dated February 24, 1984, on which the Government took a decision to proceed against four officers, namely Iqbal Singh-XEN, SP Nagpal-ARO, PC Sharma-SDO and Harbans Singh Gill-Superintending Engineer.
The aforesaid persons were charge-sheeted in February, 1989.
It was thereafter that the Government decided to proceed against JS Sanghera-XEN (the petitioner) and Hardial Singh-XEN.
Hardial Singh submitted reply to the charge-sheet and the proceedings against him were dropped.
Thereafter draft charge-sheet was prepared by the Chief Engineer (Vigilance) on February 1, 1990 for approval of the competent authority.
Thereafter three reminders were sent and it was on May 28, 1991, that the sanction was received under Rule 12.
Thus, common proceedings were initiated against Iqbal Singh and others, four persons aforesaid.
Against the petitioner, the charge-sheet was approved on February 4, 1992.
This would show that though inquiry was completed in 1989, it was only after four years thereof that the draft charge-sheet was prepared against the petitioner.
Initially action was sought to be taken against lqbal Singh and others, four persons.
From the data available no reasonable explanation appears on the record as to why action against the petitioner by framing charge-sheet could not be taken up promptly.
Rather it appears that initially only 4 persons were sought to be proceeded against i.e. lqbal Singh and others and not the petitioner.
Against one of them i.e. Hardayal Singh, Executive Engineer, the proceedings were dropped though he and the petitioner were sailing in the same boat.
Since the matter relates to 1976-77 and the petitioner ( ?
? ? )
was, ling at that time in a supervisory manner, by lapse of time, his defence would be prejudiced and it is not advisable to proceed further with the charge-sheet framed against the petitioner in February, 1992 Annexure P.5.
6.
For the reasons stated above, charge-sheet Annexure P 5 and the proceedings initiated thereon are quashed.
Petition allowed.