NK Sodhi, J - The only claim made by the appellant in this appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is that he should be deemed to have been considered and promoted to the post of Deputy Advocate General with effect from the date when one Shri GS Bains, junior to him, was so appointed and that he be given his retiral benefits accordingly.
2.
The appellant was appointed as Assistant Advocate General on July 15, 1976 in the office of the Advocate General, Punjab and one Shri GS Bains was so appointed on October 20, 1977.
The services of the appellant were terminated on June 15, 1982 and against the order of termination he filed a departmental appeal which was accepted on December 26, 1984 and he was ordered to be re- instated.
He joined duty on January 1, 1985.
The question then arose as to how the period between 1561982 and 31.12 1984 was to be treated.
The State Government declared the said period as 'dies-non' and communicate its decision to the Advocate General, Punjab as per letter of June 24, 1987.
After treating the aforesaid period as 'dies-non', the total length of service of the appellant became less than the total service of aforesaid Shri GS Bains.
Consequently, the State Government also declared the said Shri GS Bains as senior to the appellant.
The appellant filed a civil suit challenging the order of the State Government declaring the aforesaid period as 'dies-non'.
This suit was decreed on March 9, 1989 and the order impugned therein was set aside.
The net result was that the period from 1561982 to 31.12.1984 was not treated as a break in the service of the appellant.
The appeal filed by the State against the decree of the trial Court was dismissed in January, 1990 and the second appeal was also dismissed by this Court on July 21, 1990.
3.
In the meantime, Shri GS Bains, who was junior to the appellant, was appointed as Deputy Advocate General on August 10, 1987 and he retired from service on February 28, 1989.
The appellant was, however, appointed as Deputy Advocate General by an order of the State Government dated April 24, 1989.
As stated earlier, the claim of the petitioner is that since Shri Bains was junior to him as Assistant Advocate General, therefore, he should be deemed to have been promoted with effect from the date Shri GS Bains was appointed.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length and find no merit in this appeal.
It is true that Shri Bains was junior to the appellant and the State Government declared him senior when the period between 1561982 to 31.12.1984 in the service of the appellant was treated as 'dies-non'.
When the order declaring this period as 'dies-non' was quashed by the Civil Court, the appellant at the most could claim seniority over Shri Bains, but not that he became entitled to claim promotion to the post of Deputy Advocate General as a matter of course.
The post of Deputy Advocate General is, indeed, not a promotional post and fresh appointment is made by the State Government by way of selection based on merit and any Assistant Advocate General is eligible to be considered for the said post.
As is clear from the order of the State Government dated April 24, 1989, the appellant was not just promoted to the post of Deputy Advocate General but was appointed afresh by selection to the said post.
Similarly, Shri Bains was also appointed as Deputy Advocate General in August, 1987 when he was working as Assistant Advocate General.
He, too, was not just promoted but selected.
In this view of the matter, the appellant cannot claim to have been promoted/appointed to the post of Deputy Advocate General on the basis of seniority with effect from the date when his junior Shri Bains was so appointed since seniority is not of much significance for the purposes of selection.
No other point was raised.
In the result, the appeal fails and the same stands dismissed.
There is no order as to costs in this appeal.