AL Bahri, J - Vide this order two writ petitions No. 7544 and 7635 of 1988 are being disposed of as the question of fact and law involved are common.
2.
The challenge in these two writ petitions is to the determination of seniority of the members of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch).
The petitioners and the private respondents were directly recruited to the service.
The private respondents were also like-wise recruited.
However, they were given benefit of military service and thus fixed in the final seniority above the petitioners.
This benefit was given under the Indian Armed Forces Personnel (Reservations of Vacancies in Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) Rules, 1972, (hereinafter called the 1972 Rules).
These Rules were framed under Articles 309 of the Constitution.
The case put up by the petitioners is that since the private respondents were released from Army on completion of their contractual tenure, they may not be treated as 'Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel' to seek benefit of seniority under the Rules aforesaid.
Reference was made to the certificates of the private respondents (CWP No. 7544 of 1988, Annexures P-2/1 to P-2/6).
In this writ petition reference is also made to the Demobilised Indian Armed Forces Personnel and Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab Non-Technical Service Rules, 1968, to aver that the private respondents could not take benefit of their military service as these rules were subject matter of consideration in the case of Inderjit Kaushik v. The Punjab Public Service Commission and another, 1982(2) S.L.R.
617, holding that the definition of 'released Indian Armed Forces Personnel' would mean only the person who had been demobilised from the Forces and not the one who had been released from the Army/Air Force after completion of his tenure.
In this petition, the tentative seniority list prepared and circulated for inviting objections was also filed and the final order passed determining the seniority of the members of the services was also filed.
The challenge was to the order dated April 8, 1988 fixing final seniority which is Annexure P-5 and the final list is Annexure P-5/1.
On the basis of finalization of the seniority list, order Annexure P-6 was issued on July 26, 1988 promoting the private respondents and appointing them to the Indian Administrative Services which is also sought to be quashed through this writ petition.
This writ petition (No. 7544 of 1988), has been filed by Roshan Lal Kalsia and nine others.
The other writ petition (No. 7635 of 1988), has been filed by Gurinder Singh Grewal and SK Ahluwalia.
Some of the private respondents are common in these two writ petitions.
3.
The stand taken by the State as well as the Private respondents in their written statement filed in these cases is common that the seniority has been finalized giving benefit of military service to the private respondents under the 1972 Rules.
The ratio of the decision in Inderjit Kaushik's case (supra), will not be attracted as the aforesaid case was under the 1968 Rules.
The 1972 Rules specifically apply to the service in hand.
4.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioners, has vehemently argued on the basis of preamble of 1972 Rules that the Rules are to be so interpreted that the object of the Rules as enshrined in the preamble is achieved.
Since the word 'demobilised' appears in the preamble, it should be given the same meaning (dictionary meaning) as was given to such a word in the 1968 Rules.
It is in this context that the reference has been made to the decision of Inderjit Kaushik's case (supra).
At page 623, the definition of the word 'demobilization' as given in Corpus Juris Secundum (Vol. 26-A) was reproduced as under :-  "Demobilization : In military law, the dismissal of an army or body of troops from active service."
and from the Webster's Third New International Dictionary, meaning of demobilization was reproduced as under :- "...the reduction (as of force, equipment, or resources) from a war basis to a peace basis; the disarming of troops previously mobilized; release from the armed services...." and it was observed as under :- "It would be thus plain that demobilization even if widely construed, cannot become an equivalent of mere retirement on superannuation from defence services.
The framers of the Rules deliberately introduced this condition as against a 'release' simpliciter from the Armed Services in the unamended rules.
Consequently, a mere discharge on fulfilling the specific conditions of his enrolment in the regular service of the Air Force, in my opinion, cannot be treated as synonymous with release on demobilization."
5.
The aforesaid view was expressed in the context of Rule 2(d) of the 1968 Rules.
It is in this context that it was observed that the personnel discharged from the military service would not fall in the category of Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel as defined under Section 2(d) of the Rules of 1968.
6.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners in the present case is that though certificates issued to the private respondents Annexures P-2/1 to P-2/6, referred to release of the respondents but it would amount to discharge on completion of the engagement.
7.
At the outset, it may be stated that the question involved in the present case is to be decided in the context of 1972 Rules and not 1968 Rules.
Thus, reference is being made to 1972 Rules which are contained in Annexure P-1 (Writ Petition No. 7544 of 1988.
Rule 1(3) makes these rules applicable to all posts in the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch).
Thus, these Rules are special rules to be applicable to the service in dispute and on that account we need not refer to 1968 Rules, which were general.
Rule 2 of 1972 Rules provides for filling 20 per cent of the vacancies in the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) by direct recruitment to be reserved for "Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel who joined military service or were commissioned on or after the first day of November, 1962 and released at any time thereafter.
Such Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel are not required to appear in optional subjects of the competitive examination.
The private respondents in the present cases appeared in the Punjab Civil Services, (Executive Branch) competitive examinations and were recruited under Rule 2(1) of the Rules of 1972 (supra).
At this stage, it may be observed that Rule 2(1) did not limit the period of service for the purposes of granting of the benefits.
Howsoever short the period of military service may be, the person is to be given the benefit.
Rule 4 of the 1972 Rules, which is relevant and deals with the question for determination of seniority, reads as under :-  "(1) The period of military service rendered after attaining the age prescribed for appointment to the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) by the candidates appointed against reserved vacancies under rule 2, shall count towards fixation of pay and seniority in the said service subject to the condition that :- (a) the date of appointment in the PCS (Executive Branch) in respect such candidates as are appointed against the reserved vacancies under Rule 2 shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the service under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after joining the military service or training prior to the Commission; (b) the inter-se-seniority of the military personnel determined by the Punjab Public Service Commission shall not be disturbed; (c) a military personnel appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to a military personnel appointed as a result of subsequent selection, irrespective of the period of military service to his credit; and (d) all candidates appointed against the reserved vacancies under Rule 2 shall rank below the candidates appointed by direct recruitment in the year to which the former candidates are allotted.
(2) The period of military service rendered after attaining the minimum age mentioned in sub-rule (1) shall also count towards pension, subject to the following conditions; (a) The persons concerned should not have earned pension under the rules applicable to such service except disability pension; (b) Any bonus or gratuity received from the military authorities in respect of military service shall have to be refunded to the State Government."
8.
Rules 5 gives overriding effect of 1972 Rules to any other rules providing to the contrary.
If Rules 4(1) is strictly applied to the case in hand, the seniority of the private respondents has been rightly fixed giving them due benefit of military service.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that seniority of the members of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) is to be determined in accordance with the rules of recruitment, i.e. Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, and as subsequently amended.
Rule of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch), Rules, 1930, prescribes the mode of determination of seniority to the order in which they are appointed.
10.
This contention again cannot be accepted in view of Rule 5 of the 1972 Rules referred to above as such Rules being special rules would override other rules on the subject.
Reference was made to actual period of military service rendered by some of the respondents, i.e. Sukhpal Singh joined on May 10, 1969, and was released in 1975, KS Kang joined military service on August 12, 1968, and was released in 1974 and KBS Sidhu joined military service on August 12, 1988 and was released in 1974.
Since they were released after the term of their appointment, they could not be given benefit of military service in the matter of fixation of seniority.
As already stated above, this contention is devoid of merit.
The seniority is not only to be fixed under Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1976, but so far as released armed forces personnel are concerned, they are given the benefit of military service under 1972 Rules.
The Supreme Court had the occasion to consider the applicability and scope of 1972 Rules in SB Dogra v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, JT 1992 (5) SC 667 : 1993(1) SCT 119 (SC).
While giving benefit of military service, the same was limited to the period of Emergency by the Tribunal.
It was held that the Tribunal was wrong in confining the benefit under Rule 5(1) of 1972 Rules to the period in the Army during emergency.
The question in the present case is not to give benefit under the Punjab National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The language of 1965 and 1972 Rules being different, they are to be interpreted differently.
It was so observed in SB Dogra's case (supra).
Similar provision exists in Demobilized Indian Armed Forces (Reservation of Vacancies in Punjab Civil Services (Judicial Branch), Rules, 1969, for reservation for such released Indian Armed Force Personnel as is in Rule 2(1).
The aforesaid Rule was considered by this Court in Shri Sampuran Singh Sandhu, Advocate v. The State of Punjab and others, 1975 (1) S.L.R.
197.
In para 4 of the judgment, it was observed as under :-  "A plain reading of the rule shows that the word 'released' has not been qualified by any considerations, like released at the instance of the Army authorities only.
The phrase would therefore he given beneficial interpretation in favour of those to whom it is meant to apply.
I do not for a moment suggest that even deserters from the Army or those who seek release from the Armed Forces against the wishes of the Army authorities should also be given the benefit of this provisions.
Mr. Gupta is right in submitting that this rule is meant for rehabilitating those members of the Armed Forces whose services are no longer required by the Army Authorities.
At the same time, it would result in manifest injustice if this rule is not made applicable to the case of the petitioner.
He joined the combatant branch of the Indian Army with the hope that he would be able to rise but his ambitions were cut short because of the unfortunate accident.
With one arm only, he could not continue to serve in an Infantry Battalion.
The accident was not of his own seeking and I think it would be unjust to expect of him to serve as a non-combatant follower in the Army.
If in such a situation, he puts in a request for his release, he should not be regarded as deserter and full benefit of the rule should be given to him."
A wider meaning is required to be attached to 'demobilization' as mentioned in the Rules when it is not the case that the respondents sought their release, they would be entitled to the benefit of service rules aforesaid if they were released by the authorities.
They responded to the call of the nation at the time of imposition of emergency.
They were released from the service and thus they were entitled to the benefit of military service in the matter of fixation of seniority in other service.
This is the special benefit granted to them under 1972 Rules.
11.
It has been argued on behalf of the petitioners that some of the respondents joined other service and subsequently they competed and were selected in Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) service and thus again they cannot get the benefit of military services.
This contention is again devoid of merit in view of a Division Bench authority of this Court in Dr. Jagmohan singh and another v. The State of Punjab, and others, 1980(3) S.L.R.
400.
In para 12 of the judgment, it was observed as under :-  "It was not the intention that a demobilised person should not join an inferior job to keep his body and soul together till the time a post commensurate with his status and qualification comes his way and if in dire necessity such a person had to accept a humble job, he should be deprived of all the benefits to which the officers and ex-servicemen are otherwise entitled.
The Officers or Ex-servicemen who had joined the civil posts after release from the military do not come to form a class different from other such officers or ex-servicemen who did not or could not join civil posts.
This classification is surely unreasonable and arbitrary.
It has no relationship with the object to be achieved i.e. rehabilitation and welfare of the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel.
This fictional and artificial definition of the released armed forces personnel has no nexus with the object to be achieved."
This matter was also considered by the Full Bench of this Court in Harbhajan Singh, Advocate v. The State of Punjab and another, 1977(2) S.L.R.
180.
That was a case relating to Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) service.
It was observed as under :-  "It looks as if a person belonging to the category of Released Armed Forces Personnel accepts an inferior post he does so on pain of losing eligibility to a superior post.
It no superior post is readily available "immediately on his release from the Armed Forces he must wait till such post becomes available, and it may never become available.
In the meanwhile, he is precluded from accepting an inferior post even to keep his body and soul together.
Surely, that is not how we repay our debt to those that readily shed their blood for us."
A fine distinction was sought to be drawn in cases of 'discharge' or 'release' from the Army by making reference to Sections 22 and 24 of the Army Act, 1950, and Rule 16 Indian Army Rules, 1954.
Section 22 of the Army Act, 1950, refers to retirement, release or discharge from the service by the authority prescribed.
Section 24 of the Act talks of the discharge or dismissal of an army personnel, when out of India and then to be brought to India.
It is in this section that sub-section (4) provided that word 'discharge' shall include release and the word 'dismissal' shall include removal.
The contention of Shri Rajiv Atma Ram is that the meaning given aforesaid in Section 24 of the Act would be read into the Rules of 1972, referred to above.
This contention cannot be accepted as sub-section (4) of Section 24 specifically provides that for the purposes of this Section, only the word 'discharge' is to include release.
It would show that for all other purposes or for other provisions of the Act or Rules, this definition is not to be carried.
The Army Rules, 1954, have also been referred to.
Rule 11 talks of discharge of every person enrolled under the Act under the conditions of his enrolment.
Reference has been made to the Table under Rule 13 that for Junior Commissioned Officers, the ground of discharge would be on completion of the period of service or tenure, specified in the regulation for his appointment.
This provision cannot be applied to the private respondents in this writ petition as they do not belong to the rank or they were enrolled under the Act as such.
They were appointed as Officers.
Reference be also made to Rules 15-A and 16 which talk of release on medical grounds and release from service in accordance with the Release Regulations for the Army or in accordance with any other regulations, instructions or orders, made in that behalf.
If these rules are read as such, the orders of release produced in the case cannot be treated as orders of discharge.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in the writ petitions the same are dismissed.
Petition dismissed