Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners were selected and appointed as Lecturers in English at the Doaba College, Jalandhar.
This appointment was initially made on temporary basis against substantive vacancies.
It was approved by the Director of Public Instructions (College) Punjab, Chandigarh as well as by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
After the petitioners had worked for more than two years, the college sought the approval of the University for treating the petitioners as on probation with effect from the date of appointment.
This proposal was declined by the University vide order dated October 15, 1991.
Another effort made by the college having met with the same fate, the petitioners whose continuance in service was threatened have approached this court through this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Amongst others, three posts of Lecturers in English had become available in the college in the year 1989.
The first of these vacancies had occurred on February 11, 1989 on account of the death of the incumbent, Mr. D D Sandal.
The other two vacancies had arisen on March 29, 1989 and May 28, 1989 as the lecturers concerned had submitted their resignations.
The college had then issued an advertisement inviting applications for recruitment to various posts of lecturers including the three posts in the subject of English.
The advertisement may be usefully reproduced.
It reads as under :-  "Wanted temporary Lecturers in English (Likely (to) become permanent) one each in Punjabi and Chemistry upto 31390 and one Lecturer in Maths against leave vacancy.
Qualification and salary as per UGC/DPI norms.
Apply on prescribed form to be obtained from College office on payment of Rs. 25/-.
Last date of receipt of applications is 28789.
Ladies eligible."
It is the admitted position that in response to this advertisement, 37 candidates had submitted applications for appointment against the posts of Lecturers in English.
The interview was held on August 8, 1989.
33 candidates had appeared for interview.
The 3 petitioners were admittedly found to be best in order of merit.
They were selected.
Letters of appointments were accordingly issued to them.
The petitioners have produced the orders of appointment as Annexures P-3 to P-5 with the petition.
One of these letters is Annexure P-3.
In this order of appointment it was specifically mentioned that "the duly constituted Selection Committee had selected you for the post of Lecturer in English on temporary basis in the scale of Rs. 2200-4000 upto July 31, 1992.
You will be granted annual increment only if the DPI(C), Punjab, has no objection.
You will not be confirmed during the period of temporary appointment.
Your appointment will be subject to the approval by the GND University, Amritsar and DPI (College) Punjab, Chandigarh.
The nature of your appointment will be reviewed in July, 1992.
You have to join against substantive vacancy covered under 95% deficit scheme.
You will have to deposit notice period salary of 3 months in case you want to leave service."
Identical letters were issued to the three petitioners.
In accordance with the procedure prescribed by the University, the college teachers return was submitted in respect of the petitioners as well and a copy thereof has been produced as Annexure P-6.
In this return, it has been specifically indicated that the appointments had been made against substantive vacancies.
These appointments were duly approved by the University vide its letter dated June 20, 1990.
Identical letters were sent to the three petitioners.
Copies of these letters have been produced on record as Annexure P-7 to P-9.
More than a year later, the Principal of the college sought the approval of the University for the appointment of the petitioners "on probation from the date of their joining".
It was specifically mentioned that these appointments had been made against substantive posts and were filled through a regularly constituted selection committee.
An identical communication was sent on the same date to the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges.)
On October 15, 1991, the Registrar of the University informed the Principal that "It is not possible to give approval to the appointments of the said three Lecturers on probation from the date of their joining.
So action may be taken to fill up their vacancies by advertising posts on permanent basis."
A copy of this communication has been produced as Annexure P-13 with the writ petition.
The college sought reconsideration of the matter.
On January 2, 1992, the Principal of the college had addressed a detailed communication.
It was clearly pointed out that there were 13 substantive posts of Lecturers in English in the college and three had fallen vacant permanently.
These vacancies were duly advertised and after interviewing as many as 33 candidates, the Selection Committee had selected the three petitioners.
It was further pointed out that the posts were not stated to be temporary.
In fact it was stipulated in the advertisement that these were temporary but likely to be made permanent.
It was further pointed out that this was so done "on account of the fact that Plus I and Plus II Classes were likely to be transferred to the schools and the college wanted to safeguard against any likely reduction in the number of posts of lecturers....".
Besides pointing out certain other facts, the Principal also observed that "the contingency visualised at the time of their appointment no longer exists" and they have rendered satisfactory service of more than 2 years and have completed the requisite maximum period of probation of two years.
The question of readvertising posts could arise in case they had been appointed against temporary vacancies (which may have fallen vacant permanently later on or on ad hoc basis".
The procedure prescribed was duly followed.
On these premises he requested the University to review its order and to give its approval to the appointment of the petitioners on probation with effect from the date of their appointment in 1989.
Even the three petitioners made representation to the University.
While the Director of Public Instructions (Colleges) conveyed his approval to the proposal sent by the College, vide his order dated March 26, 1992 (copy of this order is Annexure P-17) the University remained adamant and vide communication dated May 22, 1992, it informed the college that "the earlier decision of the Vice Chancellor regarding the above mentioned three Lecturers in English conveyed vide letter No. 3559/Coll.
dated 151091 stands."
Apprehending re-advertisement of posts and termination of their services, the petitioners have approached this court through this writ petition.
The action of the University in refusing to accord approval to their appointment on probation has been challenged as being without jurisdiction, arbitrary, illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
3.
Separate, though almost identical written statements, have been filed on behalf of the University and the College.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the University, it has been inter alia averred that the University makes a distinction between the advertisement for appointment on temporary basis and another for appointed on regular basis.
According to its experience, if the advertisement has been made for temporary appointment then all eligible candidates do not apply and the best talent cannot be tapped.
In the present case "the posts of Lecturers in English were temporary.
The number of posts of Lecturers in English were not specified in the advertisement.
Their appointment letters Annexures P-3 to P-5 also clearly stipulate that they had been appointed on temporary basis and their appointment was subject to be reviewed in July, 1992."
This appointment was approved by the University "on temporary basis with effect from 1881989 (should be 8.8.89 instead of 18889) to 31.7.92."
It has been further stated that "the approval was granted by the answering respondent on temporary basis on the condition that after 1992 the post would be readvertised and fresh selection would be made as per rules."
It has also been averred that "rule regarding eligibility for appointment to the post of Lecturer has now been changed.
Now for the post of Lecturer, the petitioners will have to compete according to the revised qualifications for the post of Lecturer and can be appointed only after they fulfil the same."
The respondent goes on to point out that petitioner No. 1 is ineligible to be appointed as she has not done MPhil.
nor she has passed the test conducted by the University Grants Commission.
An effort has also been made to explain the circumstances in which the University had granted approval in respect of various persons mentioned in paras Nos. 28 and 29 of the writ petition.
On these premises, it has been stated that the action of the University is legal and valid and that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
4.
To a similar effect is the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 who is Principal of the College.
It has been inter alia mentioned that vide letter dated August 14, 1992, a request had been made to the Deputy Director Colleges for recalling the approval accorded vide letter dated March 26, 1992.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R-3/2 with the written statement.
5.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr.
I P Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the petitioners had been appointed though on temporary basis against substantive vacancies.
They have completed maximum period of probation prescribed under the law.
Their work and conduct has been satisfactory.
In this situation the action of the respondent-University in not approving their appointment is wholly arbitrary and without jurisdiction.
The learned counsel has also contended that the University has granted approval to the appointment of a number of teachers in different colleges as well as its own departments in similar circumstances.
Its failure to accord parity of treatment to the petitioners is discriminatory and thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It has also been claimed that the respondents have erred in not releasing the annual increments that have fallen due to the petitioners ever since their appointments.
On the other hand, Shri P S Patwalia, learned counsel for the University has contended that according to the advertisement issued by the College the posts were temporary, the prospective candidates were given only a week's time to submit their applications and the Selection Committee had found the petitioners suitable only for temporary appointment.
In this situation, the selected candidates had no right to be appointed on regular basis.
He has further submitted that the action of the University is in strict conformity with the provisions of the Ordinance contained in Chapter 11 of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar Volume III (1966 Edition).
6.
The sequence of events as noticed above shows that three vacancies of Lecturers in English had become available in the year 1989.
These were advertised.
The petitioners along with 34 other candidates had submitted applications.
A Selection Committee as envisaged under the provisions of the Ordinances issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University was duly constituted.
It interviewed the candidates.
The petitioners were selected.
They were duly appointed.
Even though the vacancies were substantive, the documents on record clearly indicate that the appointments were made on temporary basis only because the college apprehended that certain classes may be shifted to the schools.
The first question that arises for consideration is - whether the appointments were in conformity with law ?
7.
The contention raised on behalf of the University is that since the vacancies had been advertised as being temporary, it is likely that various candidates who may even have been more meritorious than the petitioners did not apply.
This contention ignores the clear stipulation in the advertisement that vacancies were likely to become permanent.
If it had not been so stated, an argument may have been raised that some candidates had offered themselves for consideration.
However, the clear stipulation in the advertisement as noticed above clearly negatives the conjecture made on behalf of the University.
The likelihood of the vacancies becoming permanent was a clear indication to the prospective candidates that the college was not filling up purely temporary vacancies.
The vacancies had not arisen on account of certain teachers having proceeded on leave.
These were actually not temporary.
The vacancies had, in fact, arisen on account of death or submission of resignation by certain persons.
In such a situation, the argument raised on behalf of the University cannot be accepted.
8.
Another question that arises for consideration is regarding the legality of the action of the University.
The provisions governing the service and conduct of the teachers in Non-Govt. affiliated colleges are contained in the Ordinances promulgated by the University.
These have been published in Chapter 11 of the Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar (Volume III).
Learned counsel for the University had referred to the 1986 edition of the Calendar.
The procedure for appointment of college lecturers is contained in Ordinance 1.2.
It provides for the constitution of the Selection Committee.
The note to this provision stipulates that "no selection shall be considered valid, unless atleast one representatives of the DPI(C) is present.
Recommendations of the Selection Committee shall be subject to the approval of the DPI (Colleges) and the Vice-Chancellor of the University."
It is the admitted position that the Selection Committee had been constituted in accordance with this provision.
It is also the admitted position that the initial appointment had been approved by the DPI (Colleges) as well as by the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
However, at a later stage, the college had sought the approval of the University for the appointment of the petitioners "on probation from the date of their joining".
This proposal was approved by the DPI (Colleges) vide his letter dated March 26, 1992.
However, the University declined the request of the College.
Was the action of the University legally valid ?
Ordinance 31 in Chapter 11 as referred to above provides as under :-  "31.
The employee will ordinarily be appointed on one year's probation after which he will normally be confirmed if his work is found satisfactory.
It would be obligatory on the part of a Managing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period, whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended and in the absence of such a notice the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period, in no case, will be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment".
The above provision clearly stipulates that every college lecturer will be appointed on one year's probation and will be confirmed if his work is found to be satisfactory.
It is further required that the Managing Body has to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period as to whether he had been confirmed or his period or probation had been extended.
In the absence of such a notice, the teacher is deemed to have been confirmed.
It is also provided that the probationary period cannot be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment under any circumstance whatsoever.
The petitioners had admittedly joined service in August, 1989.
The University had declined to grant approval vide order dated October 15, 1991.
This decision was reiterated vide communication dated May 22, 1992.
It is clear that even before October 15, 1991, the three petitioners had completed more than 2 years of service.
By the force of the Ordinance of the University, they were deemed to have been confirmed.
In such a situation, the action of the University in not granting approval to the proposal of the college was even contrary to its own Ordinance.
9.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The legislature has enacted the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Service of Security) Act, 1974.
This Act was promulgated to provide for the security of service to the teachers and other employees of the affiliated colleges.
In the year 1983 the legislature passed the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Service of Security) Amendment Act, 1983.
It was enforced with effect from January 3, 1983.
By this Act, Section 2-A was inserted.
It provides as under :-  "An employee appointed, against a vacancy likely to exist for more than one year shall remain on probation for a period of one year which may be extended from time to time.
Provided that the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed two years."
Furthermore, Section 11 of the Act provides that "the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, including any regulation or statute of any University."
On a harmonious reading of the provisions of the Act, it is clear that the Act has an over-riding effect on the Ordinances of the University.
Still further, under Section 2-A as noticed above, even when an employee has been appointed against a vacancy which is likely to exist for more than one year, he has to be treated to have remained on probation.
Still further, the total period of probation cannot exceed two years.
In the present case, it is the admitted position, that the vacancies were substantive.
They were certainly "likely to exist for more than one year" as contemplated under the provision.
Even in such a case, the incumbents have to be treated as if they are on probation.
It is also clear that this provision has an over-riding effect on any of the provisions contained in the Ordinances of the University.
That being so, even if it is assumed that the vacancies were temporary, the incumbents thereof had a right to be treated as on probation.
Accordingly, the University was not entitled to insist on the readvertisement of the posts or to decline the proposal of the college for treating the petitioners as on probation from the date of their appointments.
In view of the clear provisions of the Act, the action of the University was wholly illegal and cannot thus be sustained.
10.
It was then contended on behalf of the petitioners that the action of the University suffered from the vice of discrimination.
Specific averments in this behalf are contained in para 28 of the petition.
It has been pointed out that Mr. Balbir Kumar had been appointed as a Lecturer in Political Science on August 20, 1988.
The advertisement and other conditions incorporated in the letter of appointments are almost identical.
The University had approved the proposal of the College to treat the appointment of Mr. Balbir Kumar as on probation with effect from the date of his appointment.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia stated that "grant of approval to Balbir Singh on regular basis was peculiar to the facts and circumstances of that case and were not strictly in accordance with the Calendar/statute of the University.
If a mistake is made once, this court would not direct the respondents to perpetuate the same thereafter."
It also deserves notice that in para 29 of the petition, other instances have also been given.
It has been pointed out that the University had granted approval for regular appointment even in cases where the initial appointment was against a leave vacancy.
Even though, an effort has been made on behalf of the University to explain the matter, the fact remains that in all the cases mentioned by the petitioners, approval had been accorded for regular appointment of various teachers.
It is true that this Court in the exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, would not compel the State or any other authority to perpetuate a wrong.
However, it appears clearly that in fact the University had committed no wrong in granting approval to the appointment of Balbir Kumar and as such its action in not according parity in treatment to the petitioners was clearly discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
11.
Another grievance made on behalf of the petitioners is regarding the release of annual increments.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the University, it has been mentioned that "since the petitioners were appointed on purely temporary basis....they were not even granted the annual increments which the petitioners did not accept."
This plea is wholly misconceived.
An employee earns an increment at the end of every years service in accordance with the Rules.
It can only be stopped if his performance during the year is found to be unsatisfactory.
For this purpose, a definite procedure has been prescribed.
It is the admitted position that there was nothing against the work and conduct of the petitioners.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that their performance was not up to the mark.
On the contrary various communications sent on behalf or the College clearly indicate that the work and conduct of the petitioners were satisfactory.
In such a situation, the action of the respondents in not releasing the increments to the petitioner cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The action of the University in refusing to accord approval to the appointments of the petitioners as on probation with effect from the date of their appointment vide orders, copies of which has been produced on record as Annexures P-13 and P-19 are set aside.
It is further directed that the increments due to the petitioners shall be released.
The arrears shall be paid to them.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to their costs from the University-respondent No. 1.
Petition allowed.