RS Mongia, J (Oral) - A Division Bench of this Court disposed of two writ petitions, i.e. C.W.P.
No. 12225 of 1993 and 13302 of 1993, vide judgment dated 13th December, 1993.
The former writ petition was filed by Raja Ram and five other Head Constables, namely, Dharamvir Raghbir Singh, Braham Prakash, Sohan Lal and Balbir Singh, who claimed to be senior to Hans Raj.
Vijay Singh, Subhash Singh and Kapoor Singh, respondents in the said writ petition and claimed that they were entitled to be sent to the Intermediate School Course against the seats allocated to Hissar Range, to which they all belong.
All the petitioners in the said writ petition were confirmed in the years 1990 and 1991.
The second writ petition mentioned above was filed by Hans Raj and Vijay Singh, Head Constables, whose date of confirmation was 31st January, 1989.
They had been deputed for the Intermediate Course, but were withdrawn from the Course as there was a disputed regarding their dates of confirmation.
They filed the writ petition claiming that they were rightly confirmed on the dates earlier shown and could not be withdrawn from the Intermediate School Course.
By interim directions of the Court, they were allowed to continue in the Course.
2.
The Division Bench observed that since the question of correct dates of confirmation of Hans Raj and Vijay Singh was under active consideration of the State and the case for determination of the seniority of the Head Constables is to be finalised, it was considered appropriate that the petitioners in both the writ petitions should be allowed to complete the Course.
It was further observed that this would be subject to the finalisation of the seniority list by the State and if any party is aggrieved by finalisation of seniority or actual dates of confirmation, he shall have a right to challenge the same before an appropriate forum.
3.
Though it has been observed in the abovesaid judgment that the writ petitioners in both the cases should be allowed to complete the course, giving the impression as if the petitioners in both the cases were undergoing the course, yet I have been informed by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the six petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 12225 of 1993 were deputed on 13th January, 1994 to join the Course and they joined the Course on 17th January, 1994.
4.
The petitioner was confirmed as Head Constable on 31st August, 1989.
The petitioner's case now is that by virtue of the Division Bench judgment in the two writ petitions, referred to above, the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 12225 of 1993, who were confirmed in the years 1990 and 1991, have been allowed to join the course.
The petitioners being senior to them having been confirmed earlier has also a right to join the Intermediate Course and the passing of the course can be made subject to the finalisation of the seniority list.
5.
This case had come up for hearing on 1st February, 1994, when I had adjourned the matter to 4th February, 1994 to enable the learned counsel for the respondents-State to apprise this Court as to when the seniority of the Head Constable of the Hissar Range is likely to be finalised.
No information was received by the learned counsel for the respondents in spite of his having asked for the same.
The case was adjourned to 8th February, 1994 but the same could not be taken up because of the paucity of time and the case has been taken up today.
Even today the learned counsel for the respondents says that he has not received any information from the concerned quarter regarding the finalisation of the seniority of the Head Constables of the Hissar Range.
6.
Since it is not make known to this Court by the official respondents as to whether the seniority of the Head Constable of the Hissar Range has been finalised or not, it is to be taken that so far, according to the date of confirmation of the petitioner, he ranks senior to the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 12225 of 1993 and since they have been deputed for the Intermediate Course now, the petitioner would have a right being senior to them, to be deputed for the Course.
7.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the official respondents are directed to depute the petitioner for the Intermediate School Course forthwith.
The completion and passing of the Course by the petitioner, would, however, be subject to the finalisation of the seniority and if the petitioner is aggrieved by the seniority list that may be finalised, he would be at liberty to challenge the same before the appropriate forum, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.