Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allow him to join service and to regularise his services.
He also prays for the grant of back wages with effect from September 30, 1986.
2.
This case had come up for hearing on September 10, 1993.
The respondents were directed to allow the petitioner to join duty at Ambala.
A report regarding his performance was also asked for.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents points out that in pursuance to the directions given by this Court, the petitioner was allowed to attend duty in the Haryana Roadways Depot at Ambala.
He further states that the petitioner has performed his duties satisfactorily and that he will be allowed to continue on this post.
3.
As for the claim for regularisation, it deserves mention that the petitioner had been working at different intervals of time.
The petitioner's claim is that he has not been allowed to work regularly while the respondent claims that he has been abandoning the job without any justifiable reason.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the petitioner has not referred to any rule or instruction under which the claim for regularisation may be sustained.
In any event, it is the admitted position that the petitioner is now being allowed to continue to work.
In such a situation, there is no occasion for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondent to regularise his services.
Consequently, the claim as made by the petitioner cannot be sustained and is rejected.
4.
As for the grant of back wages, it deserves mention that vide order dated September 30, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition, the Labour Court, Ambala had held that the parties had reached a settlement according to which the petitioner was 'taken on duty' with continuity of service but was not allowed the back wages.
However, it was directed that he should apply to the General Manager regarding the payment of dues.
The reference made to the Labour Court was, accordingly, disposed of.
Thereafter, vide order dated March 13, 1987 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer had recorded a compromise that the workman could join his duty within two days but "wages for the intermediate period will not be allowed--------."
The petitioner claims that there is no justifiable reason for denying him the back wages.
The respondents aver that claim of back wages cannot be sustained as the petitioner had abandoned his duties without any justifiable cause.
In view of this dispute on facts, the matter cannot be adjudicated upon in the present proceedings.
Consequently, it is held that if the petitioner has any claim, he would be entitled to resort to such remedy as may be available to him under the law.
5.
It may be noticed that the petitioner seems to be in the habit of making unnecessary complaints.
He has addressed two communications dated September 20, 1993 and October 4, 1993 to this Court alleging that he was not being allowed to mark himself present.
These communications are placed on record as Annexures 'A' and 'B'.
The postal envelopes are at Annexures 'C' and 'D'.
The falsehood of these complaints is obvious from the fact that the respondents have categorically stated that the petitioner has been working since September 15, 1993 and that his performance has been satisfactory.
A copy of the report produced by Mr. Jaswant Singh is taken on record as Annexure 'E'.
6.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that the main claim of the petitioner having been satisfied, this petition has become infructuous.
As for the claim regarding the arrears of salary, he may resort to such remedy as he may be advised.
7.
The petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly