TS Doabia, J - This Court is not to act as a Court of appeal and re- appreciate the findings recorded by Disciplinary authorities.
Such is the state of law discernible from various pronouncements beginning from early sixties.
One such case is reported as State of Andhra Pradesh v. S Shri Rama Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1723.
This view has been consistently expressed in the later decisions.
Recent decisions are Indian Oil Corporation v. Ashok Kumar Arora, AIR 1997 SC 1030 : 1997(2) SCT 52 (SC); and Govt. of Tamil Nadu v. KN Ramamurthy, AIR 1997 SC 375 : 1997(4) SCT 76 (SC).
The only exception to the above general preposition stands carved out when the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Managing Director ECIL v. K Karunakaran, AIR 1974 SC 1074 is perused.
In the above case, there was failure to supply the delinquent Government servant with the copy of the enquiry report.
Supreme Court of India was of the view that merely because the enquiry report has not been made available should not lead the Courts to quash the order of punishment but they should apply their judicial mind to the question and find out if the furnishing of the enquiry proceedings and the report would have made any difference to the resultant order passed against the delinquent.
It is only after this exercise is completed, the order of punishment should be set aside.
2.
In the present case, the Respondent Krishan Lal was not supplied with the copy of the enquiry report.
The Supreme Court of India has remitted the case for appreciating the material of the record and to find out if any prejudice has been caused to the Respondent on account of above procedural lacuna.
It is keeping in view this aspect of the matter, the arguments addressed by both sides in this appeal are being appreciated.
3.
On a complaint having been filed by one Tula Ram, the allegations came to be enquired into by Anti Corruption Commission constituted under the provisions of J&K (Government Servants Prevention of Corruption) Act, 1962.
Tula Ram referred to above who made the complaint was a Company Commander with the Home Guards of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
The allegations contained in the complaint were to the effect that one AN Mehta the then Company Commandant Home Guards Poonch and the appellant Krishan Lal Office Clerk to the above Commandant Home Guards Poonch abused their official position and fraudulently and dishonestly mis-appropriated a sum of Rs. 1,800/- from the Government funds.
As to how this mis-appropriation took place was elaborated by the State.
It was alleged that false entries were made in the attendance register regarding one person by the name of Mohammad Iqbal.
This was for the month of February and March 1971.
On the basis of this entry pay bill was prepared and salary was drawn.
The other allegation was that from time to time false entries vis-a-vis another non-existing persons were made in the attendance register for the months of April to November, 1971.
These persons were Mohd.
Iqbal and Mehraj-ud-din.
It was accordingly alleged that the aforementioned Company Commander AN Mehra and Respondent Krishen Lal mis- appropriated Government funds to the tune of Rs. 1,800/-.
The sum and substance of the complaint was that even though the aforementioned two persons never attended and never did any duty with the office of the Commandant Home Guards Poonch, money was drawn from the Government Treasury and this was mis- appropriated.
The Commission framed charges.
Evidence was recorded.
4.
After recording of evidence, a recommendation was made that so far as Krishan Lal is concerned, he should be dismissed from service.
So far as AN Mehta is concerned as he was no longer in service the only direction made against him was that in the event of State Government taking a decision that the force to which AN Mehta was deputed, ultimately becomes entitled to pensionary benefits, then this pension should not be released in his favour, and this should be appropriated to State funds.
AN Mehta had since retired.
Respondent Krishan Lal was thus aggrieved.
He took recourse to legal remedies.
These remedies are noticed below;  5.
Respondent Krishan Lal wanted the copy of the proceedings of the Enquiry including the report of the Commission.
This was not made available to him.
He preferred a writ petition in this Court.
This bears No. 413 of 1978.
This writ petition came to be disposed of with a direction that copy of the proceedings and the enquiry report be made available to him.
However before this order could be implemented, Respondent Krishan Lal came to be dismissed from service.
This happened on 3111978.
He filed a second writ petition challenging order of dismissal.
This bears No. 23 of 1978.
This was dismissed on 1.6.1979.
This was on the ground that the dispute involved complicated questions of fact.
A Letters Patent Appeal was preferred.
That was also dismissed.
Thereafter, Respondent Krishan Lal filed a civil suit.
This civil suit was decreed.
State preferred an appeal.
That was dismissed.
The appeal was dismissed as barred by limitation.
State preferred a revision petition in this court.
The revision petition was dismissed.
State took the matter in appeal before the Supreme Court of India.
Supreme Court of India was of the view that the decision given by the District Judge dismissing the appeal as barred by limitation was not in accordance with law.
A direction was given to the District Judge to decide the appeal on merits.
District Judge thereafter heard the appeal, State appeal was dismissed on merits.
Thereafter, a second appeal was preferred in this Court.
In the second appeal, a new question was raised.
This was vis-a-vis the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain the civil suit.
It was argued that in view of the provisions contained in Section 20 of the J&K Government Servants Prevention of Corruption Act, 1962, the Civil Courts had no jurisdiction in the matter.
This argument found favour with this Court.
The matter was taken up before the Letters Patent Bench.
The appeal was dismissed.
Krishan Lal thereafter approached the Supreme Court of India.
He filed a Civil Appeal (being No. 964/1991).
A separate writ petition was also filed.
The writ petition bears No. 788 of 1990.
The Supreme Court of India was of the view that the bar of jurisdiction as envisaged by Section 20 of the Act of 19962 was not attracted to the facts of this case.
The view expressed by this Court to the contrary was held to be incorrect.
The further argument raised by the State that on account of the earlier decisions given in the writ petitions, the bar of res- judicata would apply, was also gone into.
It was observed that principle of res judicata would not be attracted to the facts of this case.
6.
After coming to the aforementioned conclusion the judgment given by this Court reversing the judgment and decree passed by the District Judge, who had affirmed the judgment and decree of the trial court, was set aside.
The further question arose as to how the matter should be dealt with.
The argument of Krishan Lal Respondent that he was not provided with the enquiry report was taken note of.
On the basis of the decision given by the Supreme Court in case reported as Managing Director ECIL v. K Karunakaran, AIR 1994 SC 1074, the Supreme Court observed that as the enquiry report was not made available to Krishan Lal before the order of dismissal was passed, therefore, there was apparent non-compliance of the principles of natural justice.
The matter was, however, not left there.
It was further deliberated upon on the basis of the decision given in the case of Managing Director ECIL v. K Karunakaran (supra).
The Supreme Court of India observed that the proper course would be to remit the matter back to this Court, so that this Court could examine whether Krishan Lal had been prejudiced by non-supply of the copy of the enquiry report.
As the matter stands remanded to this Court, the question arises as to what is the scope of the jurisdiction which this Court is supposed to exercise in this matter.
7.
In the case Managing Director ECIL v. K Karunakaran (supra), this aspect of the matter has been dealt with at page 1092.
The relevant observations are quoted below;  "The Court/Tribunal should not mechanically set aside the order of punishment on the ground that the report was not furnished as is regrettably being done at present.
The courts should avoid resorting to short-cuts.
Since it is the Courts/Tribunals which will apply their judicial mind to the question and give their reasons for setting aside or not setting aside the order of punishment, (and not any internal appellate or revisional authority), there would be neither a breach of the principles of natural justice nor a denial of the reasonable opportunity.
It is only if the Courts/Tribunals find that the furnishing of the report would have made a difference to the result in the case that it should set aside the order of punishment."
8.
From the quotation quoted above, it becomes apparent that this Court has to go into the question as to whether the non-supply of the report would have made any material difference to the ultimate findings and the punishment given.
On perusal of the enquiry report if it becomes apparent that sufficient material is not there to record finding of guilt, the punishment awarded is too excessive, then this Court can set aside the order of punishment and remand the matter back.
9.
In view of the above legal position noticed above, we have with the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties gone through the evidence which has come on the record.
The material witness on the subject is Tula Ram.
He was the complainant and Ex-Company Commander.
He appeared before the Commission as PW-1.
A perusal of his statement brings out following facts :-  (I) That at the material point of time i.e. from March 1971, to November, 1971 he was not present at Poonch.
He had gone for training at Jammu; (II) On his return from Jammu, he enquired about the two persons i.e., Mohammad Iqbal and Mehraj-ud-din.
He is categoric that it was the Company Commander AN Mehta who informed him that these two persons had been ordered to be indicted at his instance; (III) That appellant Krishan Lal was merely working as Clerk in the office.
He was preparing the bills.
This witness has also stated that Krishan Lal was maintaining the attendance register Ex.PW-1/4.
He also testified to the fact that this attendance register was in the handwriting of Krishan Lal.
The above statement was read in extenso by the counsel appearing for the State and also by the Counsel appearing for Krishan Lal.
This witness namely Tula Ram was categoric that the aforementioned two persons were never seen by him.
10.
The second witness is Ram Saroop.
He is the Lines Officer.
He had also signed on the attendance register.
He had testified to the fact that the names of the two persons were got entered at the asking of AN Mehta.
He also testified to the fact that Respondent Krishan Lal had asked him to sign the relevant entries vis-a-vis the two persons referred to above, as the accounts were to be audited.
This witness stated nothing as to whether these two persons were in fact attending to the duties or not, or whether Krishan Lal was in any other way instrumental in getting the attendance recorded.
PW-3 is Babu Ram.
He is the Platoon Commander.
Assertion of this witness is to the effect that he had not seen the two persons noted above attending to the duties in the Home Guard serving at Poonch.
PW-4, Mohan Lal has testified to the fact that he had not seen the two persons whose names appeared in the attendance register performing any duty in the unit in question.
He has also testified to the fact that whenever the pay used to be disbursed, the person incharge of his Section would see to it that the payment is disbursed to the men of the Unit in his presence.
He has testified to the procedure which was being adopted in the Unit in question.
Mohammad Amin is PW-5.
He has testified to the fact that the two persons regarding whom disputed entries were made, were not attending the duties.
He has also testified to the fact that when he saw the attendance register the names of these persons were not there.
These entries were made later on.
As to who made the entries, he has not said anything.
Ram Nath is PW-6.
His statement is to the effect that the names of two persons were brought on the registers on a later date.
Another factor which is being adverted to by learned counsel for Respondent Krishan Lal is the comment made by the Commission vis-a-vis the need for making these false entries.
The relevant portion is being quoted below :  "It appears that mis-appropriation was effected not altogether for personal gain but partly to keep up a show of hospitality of this contingent, vis-a- vis, visiting officers.
This is clearly brought out by Shri Mehta in a letter which he wrote to the then Superintendent of Police, Anti Corruption organisation, on 29th September, 1972.
The relevant paragraph reads as under :- "Being in charge of the Unit and holding District level charge, I have to rish myself for something to keep up the show, when the sources at my disposal are very limited as it is known to all officers and your goodself as well."
In this letter Shri Mehta was obviously attempting a defence of his action by taking up the plea that he needed funds "to keep up to show" for he had no other source to fall back upon."
11.
From the above background, it is sought to be deduced that in fact everything was being done by AN Mehta.
The letter written by him to the SP Anti Corruption on 29.9.1972 is being relied upon.
What is sought to be contended is that behind the entire episode the main character was AN Mehta.
So far as Respondent Krishan Lal is concerned, he was working inside the office and was merely preparing the bills, as per the attendance register.
The above factual position vis-a-vis the statements of various witnesses, has been noticed as per the contents contained in the statements which were read in the Court.
12.
From the aforementioned evidence which has come on the record, more particularly, the statement of Tula Ram, it becomes apparent that he was not present when the two persons i.e. Mohd.
Iqbal and Mehraj-ud-din were supposed to be attending to their duties and when all these entries were made.
All these entries are said to have been made for the period February 1971 to November 1971.
During this period, Tula Ram was not at the Head Quarters of the Home Guards at Poonch.
He had gone to Jammu on training.
As such, this witness could not say anything from his personal knowledge i.e. as to whether the two persons whose presence is found mentioned in attendance register were physically present or not.
Even if his statement is taken at its face value and full credit is given to it, then all it makes out is that the two persons allegedly came to be inducted at the instance of AN Mehta.
This witness tried to implicate of AN Mehta.
He is categoric in his statement.
This statement is to the effect that Respondent Krishan Lal was working in the office and was preparing the bills.
As a matter of fact that is the stand taken by respondent Krishan Lal also.
In his defence he stated that he was preparing the bills on the basis of the record and attendance registers which were made available to him.
Therefore, the only conclusion which could be drawn is that names which came to be included in the attendance register were at the instance of AN Mehta and respondent Krishan Lal had been roped in only because he had signed the pay bills.
It was not the duty of respondent Krishan Lal physically to verity as to whether the persons regarding whom the pay bill is drawn were physically present or not.
This was as per the prosecution witnesses the duty of the Section Officer to see to it that the payment is disbursed in his presence.
This is so stated by PW Ram Nath.
It was at that particular point of time Ram Nath who was the Section Officer or any other Section Officer who could have objected to the payment being made.
No objection was raised and none is recorded on the record.
Therefore, to fasten liability on Krishan Lal would not be apt.
The finding recorded by the Commission, though detailed, did not take into consideration the full impact of the statement of Tula Ram, who was the main witness.
13.
The fact that the Commission itself was doubtful vis-a-vis dishonest intention of the Company Commander cannot be ignored.
If that aspect of the matter is taken note of, then it was only the Company Commander who could be held responsible for the lapses, if any.
Krishan Lal was working in the office.
He was only preparing the pay bills.
He cannot be held guilty of the lapse.
14.
The question arises as to what relief is to be granted.
On appreciation of the evidence noticed above, we have come to the conclusion that Kirshan Lal was not directly concerned in seeing as to whether aforementioned two persons were physically present or not.
The above facts the respondent could point out only had he been given the copy of the enquiry proceedings and also the enquiry report.
This non-supply of the enquiry report has caused manifest injustice to the appellant.
The question arises as to what relief the petitioner is entitled to.
Before going into this question it would be apt to notice what was said by the Supreme Court in the case of Managing Director ECIL v. B Karunakaran (supra).
The relevant observations are, as under :  "Where after following the above procedure, the Courts/Tribunals set aside the order of punishment, the proper relief that should be granted is to direct reinstatement of the employee with liberty to the authority/management to proceed with the inquiry, by placing the employee under suspension and continuing the inquiry from the stage of furnishing him with the report.
The question whether the employee would be entitled to the back-wages and other benefits from the date of his dismissal to the date of his reinstatement if ultimately ordered should invariably be left to be decided by the authority concerned according to law, after the culmination of the proceedings and depending on the final outcome.
If the employee succeeds in the fresh inquiry and is directed to be reinstated, the authority should be at liberty to decide according to law how it will treat the period from the date of dismissal till the reinstatement and to what benefits, if any and the extent of the benefits, he will be entitled.
The reinstatement made as a result of the setting aside of the inquiry for failure to furnish the report should be treated as a reinstatement for the purpose of holding the fresh inquiry from the stage of furnishing the report and no more, where such fresh inquiry is held.
That will also be the correct position in law."
15.
From the perusal of the above observations, if becomes apparent that the order of punishment has necessarily to be set aside and direction is required to be given to the appellant.
State to reinstate the respondent.
It be also seen that the decision given by the Tribunal under the J&K Act referred to above is also open to review under the supervisory jurisdiction of this Court.
This becomes apparent if the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case reported as L Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1997 SC 1125 : 1995(2) SCT 674 (SC); is perused.
In the above case, it was observed that exercise of Judicial superintendence over all the Courts and Tribunals within their respective jurisdiction is part of the basic structure of the Constitution and this power cannot be taken away by any legislative process.
The Supreme Court of India was interpreting the provisions of Administrative Tribunals Act of 1985.
Under the aforementioned Act, by bye-passing the High Courts, a right of appeal was provided to the aggrieved party before the Supreme Court of India only.
The provision by which the jurisdiction of the High Court was excluded was struck down.
The relevant observations made in paragraph 99 are as under :-  "The jurisdiction conferred upon the High Courts under Articles 226/227 and upon the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is part of the inviolable basic structure of our Constitution xxxxxxxxxxx" "All decisions of these Tribunals will, however, be subject to scrutiny before a Division Bench of the High Court within whose jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal falls."
16.
It was thus observed that the decisions of the Tribunals would be subject to judicial scrutiny before a Division Bench of the High Court within whose jurisdiction the concerned Tribunal falls.
In view of the above enunciation of law by a Constitution Bench of Supreme Court of India, this Court could have examined and scrutinized the findings recorded by the Tribunal constituted under the J&K Govt.
Servants Prevention of Corruption Act, 1962.
This is precisely what has been done by us.
On appreciation of the material which has come on the record we are of the firm view that Respondent Krishan Lal who was working in the office was not directly connected with the making of entries in the attendance register.
On the basis of this, it is difficult to sustain the order of punishment.
We, accordingly, set aside the order of dismissal passed against the Respondent.
The Respondent shall stand reinstated.
The matter would go back to the State Government to decide the question as to how the intervening period is to be treated.
Whether the Respondent is to be paid or not paid, is a matter which would depend upon recording a finding as to whether the respondent was gainfully employed elsewhere or not.
The State would be guided by the judicial pronouncements on the subject which may be brought to its notice by the respondent.
The net result is that the order of dismissal based upon the report submitted by the Commission cannot be sustained.
Respondent Krishan Lal shall stand reinstated with all consequential benefits minus monetary benefits.
17.
The learned Counsel appearing for the State has sought leave to file an appeal before the Supreme Court of India against this order.
We are of the opinion, that this is not a fit case for grant of leave.
The findings have been recorded on appreciation of evidence.
No question of law is involved.
Therefore, this prayer is declined.
However, for a period of sixty days from today the judgment shall remain in abeyance.
This appeal is disposed of in the manner indicated above.