NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner has sought issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction seeking quashing of Annexure P-4 with a further direction to the respondent-Haryana Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission') to consider her candidature for the post of Child Development Project Officer as she is fully eligible for the post.
2.
In pursuance to the advertisement dated 1051993 the petitioner claiming herself to be eligible to the post advertised applied to the Commission.
The Commission declined to consider her application on the ground that she does not possess the requisite qualification (Annexure P-4).
It is this order which has been assailed on the ground that the same is illegal, arbitrary and otherwise discriminatory.
3.
In support of her case, the petitioner has averred that she possesses Master's Degree in Sociology which is an equivalent qualification to the Master's Degree in Social Work.
In fact, in respect of a post of District Social Welfare Officer, the Commission inserted a corrigendum in the Tribune, Dainik Tribune and other Dailies clarifying that Master's degree in Social Work will be deemed to be equivalent to Master's degree in Sociology or Psychology and so even the Haryana Government has accepted the Master's degree in Sociology to be an equivalent with one in Social Work.
4.
In response to the notice of motion issued by the Court, the Commission as well as the State of Haryana have put in appearance.
However, the Commission alone has chosen to file written statement.
Besides taking preliminary objections, other averments made in the petition have been replied.
By way of preliminary objection it has been asserted that the present petition is not maintainable since there has been no infringement of any fundamental or legal right of the petitioner; secondly, that as per Annexure P-1 the academic qualifications prescribed for the post is M.Sc.
Home Science or Master's degree in Social Work or its equivalent from a recognised University, but since the petitioner did not possess the prescribed qualification as given in the advertisement her candidature was rightly rejected vide Annexure P-4.
As regards the corrigendum referred to in the petition, it was stated that the same related to the post of District Welfare Officer and thus had no relevancy to the post in question.
5.
As per Annexure P-1, the qualifications prescribed for the post of Child Development Project Officer is as under :-  "a) M.Sc.
Home Science or Master's Degree in Social Work or its equivalent from a recognised University.
b) Hindi or Sanskrit upto Matric standard or its equivalent or B.Sc.
Home Science or its equivalent from a recognised University with 3 years' experience in Family Welfare and Child Development in a Government Deptt.
Hindi or Sanskrit up to Matric standard or its equivalent".
Admittedly, the petitioner is MA in Sociology from Meerut University.
It is the case of the petitioner that various universities give different nomenclature though subjects taught were almost identical or cover the same field and precisely for this reason Master's degree in Social Work is taken to be an equivalent to a Master's degree in Sociology.
Even the Haryana Government while advertising for the post of District Welfare Officer vide corrigendum issued by the Commission vide Annexure P-3 has taken Master's degree in Social Work to be equivalent to the Master's degree in Sociology or Psychology.
Not only this, even the Union of India has taken these two degrees to be equivalent and so the rejection by the respondent-Commission is per se wrong and hence unsustainable.
6.
Learned Additional Advocate General has, however, tried to justify the rejection of the candidature of the petitioner on the ground that the prescribed qualifications for a particular post is within the domain of the authority offering employment which in the instant case in unmistaken words have prescribed MA in Social Work as the essential qualification for the post of Child Development Project Officer.
Refuting the assertion of the petitioner's counsel that MA in Sociology is equivalent to MA in Social Works, the learned Additional Advocate General referred to the communication received from the Registrar, Kurukshetra University, dated 12101993 who has opined that MA (Sociology) is an academic discipline whereas MA (Social Work) is a professional discipline which trains students how to do skills when Sociology does not impart skills.'
7.
Mr. HN Mehtani, learned counsel for the Commission, has placed reliance upon the decision of this Court in case reported as Som Dutt v. State of Haryana and another, 1983(3) S.L.R.
141 for the view that the State can insist on a literal adherence to the qualification as given in the advertisement and since MA (Sociology) has not been mentioned as the qualification for the post, the candidature of the petitioner was rightly rejected.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at a considerable length of time and perused the material referred to during the course of arguments.
The crux of the matter falls within a very narrow compass i.e. whether the qualification possessed by the petitioner can be taken as equivalent qualifications as given in the advertisement Annexure P1.
Before adverting to the point raised, it may be mentioned that while issuing notice of motion by way of interim relief, a direction was issued to the respondent-Commissin to interview the petitioner.
However, her result was not to be declared.
A bare look of the academic qualifications prescribed in annexure P-1 reveals that a candidate desiring to apply was to possess M.Sc.
Home Science or Master's Degree in Social Work or its equivalent from a recognised University ie to say a person possessing an equivalent qualification to the one mentioned in Annexure P-1 was equally entitled to be considered for the post advertised.
The word 'equivalent' as per Chambers English Dictionary, means "equal in value, power, meaning, etc; interchangeable : of like combining value, a thing equivalent, an equivalent weight....." According to the petitioner, who is MA in Sociology, this qualification is equivalent to the one who possesses MA In Social Work.
9.
We find substance in what has been asserted by the petitioner.
The Commission in partial modification of its earlier advertisement issued a corrigendum clarifying that Master's degree in Social Work will be equivalent to a Master's degree in Sociology or Psychology.
This was for the post of District Welfare Officer.
Even the Union Public Service Commission while advertising for the post of Child Development Project Officer, as in the present case, stipulated the following academic qualifications :  "(i) Master's Degree in Social Work or Social Science or Sociology or Child Development or Nutrition or equivalent; (ii) Two years' experience in Social Work in a Government/Semi- Government origanisation or an institution recognised by the Government/Administration."
This proves that the Central Government too recognises the two qualifications to be equivalent.
Except for referring to the opinion of the Registrar, Kurukshetra University, no tangible material has been placed on record on the basis of which it could be inferred that the qualifications possessed by the petitioner cannot be equated with the one mentioned in the advertisement Annexure P-1.
It is precisely for this reason that the Haryana Government has not chosen to contradict the assertion made by the petitioner by filing written statement.
We are thus of the view that the petitioner possesses the qualification which is equivalent to the one mentioned in advertisement Annexure P-1 and so has a legitimate right to be considered on merit by the Commission.
Identical objection was raised by the Commission in CWP No. 10307 of 1993 (Dhan Raj Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(2) S.C.T.
205) decided on 251193 and was repelled by the Bench.
The decision in that writ petition squarely covers the point in controversy.
10.
Since much emphasis has been laid on the Full Bench decision of this Court, it would be appropriate to make brief reference to the same.
In the cited case, petitioner whose candidature was rejected on the ground that he did not possess the requisite qualification assailed the same on the ground that he, in fact, possesses a higher qualification than the one prescribed and so his claim cannot be ignored in the eye of law.
It is in these circumstances, the Court held that it cannot be said that a technically higher educational qualification is necessarily better or more advantageous for the peculiar needs of a post for which the employer-State has prescribed lower qualification.
This decision, in fact, has no applicability to the facts of the present case.
Advertisement Annexure P-1 specifically permits persons possessing the qualification as enumerated therein or its equivalent from a recognised University to apply for the post of Child Development Project Officer.
Petitioner who possessed an equivalent qualification i.e. MA in Sociology, was unjustly declined of a consideration.
11.
For the reasons aforesaid, we allow this writ petition, quash Annexure P-4 and direct the respondent to declare the result of the petitioner forthwith (since the same was stayed vide interim order dated 12.8.1993).
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.