A L Bahri, J - Dr Anita Puri, in this petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, challenges selection made by the Punjab Public Service Commission-respondent No. 2, for the post of Dental Officers.
In response to advertisement published in the newspaper on September 9, 1991, the petitioner as well as others applied for 21 posts advertised.
Out of them 12 posts were of general category; 5 of Scheduled Castes, 2 of Backward Class, and 2 of Ex-servicemen.
One of the terms of the advertisement was : preference to be given for higher dental qualification.
The selection was ultimately made on the basis of interview held by the Commission.
The basic qualification for the post for B.D.S.
The petitioner being M.D.S.
claims to be preferred on the basis of the terms of the advertisement.
The selection was challenged on different grounds, inter-alia, that the mode of selection by interview was not justified as element of arbitrariness could be introduced therein ignoring the merit.
Reliance was placed on the decision of Single Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 316 of 1991, decided on September 24, 1991.
2.
The petition was contested by the official respondents as well as by the two private respondents Nos. 3 and 4 who were selected by the Board.
They inter alia asserted that in the absence of any other mode of recruitment prescribed in any rules the Commission was fully justified in making selection on the basis of interview and qualifications, experience etc.
Such a decision was not subject to scrutiny by this Court.
Further details of academic qualifications of the replying respondents were also mentioned.
3.
When the case came up earlier, during arguments and after going through the records, counsel for the parties were not in a position to inform the Court as to how preference was given to higher qualifications possessed by the candidates when the sole criterion was judging suitability of the candidates on the basis of the interview.
Thus a direction was given to the counsel for the Commission to file a detailed affidavit indicating in order of merit, number of persons selected category-wise i.e. general category, reserved categories of Scheduled Castes, Backward classes and Ex-servicemen and to produce records of selection made by the Commission.
Though no additional affidavit has been filed by the Commission, however, record of selection prepared by the Commission has been produced in a sealed cover which has been opened and the contents have been examined.
4.
Before reference is made to the process of selection adopted by the Commission in the case, an argument addressed on behalf of the petitioner by her father who was representing and argued the case, deserves to be noticed.
The contention is that when in the advertisement it was mentioned that the candidate with higher dental qualifications would be preferred and selection by interview was not mentioned, the petitioner who possessed M.D.S.
Degree (higher qualifications) was entitled as of right to be selected.
Otherwise if the petitioner was also to rank with others possessing B.D.S.
degrees and compete in the interview there would have remained no cause of preference.
There is force in this contention.
The present case is of fresh appointments to be made to the service, if the number of candidates fulfilling the qualifications is less than the number of posts advertised and there being no other mode of recruitment prescribed for the purposes of selection, such of the candidates on the basis of their educational qualifications would be selected unless the Commission finds something against them to make them unsuitable for the job.
Even if in such a case interview is held by the Commission it is only for the purposes of checking genuineness of educational qualifications or to find out if those candidates would be unsuitable for the job and to determine inter se merit.
The element of selection or finding candidates more suitable for the job arises when the number of candidates is more than the number of posts available.
In such a case in the absence of any written guidelines provided under the Rules or otherwise, it is left to the Commission to adopt any known method of selection such as by conducting a written test or and by holding interviews.
In the process of interview not only the genuineness of the educational qualifications is to be verified but general knowledge, personality aptitude towards service and all other relevant factors can be taken into consideration in preparing the merit list.
This entire exercise is done not with the purpose of finding any candidate as unsuitable for the job but for finding most suitable person for the job.
5.
Since there were 12 posts of Dental Officers advertised for the general category, there being only two candidates possessing higher qualification i.e. M.D.S.
such candidates formed a class by itself as covering all the educational qualifications prescribed.
Since there were only two such candidates the present petitioner and another who already stands selected, they fall in the first category of cases i.e. possessing higher educational qualifications which are to be preferred and in their cases they had a right to be selected if not found to be unsuitable by the Commission.
There is nothing in the written statement filed by the Commission to indicate that the petitioner was found to be unsuitable for the job of Dental Officer.
The action of the Commission is not only arbitrary but against the spirit and intention of the appointing authority who had laid down the minimum qualifications for the job and indicated preference for higher qualifications.
6.
From the perusal of the records of selection, it transpires that the Commission selected 12 candidates in general category, 2 in Scheduled Castes, 3 in Balmiki/Mazhabi Sikhs and 2 in Ex-servicemen categories.
The Commission fixed 100 marks for the purpose of selection which were bifurcated as under :-  1.
Academic achievement As per essential qualification 40 Marks 2.
Higher Qualification 2-1/2 Marks 3.
Gold Medal 2-1/2 Marks 4.
Sports 10 Marks 5.
Experience : 
1. mark for each year subject to maximum 5.
5 Marks 6.
(a) Professional knowledge and aptitude for the job 20 Marks (b) Viva-voce 20 Marks (i) General Knowledge (ii) Personality.
Total 100 Marks 7.
The aforesaid criterion laid down by the Commission indicated that only 2- 1/2 marks were allocated for higher qualifications.
It could not be explained during arguments as to how by providing 2-1/2 marks out of 100 marks for higher qualifications such candidates could be preferred, the object which was to be achieved while advertising the post.
The stand taken up on behalf of the Commission is that some weight was given for the higher qualification and that should suffice the fulfilment of the requirement of the preference indicated in the advertisement.
This contention is devoid of merit.
As far as items Nos. 1 to 5 are concerned in the criterion as reproduced above, the Commission had hardly anything to do except to prepare memorandum from the documents supplied by the petitioners or to be verified at the time of interview.
It is all a method of arithmetic calculations to be made.
40 Marks were allocated for Viva-Voce test as indicated in item No. 6.
It is in the exercise of this power that the Commission could act arbitrarily or in such a manner so as to eliminate the candidate possessing higher qualifications who was otherwise to be selected for the post on preference.
Reference be made to the details of marks allocated and awarded to the petitioner Smt. Anita Puri.
She secured 31 marks in respect of items Nos. 1 to 5 and 20 in respect of item No. 6(a) and (b) (10+10), the total being 51 marks, the Expert's gradation was 'B'.
At this stage it may be noticed that the Expert's Gradation is 'A' 'B' and 'C'.
By awarding 'B' gradation it could not be said that the petitioner was unsuitable for the job.
Such could be said, if at all, only with respect to 'C' grading.
8.
The word 'prefer' has the following meaning as given in the New Lexicon Webster's Dictionary, 1987 Edition as under :-  "to like better, to choose rather, to give priority to.
The word 'preference' means preferring or being preferred, the person or thing preferred, the right to choose, priority in the right."
Chambers 20th Century Dictionary, 1987 Edition, gives meaning to the word 'prefer' as under :-  "to set in front; to put forward, offer, to promote, to hold in higher estimation; to choose or select before others; to like better; having priority."
The word 'preference' has been defined as under :-  "the act of choosing, favouring, or liking one above another; estimation above another, priority an advantage given to one over another."
The simple meaning of the word 'prefer' would be, as defined above, to promote or select the persons with higher qualifications in the context.
The persons who fulfil the three requisites as given in the advertisement are to form a class by itself as stated above, and if number of such persons is less than the number of posts to be filled, they are to be preferred, selected and appointed unless they are otherwise held to be not suitable.
9.
As far as other candidates who did not possess higher educational qualification and were not within the preference zone, the Commission was fully justified in judging the suitability as per interview held providing marks.
Since persons who had already been selected and appointed obtaining such marks are not before this Court, no further comment is considered necessary as the entire selection cannot be quashed.
One seat was ordered to be reserved vide order dated January 15, 1993.
Surinder Kumar, respondent No. 4 was selected and was placed in order of merit at No. 12 in the general category i.e. the last one in the merit list.
By mere selection he has not acquired any right to the post.
He cannot be preferred as against the petitioner who was to be selected on preferential basis as held above.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with the direction to the Punjab Public Service Commission-respondent No. 2, to forward name of the petitioner as a selected candidate on preference basis against one of the posts which was reserved in the general category.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.