VK Bali, J (Oral) - Ram Niwas through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash letter issued by Joint Secretary to Government Haryana dated 11101989, Annexure P3, as also letter dated 9111989 Annexure P4 as also a writ in the nature of mandamus directing Joint Secretary to Government Haryana, Rehabilitation Department to fix his seniority after Amin Chand and before Megh Raj in seniority list Annexure P2.
The relief asked for as has been noticed above stems from the following facts.
2.
Petitioner was appointed in the Rehabilitation Department in the State of Haryana on the recommendations of the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana on 2241979 as Clerk on regular basis, on which post later, he was confirmed.
He was promoted to the post of Assistant with effect from 26.9.1983, again on regular basis against the vacant post.
He continued to work as Assistant upto June 26, 1991 when he was promoted on the post of Deputy Superintendent on ad hoc basis and adjusted against a vacant post of Naib Tehsildar (Rehabilitation) Rohtak.
However, till the post of Naib Tehsildar was to be filled, he was asked to work at headquarters Chandigarh in legal cell.
It is pleaded that there are three posts of Deputy Superintendent and one post of Naib Tehsildar (Peshi) at headquarters.
These posts are to filled by way of promotion from amongst the Assistants posted at headquarters at Chandigarh.
The Assistants are promoted to the posts of Deputy Superintendents as also to the posts of Naib Tehsildars (Peshi).
The Naib Tehsildar (Peshi) is also promoted as Deputy Superintendent, even though the said post i.e. Naib Tehsildar (Peshi) is higher in pay scale than the post of Assistant and lower than that of Deputy Superintendent in the pay scale.
Joint Secretary to Government of Haryana issued letter dated 771980 in pursuance of notification dated 2921980 granting selection grade and showing the seniority of the petitioner and other Clerks working in the Department.
The name of respondent No. 3 Shri Jagdish Singh appears at Serial No. 7 whereas that of the petitioner at serial No. 5.
It is pleaded that out of three posts of Deputy Superintendents at headquarters, two posts are lying vacant and on the third post Shri Tara Chand is working.
That was the position when the petition was filed, whereas at present one post of Deputy Superintendent is occupied by Tara Chand.
The next man in seniority i.e. Ram Rattan has joined some other department.
The second and third posts of Deputy Superintendents are occupied by Chandgi Ram and Amin Chand.
Respondent No. 3 is working on the post of Naib Tehsildar (Peshi) although he is at serial No. 7 in the seniority list and inasmuch as the petitioner is higher in seniority than respondent-Jagdish Singh, he claims the fourth post of Naib Tehsildar (Peshi).
3.
The relief aforesaid is sought to be strengthened by pleading that respondent-Jagdish Singh has been wrongly given benefit of military service from 26101962 to 26.4.1967 and made senior to the petitioner.
If the benefit of service rendered by him in the military is not given to him, obviously the petitioner would be senior and, thus, entitled to the post of Naib Tehsildar (Peshi).
With a view to make out a case for non-grant of benefit of military service to respondent No. 3, it is pleaded that respondent No. 3 joined the Rehabilitation Department on the recommendations of the Subordinate Service Selection Board from the quota of Ex-serviceman on 15.2.1977 as Clerk on regular basis.
He served Indian Army from 1291961 to 26.4.1967 and was discharged from military service at his own request.
He claimed the benefit of emergency period from 22.11.1962 to 26.4.1967 on the ground that he had served in the army during the Emergency period and was, therefore, entitled to the concessions in terms of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The claim of respondent No. 3 was allowed by respondent No. 2 vide letter dated 11101989 in accordance with the judgment passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 2625 of 1985, Sushil Kumar Ahluwalia etc. v. State of Haryana etc.
It is in this manner, as noticed above, that respondent No. 3 was made senior to the petitioner.
Respondent No. 3 in consequence of this seniority over and above the petitioner was promoted as Naib Tehsil (Peshi) on 5.12.1990 with effect from 2841988.
4.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents it has been pleaded by him that he filed writ petition No. 9767 of 1989 wherein it was ordered that he would file representation which shall be decided in accordance with law.
When he filed the representation claiming benefit of military service.
The authorities concerned considered his case favourably in view of judgment recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 2625 of 1985, Sushil Kumar Ahluwalia etc. v. State of Haryana etc.  5.
Mr. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana, pleads that this case should be adjourned to await the decision of Letters Patent Appeal filed by the State of Haryana against the judgment recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 2625 of 1985 as the same has since been admitted and pending in this Court.
He further states that the representation of the petitioner is pending and the same would be decided after the decision in the Letters Patent Appeal is given by a Division Bench of this Court.
6.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the view that the cause of petitioner is meritorious and therefore this petition must succeed.
It should be seen from the array of facts give above that respondent No. 3 joined the Rehabilitation Department on 15.2.1977.
He had joined the Army prior to declaration of Emergency i.e. on 1291961.
The Government of Haryana vide notification dated 981976 amended definition of expression "Military Service" The same now reads thus -  "2.
Definition :- For the purpose of these Rules, the expression 'Military Service' means the service rendered by a person, who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on the 26th October 1962, in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including the service as a warrant officer) during the period of said Emergency of such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these Rules.
Any period of military service training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as Military Service."
7.
These amendments were made with retrospective effect on 1111966 in exercise of the powers conferred under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
The Supreme Court in Dhan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) RSJ 433 : 1991(1) SCT 137 (SC) upheld the amendment brought about from the date when the same was made.
The question as to whether a person who joined military service prior to the proclamation of emergency was entitled to the benefit of military service was discussed and this is how the Supreme Court proceeded in the matter :  "Such of those appellants and the petitioners who have joined the army before the proclamation of the emergency are not, therefore, entitled to titled to the benefit of military services as per the Emergency Concession Rules"  The judgment on the basis of which respondent No. 3 was granted the benefit of military service is, thus, not of any relevance in view of the amendment brought about in the expression "Military Service".
That being the situation, it will serve no useful purpose to await the decision of Letters Patent Appeal filed on behalf of the State against the judgment recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 2625 of 1985.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the official respondents to reframe the seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 3 and while doing so, respondent No. 3 shall not be entitled to the benefit of military service that he had rendered in Indian Army from 26101962 to 26.4.1967.
After refixing the seniority in pursuance not the directions issued above, the petitioner shall be considered for his promotion and accordingly his posting as Deputy Superintendent or Naib Tehsildar (Peshi) in accordance with his seniority vis-a-vis others.
This exercise be done within a period of two months from today.