GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1942 and 9356 of 1990.
In these petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, a challenge has been made to the notices of premature retirement from Government services issued in terms of Rule 532(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II read with Rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part I as applicable to the State of Haryana (for short, the Rules) dated April 23, 1992 and May 22, 1990, respectively.
The question of law arising for determination is identical in both these cases although the facts are not identical.
A reference to the relevant facts from each of the writ petitions is necessary to adjudicate the question of law arising for determination.
Civil Writ Petition No. 1942 of 1990 :  2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the Public Works Department, Buildings & Roads Branch, Patiala and East Punjab States Union on November 6, 1954.
He was promoted as Sub Divisional Clerk, Accounts Clerk and Head Clerk in the years 1964, 1969 and 1979 respectively.
Following adverse remarks were recorded in the annual confidential report (for short, the ACR) for the year 1983-84 :  "His dealing with the contractor's case and personal cases of the staff is not above board.
His reputation for honesty is not good."
3.
He filed representation dated May 28, 1985 to the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, PWD (B&R Branch), Chandigarh.
He stated therein that in his capacity as Head Clerk of Dadri Provincial Division, he was working under the overall control of Executive Engineer and he worked to his satisfaction during the year 1983-84.
He was never issued any warning either verbally or in writing by the Executive Engineer or any authority for any lapse on his part.
According to him, the adverse report appears to have been recorded on superfluous/false complaints made by Harish Chander, Clerk of Dadri Provincial Division against him and the then Executive Engineer, Shri Thakur Lal.
The complaint was investigated and it was found to be baseless.
Accordingly, Harish Chander was served with a charge-sheet for making false complaint against the Executive Engineer and the petitioner.
The statement of allegations against Harish Chander, Clerk, reads thus :-  "While working as Clerk in Provincial Division, P.W.D.
B&R Branch, Charkhi Dadri, from 3882 todate, Shri Harish Chander committed the following acts of omission and commission :-  Shri Harish Chander made a written complaint on 6384 against the Executive Engineer/Head Clerk of Provincial Division Dadri, along with :-  (i) His case of granting two increments, which were admissible to him on having passed MA Ed. was delayed and wrongly dealt by the Head Clerk.
It was further alleged that the Head Clerk demanded Rs. 500/- (five hundred) as bribe of this case.
(ii) He was not granted no objection certificate for getting his name registered with the Local Employment Exchange;  (iii) He was demoralized of his degree and caste.
(iv) The Head Clerk/2nd Clerk does business and contractorship in the name of others.
Shri Harish Chander, Clerk was asked by the Executive Engineer, Provincial Division, Charkhi Dadri to give documentary proof for the allegations levelled by him and also to furnish an affidavit in this regard.
Sh. Harish Chander failed to prove documentary the allegations levelled by him and also to file an affidavit.
In this way he acted in a most irresponsible manner by making false complaint against his superiors.
It is thus quite evident that Sh. Harish Chander, Clerk misconducted and acted as unbecoming of a Govt. employee and breached the office discipline and as such he is liable to be punished under Rule 3 of the Government Employees (Conduct) Rules, 1966."
4.
Sh. Harish Chander filed reply to the charge-sheet and after considering the same, the competent authority imposed a punishment of recorded warning besides stoppage of one grade increment without further effect.
5.
The representation of the petitioner against the adverse remarks was not disposed of and he sent reminders dated September 29, 1989 and November 24, 1989.
The Engineer-in-Chief, P.W.D.
(B&R Branch), Haryana vide Memo No. 40-CR-85/364/CR, dated January 24, 1990, addressed to the Superintending Engineer, Bhiwani Circle, P.W.D.
B&R Branch, Bhiwani, informed that the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks for the year 1983-84 (April 1, 1983 to March 31, 1984) had been rejected.
On April 23, 1992, the Engineer-in-Chief issued three months' notice of retirement in terms of Rule 532(c) read with Rule 3.26(d) of the Rules.
The petitioner has challenged these orders in this petition.
The delay in disposing of the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks in his ACR for the year 1983-84 has been sought to be justified in the written statement on the ground that it could not be disposed of till the complaints filed against him were finally disposed of.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the complaint dated January, 1983 cited at Serial No. 1 of para No. 3 of the written statement does not relate to the period for which adverse entry had been recorded : that the complaint cited at Serial No. (2) had been filed by Harish Chander, which after investigation was found to be frivolous and Harish Chander was charge- sheeted under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 for misconduct and a punishment of recorded warning besides stoppage of one grade increment without future effect was inflicted upon him.
As regards complaint cited at Serial No. 3 in para 3 of the written statement, he submitted that the same did not relate to the period for which adverse entry had been recorded.
He further submitted that the petitioner's comments were not sought with regard to the complaints allegedly filed against him before disposing of the representation.
The department examined these complaints without asking the petitioner to give his comments/explanation with regard to the allegations made therein.
The learned counsel further submitted that the petitioner came to know of the complaints mentioned at Serial Nos. (1) and (3) in para No. 3 of the written statement only from the written statement filed in reply to the writ petition and prior to that he had no notice of the same and was not aware that the Department was going to take these complaints into consideration for disposing of the representation.
7.
We find substance the submissions made.
The complaints cited at Serial Nos. (1) and (3) in para No. 3 of the written statement, to which reference has been made, were not before the initiating or the reviewing authority when the adverse remarks were recorded in the ACR for the year 1983-84.
The complaint mentioned at Serial No. 2 referred supra was before the initiating and the reviewing authorities and for that action was taken against the complainant under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules.
The authority disposing of the petitioner's representation took some material into consideration without giving the petitioner an opportunity to explain the same.
The authority thought it convenient to take into consideration the material for disposing of the representation without bringing the same to the notice of the petitioner.
It is unfortunate that the authority did not appreciate that no material can be taken into consideration against a Government employee unless he is given an opportunity to explain the same.
The rules of natural justice, which are inherent in the administration of justice cannot be violated and in the present case, we are constrained to observe that these were violated and no explanation is forthcoming as to why the authority had acted in a manner which is not expected of it.
The competent authority has taken into consideration the material, which prejudicially affects the petitioner, without affording an opportunity to him to meet the same.
The action of the authority is rendered invalid since it has violated the principle of audi alteram partem.
8.
Apart from this, the competent authority took more than 4-1/2 years to dispose of the representation of the petitioner against the adverse remarks in the ACR for the year 1983-84.
No explanation is forthcoming for this long delay in the disposal of the representation.
The statement in the written statement that some complaints were under process and the representation could not be disposed of appears to have been evolved for explaining the delay in disposing of the representation.
It is not disclosed as to when these complaints were received and how much time was taken to dispose of the same, more particularly when these complaints did not relate to the period for which the ACR had been recorded.
If these complaints had been received during the period for which the ACR has been recorded, the petitioner would have been given a notice to explain the allegations made therein.
Since the explanation of the petitioner was not sought, it leads to an inference that these complaints were not with the authorities when the ACR for the year 1983-84 was recorded.
This inference is corroborated from the statement in the written statement that these complaints were under process when the representation was being disposed of.
The authorities could not take into consideration the material for the purpose of disposal of the representation which was not before the initiating or the reviewing authority when it wrote the ACR.
To say the least, the petitioner has been unfairly dealt with.
Annual confidential report is the subjective opinion of the reporting officer and it is to be formed upon an objective appraisal of the material and not arbitrarily.
Confidential remarks are after all an assessment of the work, performance and conduct of an officer/official by his superiors.
The assessment by its very nature would be somewhat subjective, but the subjective opinion has to be formed upon an objective appraisal of the material.
In the instant case, we find that the material which was before the reporting officer was labelled as false after enquiry, as observed earlier, and the material alluded to in the written statement was not before the reporting officer and it was used only for the purpose of disposing of the representation, which is impermissible at law.
The competent authority has to dispose of the representation keeping in view the material which was used for recording the ACR for the relevant period.
The competent authority has taken into consideration irrelevant material for disposing of the representation.
The order dated January 24, 1990, rejecting the representation of the petitioner against the adverse remarks cannot be sustained.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner maintained that except for the adverse entry in the ACR for the year 1983-84, all other entries in the ACRs of the petitioner are unblemished.
This statement of the learned counsel has not been controverted by the learned State counsel.
10.
The notice of premature retirement from Government service appears to have been issued to the petitioner on the basis of the adverse entry recorded in the ACR for the year 1983-84.
The service record of the petitioner has not been produced.
A reference has been made in the written statement to some of the remarks recorded against the petitioner by the Superintending Engineer.
We do not know whether these remarks were carried forward in the ACR.
The entire service record of the petitioner has to be taken into consideration by the competent authority before ordering premature retirement.
Operation of the notice of premature retirement dated April 23, 1992 which has been impugned in the instant case was stayed by the Motion Bench and the petitioner is continuing in service.
We accordingly quash the impugned notice and direct the competent authority to take a fresh decision regarding premature retirement of the petitioner keeping in view the Government instructions issued from time to time and the observations made therein.
Civil Writ Petition No. 9356 of 1990  11.
The petitioner was initially recruited as a Clerk in the Education Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab on January 7, 1957.
He was promoted as Accountant-cum-Assistant in the Industries Department on November 13, 1964.
On re-organisation of the State of Punjab, his services were allocated to the State of Haryana.
He was promoted as Head Clerk on January 14, 1977.
He earned Good/Very Good reports during his service career.
Under our directions, summary of the ACRs of the petitioner for the years 1964-65 to 1988-89 has been prepared by the Department and produced before us.
The same reads as under :-  Year Assessment Remarks 1964-65 Good 1965-66 Very Good 1966-67 Good 1967-68 Good 1968-69 Good Letter of appreciation issued for settling old audit objections.
1969-70 Good 1970-71 Very Good 1971-72 Good 1972-73 Good 1973-74 Very Good 1973-74 Good 1974-75 Very Good 1975-76 Good 1976-77 Good 1977-78 Very Good 1978-79 Good 1979-80 Very Good 1980-81 Good 1981-82 Good 1982-83 Good 1983-84 No assessment Being remained on long leave throughout the year under report.
1984-85 Average Integrity doubtful.
1985-86 Very Good 1986-87 Very Good 1987-88 Very Good 1988-89 Very Good A perusal of the summary of ACR's of the petitioner reveals that except for the period 1984-85 when his assessment was categorised as "Average", all the entries in the ACRs are either 'Good' or 'Very Good'.
During the year 1983-84, no assessment was made as the petitioner remained on long leave.
For the year 1984-85, following entry was recorded against column No. 8 (Reliability and reputation for honesty) :-  "To be watched, doubtful and shady."
Against the column "overall assessment", it is stated as "Average".
The ACR was recorded by the Senior Technical Officer, Government Quality Marketing Centre for Engineering Goods, Faridabad.
Government instructions postulate that the ACR has to be recorded within six months of the close of the year reported upon.
No reason is forthcoming for not recording the ACR within the stipulated period and why it was delayed for more than three years.
Be that as it may, the overall assessment of the petitioner's performance for the year 1984-85 was recorded as 'Average'.
12.
In Fakir Chand Aggarwal v. The State of Haryana, (Civil Writ Petition No. 1984 of 1987) decided by a Division Bench of this Court on January 21, 1988, this Court had the occasion to opine on the similar types of entries in the ACR of the petitioner and it observed thus :  "We have carefully examined the extracts of the ACRs of the petitioner which have been appended with the written statement.
For the reports.
So he had more than 70 per cent 'good' reports and according to the guidelines issued by the State of Haryana, he was entitled to be retained in service after attaining the age of 50 years, According to the respondents, the petitioner has been pre-maturely retired because for the period 6.8.1982 to 31.3.1983 he had earned an adverse report and has been found lacking in integrity.
The record of the case does not support this conclusion.
As has been noticed earlier, the reporting authority adjudged the petitioner for the period 681982 to March 1983, as an average officer.
He also observed that petitioner's integrity deserved to be watched.
The reporting authority has not stated that the petitioner lacked in integrity or his integrity was doubtful.
It seems that the reporting authority had cautioned that the work and conduct of the petitioner should be carefully watched with special reference to integrity.
However, he has not given a considered opinion regarding the integrity of the petitioner.
If he had come to a conclusion that the integrity was doubtful, there was no occasion to observe that his integrity should be watched.
Furthermore, the person who lacks integrity is not evaluated as an average officer.
In that case, such an officer is regarded as below average and lacking in integrity.
Many persons in Government service are average officers but that does not mean that they lack in integrity.
However, if an officer lacks integrity, he is not an average officer.
He is much below that.
Since overall assessment of the reporting authority was average, one can safely conclude that he had not made up his mind regarding the integrity of the petitioner and had wanted that the petitioner should be further watched to reach a final conclusion.
As noticed earlier, the remaining reports of the petitioner are good.
There is only one other report of average but that is not sufficient to prematurely retire the petitioner.
The object of screening at the age of 50 and then at the age of 55 Is to chop off dead wood from the service and get rid of dishonest and really inefficient employees.
That serves the public interest.
The record of the petitioner for the 10 years preceding the orders of premature retirement does not justify the conclusion that the retention of the petitioner is not in public interest.
The impugned order dated 9.4.1987 cannot be sustained."
"watched" cannot be read to mean that the official lacked in integrity or his integrity was doubtful.
A perusal of the service record of the petitioner in the instant case does not justify the conclusion that the retention of the petitioner in service on attaining the age of 55 years is not in public interest, The service record does not justify the issuance of notice of premature retirement from service.
13.
In fairness to the learned counsel for the respondents, it is necessary to refer to the judgment of the Apex Court in Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada, AIR 1992 SC 1020 : 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC).
He laid stress on principle No. (iv) mentioned in para 32 of the judgment, which reads thus :  "The Government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter - of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable and adverse.
If a Government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority."
14.
These observations indicate that the service record of the officer/official has to be taken into consideration before arriving at a decision whether he should be retained in service after attaining the age of 55 years.
The apex Court emphasized that more importance has to be attached to the performance during the later years and the service record, both favourable and unfavourable, has to be taken into consideration for retaining a Government employee in service after attaining the age of 55 years.
If the record of later years only is taken into consideration, the notice of premature retirement is not justified.
Apart from this, the Government instructions postulate that if a Government employee has earned 70 per cent 'good' reports during the last 10 years, the order of premature retirement will not be warranted.
In the light of the Government instructions, there is no escape from the conclusion that the notice of premature retirement is not justified.
15.
For the reasons stated above, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1942 and 9356 of 1990 succeed.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 1942 of 1990, the order contained in Memo No. 40-CR-85/364/CR, dated January 24, 1990 rejecting the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks recorded in his confidential report for the year 1983-84 and office order No. 55/EIII, dated April 23, 1992 giving him notice of premature retirement from service in terms of Rule 532(c) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II read with Rule 3.26(d) of Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, Part I, as applicable to the State of Haryana, are quashed.
However, respondent No.
I has to take a fresh decision if premature retirement can be ordered.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 9356 of 1990, office order dated May 22, 1990 issued under Endst.
No. Admn.
II/90/196-II/16875-A, dated May 29, 1990, by respondent No. 2 is quashed.
There will be no order as to costs in both these writ petitions.
Order accordingly.