Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Jawan in the Indian Army and joined as a recruit/under training on 16th January, 1984 after having undergone the required medical examination which found him medically fit.
He was discharged from his appointment after having completed 2 years and 194 days in service on account of being categorised as medical category 'EEE' vide certificate of discharge Annexure P-1.
The petitioner thereafter requested for the grant of disability pension through representation dated 27th November, 1986, Annexure P-4 to the petition.
This request was declined vide order dated 16th July, 1987.
Annexure P-5 to the petition and two appeals filed against the aforesaid order were also declined vide Annexures P-6 and P-9 dated the disability from which the petitioner had suffered was not attributable to or aggravated by Military Service.
Aggrieved thereby the petitioner has approached this Court impugning the aforesaid orders.
2.
At the time of the preliminary hearing of this case, it was brought to the notice of the Motion Bench that there appeared to be a conflict in the views taken by two Single Benches of this Court in the case reported as Darshan Singh v. Union of India and another, 1992(1) S.L.R.
35 : 1992(2) SCT 196 (P&H) and in Civil Writ Petition No. 5204 of 1986 (Surjit Singh v. Union of India and another) decided on 16th July, 1993 : 1993(4) SCT 539 (P&H) and the matter was accordingly directed to be put up before a Division Bench.
3.
It has been urged by Mr. Sarwan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, that the petitioner had admittedly no history of epilepsy and he had contracted this disease on account of a gun-shot wound which he had received in June, 1984 after his recruitment in the Army and, as such, the said disease would be deemed to have arisen in service as envisaged by rule 7(b) of the Defence Instructions governing the disability pension, contained in letter dated 1841950 and amended by letter dated 1st October, 1951.
He has urged that a bare reading of the aforesaid rule would be indicative of the fact that if an individual was discharged from military service on account of a medical disability, the assumption would be that such disability had arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for the military service or at the time of his discharge.
Mr. Sarwan Singh has relied on the observations in Surjit Singh's case (supra), in support of his case.
4.
The stand of the respondents, however, is that the petitioner had been invalidated out of service on account of post traumatic epilepsy resulting from a gun-shot injury and the Controller of Defence Accounts after scrutinising his claim had reached the conclusion that this disability was not attributable to military service and, as such, he was not entitled to the payment of any disability pension.
It has been admitted, however, that the petitioner had received the gun-shot injury on 10th June, 1984 but at a time when he was not on duty, the inference drawn being that as he was not on duty it could not be said that the disability was attributable to military service.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Rule 7(b) referred to above, is quoted below :  "In respect of diseases, the following rules shall be observed :-  (a) .....xxx.......xxx......xxx...  (b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
(c) .....xx.....xxxx........xx...  A reading of this rule would indicate that it is primarily in two parts viz. (i) that a disease which leads to discharge will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service and (ii) an exception is also provided if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to the acceptance for service and in that case the deeming factor was to be ignored.
It will be seen from the pleadings in the case that admittedly no note to the above effect was recorded at the time when the petitioner was accepted for military service nor was the medical opinion recorded in terms of the exception that has been provided in rule 7(b) even after the disability had been detected prior to his discharge.
Mr. SK Pipat, learned Senior Standing Counsel for the Union of India, has however, placed reliance on the observations made in Darshan Singh's case (supra), in which the learned Single Judge of this Court held that "the mere fact that no note was made at the time of the petitioner's acceptance of military service that he was suffering from a disease like the one on account of which he was discharged from service would thus not make any difference", is misplaced as the observations were in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case as the court found that even in the absence of a note recorded under Rule 7(b) there was overwhelming evidence to show that the petitioner therein had been suffering from the invalidating disease even prior to joining the Armed Forces and it was in that situation, that the observations, afore-quoted, were made.
We therefore find that there is no conflict of opinion between the two judgments referred to by the Motion Bench.
6.
Now coming to the facts of the present case, it is clear that the petitioner was recruited in service in January, 1984 and the gun-shot injury was suffered by him in June of the same year which resulted in post traumatic epilepsy which ultimately led to his discharge.
It bears repetition that in the written statement filed by the respondents it is not denied that the medical disability occurred while in service but the payment of pension is being denied by the Controller of Defence Accounts on the ground that the gun shot injury which ultimately resulted in post traumatic epilepsy was suffered by the petitioner while he was not on duty.
This opinion of the respondents appears to be based on a complete mis-conception of rule 7(b) as a bare reading thereof shows that the disability pension is to be paid to an individual for a disease suffered by him during the period when he stood enrolled in military service and whether such disease was suffered at a time when he was on duty or not is a totally irrelevant factor.
We, therefore, find that the denial of the disability pension to the petitioner was completely unwarranted in law and the observation in Annexure P-5 that the pension was not to be paid as the disability was not attributable to military service, cannot be sustained.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow the writ petition; quash the orders Annexure P-5, P-6 and P-9 and direct that the petitioner be paid disability pension in terms of rule 7(b) the arrears to be paid to him with 12 per cent interest from the date the pension fell due to the date of actual payment.
We further direct that the entire matter with regard to the quantum of pension payable to the petitioner will be decided positively within a period of three months from today and the payment of the arrears along with interest be paid within a period of one month thereafter.
Costs of the petition are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.