VK Jhanji, J - This petition for revision is directed against the order of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, whereby order of the trial Court was set aside and in consequence thereof, injunction was granted in favour of the plaintiff (respondent herein) restraining the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (in short 'the University') from terminating the services of the plaintiff and also from getting the house vacated in pursuance of letter dated 2531992 till the decision of the suit.
2.
In brief, the facts are that vide order dated 411992, plaintiff was appointed as Security Officer by the Vice Chancellor of the University.
As per the appointment order, plaintiff was to remain on probation for one year which could be further extended for a period of three years in all.
Subsequently, vide order dated 421992, his period of probation was extended.
However, vide order dated 2431992, services of the plaintiff were dispensed with and he was asked to vacate House No. C-35 situated in the university campus, allotted to him at the time of his appointment.
This led to the filing of a suit by the plaintiff in which he challenged the order dated 2431992 terminating his services as well as order dated 2531992 vide which he was asked to vacate the house in question.
Along with the suit, he also filed an application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, for grant of ad-interim injunction, restraining the university from implementing the aforesaid orders.
This application, on contest, was dismissed by the trial Court.
On appeal by the plaintiff, the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, set aside the order of the trial Court and in consequence thereof, restrained the university from Implementing its orders till the decision of the suit.
The order of the Additional District Judge is now being impugned by the University in the present revision position.
3.
Mr. HS Riar, Advocate, counsel for the petitioner-University contended that the Additional District Judge while allowing the appeal of the plaintiff (respondent herein) has not kept in view the principles for the grant or refusal of ad interim injunction as contained in Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
According to him, neither the plaintiff has a prima facie case in his favour, nor balance of convenience lies in restraining the university for implementing its orders.
He also contended that no irreparable loss is going to be caused to the plaintiff if injunction is not granted in his favour.
In reply, Mr. DS Pheruman, Advocate, counsel for the plaintiff, contended that order terminating the services of the plaintiff is bad in law inasmuch as he was a confirmed employee.
According to him, the Vice Chancellor was not a competent person to extend the period of probation.
He further contended that no reason at all was given that as to why it was considered necessary to extend the period of probation.
Lastly, he contended that without recording any finding in regard to the work and conduct of the plaintiff, his period of probation could not be extended after the expiry of original period of one year.
4.
At the time of motion hearing, i.e. on 3091992, operation of the order of the Additional District Judge was stayed, but the plaintiff was allowed to retain the premises till the decision of the revision petition.
Counsel for the plaintiff has fairly conceded that the plaintiff stands relieved from the post and the new Security Officer has since joined.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the revision petition deserves to succeed.
Plaintiff in his suit challenged the orders of the university on the grounds; that he was not heard before passing the impugned orders; that he had already completed one year of probation period satisfactorily and in recognition of his work and conduct, the university authorities increased his salary; that the proceedings of the meeting dated 2431992 of the Syndicate in which a decision was taken to dispense with the services of the plaintiff show that the order of termination of services of the plaintiff was by way of punishment and the same was not an innocuous order as it appears that the plaintiff had already completed one year probation period on 411992 and after the expiry of this probation period, he was deemed to have been confirmed as Security Officer.
Plaintiff in his suit nowhere challenged the order vide which his probation period was extended.
The finding of the Additional District Judge that the order extending the period of probation was not correct or was not in accordance with law, cannot be sustained for the reason that the order extending the period of probation has not been challenged by the plaintiff in his suit.
Plaintiff was appointed to the post on probation for one year.
It was stipulated in his letter of appointment that the period of probation could be extended upto a period of three years in all.
During his period of probation, the Syndicate assessed the work and conduct of the plaintiff and found the same to be unsatisfactory.
Accordingly, the services of the plaintiff were dispensed with during the period of probation.
The order of the University is innocuous and was not passed by way of punishment.
The order, thus prima facie, is not illegal, arbitrary or against the rules and service conditions as contended by Mr. Pheruman.
In order to obtain temporary injunction, the plaintiff was also required to show as to what irreparable loss would be caused to him if injunction is not granted in his favour, which he has miserably failed to establish on record.
Plaintiff, admittedly, stands relieved from the post of new Security Officer has since joined in this view of the matter, plaintiff cannot be allowed to retain the house in question because the same would be required for the new Security Officer who has come in his place.
The loss, if any, which the plaintiff may suffer, can be measured in terms of money and for that matter also, the plaintiff is not entitled, to the injunction prayed for.
For the reasons recorded above, the revision petition is allowed, order of the Additional District Judge is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored with no order as to costs.