SD Agarwala, C.J.
- This appeal and the other connected appeals No. 782 to 787 all of 1993 involve common question of law and fact and hence have been decided by a common judgment.
2.
Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9248, 9235, 9438, 9698, 9784, 10248 and 10308 all of 1993 were decided by the learned Single Judge by a common judgment dated September 3, 1993.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellants and respondents in all the appeals agree that writ petition No. 9248 of 1993, out of which LPA No. 765 of 1993 arises, be treated as the leading case, and consequently the facts, of this writ petition are being numerated hereinafter.
4.
Writ petition No. 9248 of 1993 has been filed by Shri Vipin Kapoor, Shri Vipin Kapoor passed his 10+2 examination from DAV College, Chandigarh.
He appeared in the Combined Entrance Test - 1993 (hereinafter to be referred to as CET) which is conducted for admission to First Year of the Courses of Bachelor of Engineering/Technology, Bachelor of Architecture and B Tech.
(Planning).
His position in merit was at No. 2783.
He made an application for admission to the Engineering College concerned in sports category as he had represented SGS Club, Chandigarh in Chandigarh Senior State, Championship in Kho Kho in the year 1992-93 and his case is that his team had secured second position being runner up.
The Chandigarh Administration Directorate of Sports granted the petitioner category 'C' (i) certificate issued on behalf of the Director of Sports on May 25, 1993.
His further case is that all those candidates who had been issued gradation certificates by the Director of Sports, Union Territory, Chandigarh were called for trials on different dates.
The petitioner was also called for such trial vide their letter dated July 9, 1993 and his test was held on July 15, 1993.
After the trial, the petitioner's grade was accepted as category 'C' (i).
5.
On July 19, 1993, the Director of Sports wrote a letter to the petitioner asking him to deposit the original gradation certificate according to him as it was required for counter signing.
The petitioner bona fide deposited the original gradation certificate.
His further case is that the certificate after deposit was not returned to him and he was informed that one official from the Sports Department, Chandigarh will remain as a member of Joint Admission Committee constituted for giving admissions to various Colleges in the State of Punjab and Chandigarh and that the said official will take the original gradation certificate with him at the time of interview.
The interview was to be held on July 27, 1993.
On that day, the petitioner appeared for the interview.
The petitioner as well as other similarly situated candidates from Chandigarh were surprised to know that no official from the Sports Department, Chandigarh had come along with their original gradation certificates.
Consequently, the candidates, who had made applications for admission in the Sports Quota were not at all considered in respect of the seats reserved for the sports category and as such all of them including the petitioner were not interviewed.
The result was that the petitioner and other similarly situated candidates were not admitted by the Joint Admission Committee.
6.
The petitioner's further case in the petition is that in fact the Director of Sports had played a fraud with him and other similarly situated candidates who bona fide returned their gradation certificates for counter signatures.
In fact such was not the intention of the Director of Sports.
He actually wanted to change the gradation certificates.
The Director of Sports neither returned the gradation certificates nor produced them on the date of the meeting of the Joint Admission Committee on July 27, 1993.
The resultant effect was that the petitioner and other similarly situated candidates, who had bona fide returned their certificates for counter signatures, suffered irreparable injury by not being admitted in the Engineering Colleges while candidates lower in merit to the petitioner and other similarly situated candidates, were admitted.
The petitioner, therefore, filed the present writ petition.
7.
In the affidavit filed on behalf of the Director of Sports, Union Territory, Chandigarh, the allegations made by the petitioner have not been denied.
On the other hand, it has been stated that on account of bona fide error, the petitioner was adjudged in category 'C' (i) and he was not entitled to such a certificate.
The allegation made by the petitioner that by playing fraud upon him and other similarly situated candidates, original certificate were got deposited by the Director of Sports has not been denied.
It has also not been denied that no representative of the Director of Sports was present at the time of the meeting of the Joint Admission Committee.
8.
The learned Single Judge by judgment dated September 3, 1993 allowed this writ petition and other connected writ petitions and issued a direction to the respondents in the petition to consider the case of all the petitioners on the basis of their sports gradations issued to them.
It was made clear that if they are higher in merit in the sports category, they would be admitted.
Original certificates were also directed to be returned to the candidates.
It is this judgment dated September 3, 1993 which is subject matter of challenge in this appeal by the appellant, namely, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
9.
The only question which arises for consideration in this appeal is as to whether it is open to the Chandigarh Administration to change the guidelines for admission to the reserved category of sports after the process of examination has commenced ?
10.
In the year 1993, a Common Entrance Test - 1993 has been conducted by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar on behalf of all the Engineering Institutions of Punjab and Chandigarh.
Vide Notification dated March 26, 1993, the Governor of Punjab was pleased to appoint Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar as the authority competent to make common admissions to the various courses being run in the Engineering Institutions of the State of Punjab and the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
An Information Brochure (Prospectus) was issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar for holding Common Entrance Test-1993.
Under the prospectus, the last date for receipt of application forms was May 5, 1993.
The prospectus was issued much earlier to it.
11.
It is after the expiry of the last date for the receipt of the application forms that the Chandigarh Administration changed the guidelines for admission to the reserved categories of sports.
In pursuance of the prospectus issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, the examination was held on June 6, 1993 and the result of the said examination was declared on July 1, 1993.
12.
For the first time on July 12, 1993, the Admission Brochure (Prospectus) for admission in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh; Chandigarh College of Architecture, Chandigarh and Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Panjab University, Chandigarh was issued.
It is in one of these Colleges where the respondent-petitioners had applied for admission.
It may be noted that this Prospectus was issued after the result of the CET 1993 had been declared on July 1, 1993.
13.
Admission to an Engineering Institution in Punjab and Chandigarh could only be made through Common Entrance Test-1993 conducted by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
Only those students, who succeeded in the Common Entrance Test, could apply for admission to these Colleges.
In the circumstances, the process for admission to these Colleges commenced with the issuance of prospectus for CET - 1993 conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
The last date for submission of application forms was May 5, 1993.
The petitioners/respondents made their applications for permission to appear in the said CET and they appeared in the test on June 6, 1993.
The results were declared on July 1, 1993 and it is only thereafter that the prospectus were issued by the Engineering College concerned on July 12, 1993 in which different guidelines for admission had been incorporated.
14.
In our opinion this cannot be done.
Once the process of examination has commenced, it was not open to the Chandigarh Administration to change the guidelines for admission to the reserved category of sports.
If they wanted to change it, they should have done so before the issuance of the Prospectus for CET-1993 by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and not after that.
The students appeared in the examination keeping in view the guidelines which were in existence prior to May 5, 1993.
They cannot be penalised on the basis of guidelines issued subsequent to the commencement of the process of examination.
In a Full Bench decision of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab etc., 1993(2) Punjab Law Reporter 212 : 1993(4) S.C.T.
328, it has been categorically laid down that though it is the jurisdiction of the State Government to lay down the policy for admission to the Sports Quota but this policy cannot be changed after the Prospectus has been issued to students on the basis of which they appeared in the test.
It has been opined as follows :  "The prospectus cannot subsequently be changed by the State Government to the detriment of students to benefit certain other students."
15.
We are bound by the Full Bench decision of this Court.
The principle laid down in the said Full Bench decision fully applies to the present case.
It was not open to the Chandigarh Administration to change the guidelines for admission to the reserved category of sports and in any case after May 5, 1993 which was the last date for receipt of application forms for CET-1993.
16.
In the instant case the guidelines were changed on May 7, 1993 but actually the changed guidelines were brought to the notice of the students only in the prospectus issued on July 12, 1993 which is the date even subsequent to the examination and the declaration of the result of CET 1993.
17.
In the circumstances, we are clearly of the opinion that the guidelines for admission to the reserved category of sports which were issued on May 7, 1993 cannot be made applicable to the CET-1993 as the process of examination had commenced earlier.
18.
This question can be looked into from another aspect.
In the prospectus issued by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, in clause 17 it was specifically stated that the admissions shall be based on the relative merit of the candidates determined by the result of the Entrance Test being held in the current year 1993 subject to such reservations and weightages as are prescribed in the Rules of Admission of the Govt/University/Institution concerned.
The intent of the prospectus clearly, therefore, was that whatever rules are in existence which relate to the admission and which existed on the date of the issue of the prospectus, would be applicable to the examination in which the students were to compete.
The candidates sat for the examination on the basis of the conditions laid down in the prospectus issued by Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar which conducted CET - 1993.
This Combined Entrance Test was conducted on behalf of all the Engineering Colleges of Chandigarh and Punjab.
Since the test was being conducted on behalf of all the Engineering Colleges of Chandigarh and Punjab, all these Colleges are bound by the conditions laid down in the said prospectus and as such it was also not open for the Chandigarh Administration to lay down guidelines for admission to the reserved categories of sports on May 7, 1993.
These guidelines can only be made applicable to the Combined Entrance Test which would be held for 1994.
19.
Learned counsel for the Chandigarh Administration has vehemently challenged the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge which is in the following terms :  "It has, thus, to be held that the policy decision governing the admissions with regard to any of the reserve categories should be applied when the person concerned participated in the event and the changed policy should apply to such persons who have participated in the sports event after the same has come into existence.
As mentioned above, it is not possible for a student to participate in anticipation of criteria that may come into existence later."
His case is that this finding will seriously affect the entire examination process held in the State of Punjab and Union Territory, Chandigarh.
This finding will also affect admissions to other reserve categories.
20.
In our opinion, the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge is not correct.
The policy decisions which have to be applied in the case of admissions to the reserved categories have to be applied in respect to the year of admission and not when a particular person has participated in the event.
The benefit of participation in sports is given to those students who participated in sports within three years prior to the year of examination.
If the policy is made applicable to the year in which the students had participated, it would result in serious injustice to other students who are competing in the same examination.
Different standards would be applicable at different candidates.
In an examination for a particular year, the same guidelines have to be made applicable in respect of reserved categories and the same can not be changed from student to student and as such this finding cannot be sustained.
21.
Since we have taken the view that guidelines to the reserved categories of sports which were applicable prior to May 5, 1993 would be made applicable to the CET-1993, we agree with the ultimate order passed by the learned Single Judge, subject to the observation made by us in regard to the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge in regard to the applicability of the guidelines at the time when the candidates had participated in the event.
in the Full Bench decision of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota's case (supra), in which one of us was a party to the Full Bench, it was laid down that though it is the jurisdiction of the State Government to lay down the policy for admission to the Sports Quota in the medical colleges but the State Government should not change the policy every year and in one year change it many times had been done in that case.
It was further observed in the Full Bench decision that it was expected of the State Government that any policy which has been determined with regard to the Sports Quota for the next year, shall be permitted to continue for atleast three years so that students who are eligible in the Sports Quota may be aware of the said policy.
In the instant case, the policy which was applicable in 1992 was changed for the year 1993 after the process of admission had commenced.
This should not be done.
It results in great harassment to the students who apply for admissions in professionals colleges.
They have at times to seek relief from this court.
This does not ahead the convention.
Candidates who are admitted in professional colleges should not normally enter the same through litigation.
We hope and trust that Chandigarh Administration in future shall take care to change the guidelines, if any, in regard to the Sports Quota in time much before the commencement of the admission so that no harassment is caused to the students who take part in the admission process.
22The learned Single Judge had issued a direction that the appellant shall consider the cases of all the petitioner/respondents on the basis of their sports gradation issued to them.
We consequently direct that this exercise should be completed within a period of three weeks from the date the certified copy of this order is produced before the Admission Committee.
We further direct that the original certificates of the petitioner/respondents shall also be returned to them within a period of three weeks from the date certified copy of this order is produced before the Director Sports, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.