NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of two Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 1307 and 1308 of 1990 as they arise out of a common order passed by the learned single Judge whereby he allowed two writ petitions involving identical questions of fact and law.
Since arguments were advanced in Letters Patent Appeal 1308 of 1990, facts are being taken from this appeal.
2.
Respondents who were writ petitioners before the learned judge (referred to hereinafter 'the petitioner') were working as lecturers at different places in the erstwhile State of PEPSU and Punjab.
After the merger of the State of PEPSU and Punjab on November 1, 1950 the cadres of the two different States were equated and amalgamated by the State Reorganisation Act, 1956.
The petitioners were thereafter selected and appointed to the Punjab Education Service Class II (for short 'the Service').
The service consisted of one unified cadre of senior lecturers, Assistant Directors including the Principals of Higher Secondary Schools as well as the District Inspectors of Schools.
It also included members of the teaching staff of the schools as well as colleges prior to and after the reorganisation.
A common seniority list of persons working as lecturers in the schools as also in the colleges was maintained.
In the year 1961, the then State of Punjab bifurcated the Service into two separate cadres, namely school and inspection cadre and the college cadre and separate seniority lists were accordingly drawn up and promotions to Class-I Service were made on the basis of those seniority lists.
A number of writ petitions were filed in this court challenging the bifurcation and the matter was heard by a Full Bench of this court in Brij Lal Goswami v. State of Punjab, AIR 1965 Punjab 401.
The order of the State Government bifurcating the Service into school and college cadres was held as violative of the principle of preserving the inter se seniority embodied in Rule 16 of the Punjab Services Integration Rules and also violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The said order was, therefore, quashed.
In pursuance of the directions issued by the learned Judges constituting the Full Bench the erstwhile State of Punjab issued a seniority list combining both the cadres as was being maintained prior to the bifurcation.
3.
The then State of Punjab was again reorganised with effect from November 1, 1966 and a large number of school and college lecturers were allocated to the State of Haryana whereas the petitioners and many others like them were allocated to the reorganised State of Punjab.
Schools lecturers and college lecturers continued to form one unified cadre in both the States even after the reorganisation.
The appellant-State published on March 10, 1975 a final joint seniority list (Annexure III with the written statement) of the members of the Service which included names of lecturers working in the schools as well as in the colleges.
The cadre strength of the Service was fixed by the State Government at 235.
4.
The matter of revision of scales of pay of the teaching personnel in government schools was taken up by the State Goverment and after considering the recommendations made by the Kothari Commission it was decided in the year 1967 to revise the pay scales of school lecturers to Rs. 700-1100/- with effect from November 1, 1966.
This revised scale was sanctioned for 87 posts only for the school lecturers to be granted as per their seniority in the Service.
Petitioner who were working as lecturers in government colleges and were members of the Service and whose names appeared in the common seniority list were drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 400-800.
It may be observed that the salary scales of teaching personnel in government colleges were also revised in the year 1968 w.e.f.
November 1, 1966 and the lectures like the petitioners were given the scale of Rs. 400-800.
When the revised scale of pay was sanctioned for 87 posts of school lecturers some of them who got this revised scale were junior to the petitioner in the joint seniority list.
The petitioners and others like them then represented to the State Government that some of the school lecturers had been given scale of Rs. 700-1100 though they ranked junior to the college lecturers in the joint seniority list of the Service.
When they did not get the necessary relief from the State Government, they approached this Court by filing writ petitions under Articles 226 of the Constitution challenging the action of the State Government as being violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
As already observed earlier, both the writ petitions were allowed by the learned single Judge and it was held that as a sequel to the judgment in Brij Lal Goswami's case (supra) a common seniority list of the Service had been prepared and maintained and, therefore, there was no justification for the State to treat the college lecturers whose names were borne on that list differently by giving the lower scale of pay than the one given to the school lecturers.
It is this order of the learned single Judge that has been impugned before us in the present appeals.
5.
The only contention advanced before us by the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab while assailing the judgment under appeal was that the higher scale of pay of Rs. 700-1100 had been sanctioned by the State Government only for the school personnel while accepting the recommendations of the Kothari Commission and, therefore, the petitioners and others like them who were lecturers in colleges could not claim the same.
We find no merit in this contention.
It is common case of the parties that the Service consisted of a unified cadre which included the school and college lecturers and that a joint seniority list was maintained by the State Government.
Annexure R-III is, in fact, the list produced by the appellant-State with its written statement and names of all the school lecturers as well as the college lecturers are borne on this list.
It is also admitted that the scales of pay of the college lecturers were revised to Rs. 400-800 in February 1968 with effect from November 1, 1966 and 87 school lecturers were given a higher grade of Rs. 700-1100 with effect from the same date.
Some of the school lecturers who were given this higher grade ranked junior to the petitioners in the common seniority list.
The net result was that the petitioners being senior were drawing salary in the scale of Rs. 400-800 whereas some of the school lecturers junior to them got the higher scale of Rs. 700-1100.
This, in our opinion, is arbitrary and ex facie violative of Articles 16 of the Constitution and the action of the State denies to the petitioners equality of opportunity in the matter of employment under the State.
It is by now well settled that the protection of Article 16(1) extends also to matters regarding fixation of seniority for purpose of promotion, for purposes of pay fixation etc.
When there is a common cadre and a joint seniority list of all the members of the Service, the mandate of Article 16 of the Constitution would be violated if the junior are given a higher pay scale without any justifiable grounds.
It is true that right guaranteed by this Articles does not mean that all the members of a cadre must be paid the same salary irrespective of their seniority, source of recruitment, educational qualifications and various other incidents of service.
There could be cases when a junior may be drawing higher pay than a senior without violating Article 16.
For instance when salary is fixed under valid statutory rules and the differentiation is based on an intelligible criteria having a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
Again, when a junior comes on transfer from another cadre and his pay is protected or when advance increments are given for experience passing a test acquisition of higher qualifications or as an incentive for efficiency.
Whenever a junior draws a higher pay scale than the senior there has to be a justification.
We are in agreement with the learned Judge that in the case in hand there was no justification for giving higher pay scale to the school lecturers who were junior to the petitioner.
The mere fact that the State Government acted on the recommendations of the Kothari Commission in giving higher pay scales to school teachers makes no difference.
6.
It will not be out of place to mention here that after reorganisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on November 1, 1966 a large number of school and college lecturers were allocated to the State of Haryana who belonged to Class II Service in that State.
In that State too a common seniority list was maintained in terms of the directions given by the Full Bench in Brij Lal Goswami's case (supra) and both the classes of lecturers belonged to the same cadre.
The State of Haryana granted pay scale of Rs. 700-1100 to the school lecturers with effect from December 1, 1967 but the claim of the college lecturers who were senior to them had not been considered.
The college lecturers approached this Court by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 3441 of 1977 and the same was allowed with costs holding that there was no jurisdiction for discriminating the petitioners therein.
The matter was taken in appeal before a Division Bench and the order of the learned single Judge was upheld.
Learned Judges constituting the Division Bench observed that since bifurcation of the Service had been annulled by the Full Bench in Brij Lal Goswami's case (supra) the State was not justified in allowing a higher pay scale to the juniors.
7.
In the result, there is no merit in the appeals and the same are dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.