Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, who held post-graduate degrees, were employed as whole-time Research Scholars/Fellows under the respondent-University in various subjects within the dates 3131987 to 1.4.1989 as per the specimen sanction Annexure P. 1 with emoluments at the rate of Rs. 600/- per month subsequently revised to Rs. 800/- per month.
On 26th May, 1987, the Government of India, Ministry of Science and Technology issued a Memorandum (Annexure P2) whereby revised guidelines for the benefit of research personnel working on R & D Programmes funded by the Central Government Departments/Agencies were issued and monthly emoluments at the rate of Rs. 1800/- retrospectively to be given with effect from 141987 were made available to those categories of research scholars.
The case of the petitioners is that although they were research scholars who had been selected as such by the Haryana Government, yet they were also entitled to the revised emoluments at the rate of Rs. 1800/- per month.
The petitioners also represented to the respondent-University that they should be given the emoluments at the enhanced rate and this request was duly forwarded to the Director, Higher Education Haryana, Chandigarh vide Annexure P7/1.
The University also recommended that it would be appropriate to give the revised emoluments as the Delhi University and the Panjab University, Chandigarh had fallen in line with the memorandum of the Central Government and started payments at that rate.
The University also pointed out that in case the amount was to be increased, as requested by the research scholars, the contingent grant to be paid to the University would have to be correspondingly increased.
In reply to Annexure P-7 a letter (Annexure P8) was addressed by the Director, Higher Education Haryana to the University by which information was sought as to whether the suggestion made in Annexure P7 for the grant of the higher emoluments had been placed before the Finance Board of the University and whether their approval had been obtained or not.
It appears that the University did not care to reply and the matter had rested there.
2.
In response to the writ petition, a reply has been filed on behalf of the University alone and the stand is that the University would consider the matter of raising the rates of scholarship/fellowship of the petitioners only if the Government of Haryana agreed to provide more funds for this purpose.
It has also been clarified that the higher emoluments at the rate of Rs. 1800/- per month were given to only those scholars who were sponsored by the Central Government as mentioned in Annexure P2 and this directive could not be foisted on the University against its wishes.
Reliance has also been placed on a Division Bench decision of this Court in LPA No. 1076 of 1990 (Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh v. Chander Bhan Arora, 1993(1) S.C.T.
6) decided on 6th January 1992 to the effect that as no right of the petitioners stood violated they were not entitled to any relief.
3.
Mr. GL Sardana, learned counsel for the petitioners, has additionally argued that as the petitioners were employees of the Kurukshetra University, they were entitled to a pay scale of Rs. 1800/- per month, like the other research scholars, on the principle of equal pay for equal work and the denial of the pay scales to the petitioners was violative of Articles 14 of the Constitution.
In support of this argument, he has relied on Bharat Petroleum (erstwhile Barmah Shell) Pensioners v. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, AIR 1988 SC 1407 and Jaipal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1504.
He has also urged that the instructions issued vide Annexure P2 were binding on the University in view of entry No. 66 (List-I) and entry No. 25 (list-III) of the Constitution.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the petition.
It is not denied that the scholarship of the petitioners is funded by the Haryana Government and that Government alone is to determine the amount to be paid.
I am also of the view that the instructions P2 relied upon by the petitioners would not be applicable to their case as they would apply only to such persons whose scholarship was funded by the Central Government.
While disposing of a similar argument, the Division Bench, aforementioned held that it would be "wholly within the domain of the funding authority to fix the remunerations or emoluments to be paid to Research Follows working on projects, chosen by it.
The fact that some other agencies may be paying higher emoluments, provides no occasion for imputing any discrimination or suggesting thereby any violation of the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution of India."
It was further held that the guidelines issued by the Central Government with regard to the finding the scholarships given by the University Grant Commission and other similarly central projects could not be made applicable to other agencies.
Mr. Sardana's assertion that in the cited case the respondents in the writ petition being the Chandigarh Administration could easily turn out and say that the instructions issued by the Central Government were not binding on them, whereas the University could not raise this argument is, to my mind, wholly misconceived as the directive issued by the Central Government may or may not be binding on a State or Union Territory Administration, but would certainly not be binding on an autonomous body like the University.
Taking the connected argument of Mr. Sardana that Annexure P-2 would be binding in view of the entries in the two lists mentioned above, is also without merit as they do not deal with the question posed.
5.
The final argument of Mr. Sardana that as all research scholars were doing similar work, they must get similar emoluments on the principle of equal pay for equal work is also mis-conceived.
The Division Bench, cited above, has held that it would be wholly erroneous to make a comparison in the matter of emoluments amongst Research Fellows working under different schemes or projects under by different agencies.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners have no bearing on the facts of the present case.
In Bharat Petroleum's case (supra) the question of equality was raised before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and decided in favour of the employees as higher emoluments were being denied to the employees of one of two sister concerns and it was in that situation that the Supreme Court said that similar emoluments were to be given to the employees of both the concerns.
The other case cited too has no bearing on the facts of the present case as the Supreme Court merely held on principle that no distinction with regard to emoluments could be made amongst similarly circumstanced employees working under the State Government.
In the case before me, as already indicated above, and held also by the Division Bench, the funding agency being different the question of equal pay for equal work does not arise.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition being devoid of any merit is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.