MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner was selected as a Patwari candidate in the year 1949 and was appointed as Patwari in District Ambala in the year 1951.
Thereafter, he joined Army and was discharged from there in the year 1968.
He represented to the respondents on 24th August, 1968, for being appointed as Patwari, and when this was not done for about five years, he approached this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1628 of 1973 which was allowed on 24th November, 1981.
In compliance with the judgment the petitioner was taken back in service as Patwari by order dated 5th November, 1982, of the Collector, Ambala, issued on 3rd December, 1982 (Annexure R-2/T).
Thereafter he sought voluntary retirement from service and was retired with effect from 28th February, 1989.
Pension has not been released to the petitioner despite the total period of service rendered by him from 1st March, 1951, to 10th April, 1964, and thereafter from 3rd December, 1982 to 28th February, 1989.
This is for the reason that there is break in service from 1964 to 1982, that is, eighteen years, during which period the petitioner served for sometime in the Army.
This decision of the respondents has been challenged in the present petition on the ground that as in the earlier writ petition allowed by this Court on 24th November, 1981, the respondents has been directed to consider the case of the petitioner for being appointed to the post of Patwari on his turn, the direction was not complied with inasmuch as the petitioner was not taken back in service on his turn when though persons junior to him were appointed.
This is evident from the fact that even though seniority number of the petitioner was 262, yet his juniors like Jagdish, Rattan Lal, Kailash Chand, etc., who were his batch-mates and have also retired from service, are in respect of the pension.
2.
In the written statement, the factual position has been admitted and the only plea taken by the respondents is that as the total service of the petitioner falls short by about six months, pension has been denied to him.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that if the judgment of this Court (supra) had been complied with and the petitioner had been taken into service on his turn, he would have been entitled to pension, as all the persons mentioned above, who happened to be his juniors, are receiving the same.
4.
Viewing it from another angle, the petitioner, served the Army during Emergency and if that period is also counted towards his total length of service, to which he is entitled under the rules as a matter of right, the total period of service rendered by the petitioner would qualify for the grant of pension.
Otherwise also, when the petitioner sought voluntary retirement, it was the duty of the respondents to ensure compliance of the statutory rules which enjoin a duty upon the respondents to see that an employee is permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement if he qualifies twenty years' service, so that his right to pension is not adversely affected.
Once the petitioner has been permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement, and in fact he has so retired, it is no longer open to the respondents, to tell him that instead of 20 years, he has put in 19 years and 5 months' service, and on that account he was not entitled to draw any pension.
5.
In view of the aforesaid position, we allow this petition and by issuing a writ of mandamus, direct the respondents to count the service rendered by the petitioner in the Army towards the total length of service rendered by him, and in any case to treat him having been taken back in service instead of 3rd December, 1982, from the date of judgment of this Court, that is, from 24th November, 1981, so that deficiency in the total service is adequately made up, thereby making the petitioner eligible for the grant of pension.
This shall be done within a period of three months, and after fixing the amount of pension, the pensionary benefits, along with the arrears to which the petitioner would have been entitled had the pension been fixed in the very first instance, shall be released to him within three months thereafter.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.