Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in this case are working as Store-keepers, in the Public Works Department, Buildings and Roads Branch of the State of Haryana.
They claim parity of treatment in the matter of pay with the Store-keepers working in other departments of the Government.
Their primary complaint is that the State Government while fixing the scales of pay has violated the principles of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work'.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners aver that the Store-keepers in the Public Works Department were placed in the scale of Rs. 400-600 w.e.f.
April 1, 1979.
Later on, this pay scale was revised and raised to Rs. 950-1500 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 vide notification dated April 29, 1987.
As against this, the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education were placed in the scale of Rs. 525-900 w.e.f.
April 1, 1979 while those working in the Moti Lal Nehru School of Sports, Rai, were placed in the scale of Rs. 525-1050.
The pay scales of these Store-keepers were revised and raised to Rs. 1400-2600 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
The petitioners aver that the qualification and the nature of duties being identical, they made representations to the appropriate authorities including the Chairman, Pay Anomalies Committee, Haryana.
Reference has been made to a representation dated December 2, 1988, a copy of which has been appended as an annexure with the writ petition.
The comments of the Head of Department viz. Engineer-in-Chief were asked for.
These were sent vide letter dated January 24, 1989.
Having failed to get any order from the Government, the petitioners served a notice dated February 10, 1989.
Nothing useful having followed, they approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
It appears that initially this petition came up for hearing before a learned Single Judge of this Court on December 1, 1992 when in order to clarify the factual position, a prayer for permission to amend the writ petition was made.
This prayer was allowed subject to payment of Rs. 5000/- as costs.
These costs have been paid by the learned counsel for the petitioners to Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, today in Court.
The amended petition was filed in this Court in accordance with the directions of the learned Single Judge on January 11, 1993.
Three copies of the amended petition were delivered to the office of the Advocate General on the same date.
This amended petition was filed by petitioner No. 1 only.
Mr. Neeraj Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners has stated that since the other petitioners were not available for signing the Power of Attorney etc., the amended petition was filed by one of the petitioners only.
4.
In the amended petition, it has been pointed out that the duties of a Store-keeper in the Public Works Department are very onerous.
He holds charge of extensive stores in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Department Code.
He is responsible for the custody, preservation and issue of stores under his charge and keep the required returns relating to them.
Reference has been specifically made to paragraph 444 which provides as under :-  "When the stores are sufficiently extensive to require it, a store-keeper will be appointed to the charge of them.
The store-keeper will have nothing to do with the disbursement of cash, the supply of materials of the preparation of bills.
His duties will be confined to the custody, preservation and issue of the stores under his charge, and to keeping the required returns relating to them."
5.
It has been further pointed out that the observations made by the Engineer-in-Chief on the representations submitted by the petitioners were based on incorrect facts.
It has been averred that the store-keeper working the Public Works Department is required to possess the qualification of Matric preferably alongwith experience and the appointments are made after interview and selection.
It has been further pointed out that one of the petitioners was actually employed after selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
On this premises, it is averred that the comment of the Engineer-in-Chief that the appointments are made by regularisation of the services of work-charged employees only is not correct.
It has been further pointed out that the qualifications and nature of duties performed by the Store-keepers and nature of duties performed by the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education are not different.
The petitioners aver that there is no avenue of promotion for Store-keepers in the Department of Public Works.
It has been also pointed out that the second reason given by the Engineer-in-chief is that the Store-keepers are junior to the Junior Engineers whose pay scale is Rs. 1400-2300, while the petitioners are claiming a pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
It has been pointed out that this reason is also not correct, inasmuch as the Junior Engineers are actually working in the pay scale of Rs. 1640-2900 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 and that there a provision for selection grade of Rs. 2000-3200.
It has been further pointed out that the observation of Engineer-in-Chief that the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training deal in matters of cash etc. is also incorrect as they do not have any financial powers.
In fact, even the Principals of Industrial Training Institutes have very limited financial power to the extent of Rs. 250/- which can be exercised in accordance with the financial regulations and after following the prescribed procedure of inviting quotations etc. On these premises, the petitioners submit that the observations of the Engineer-in-Chief are based on a total misconception regarding the factual position.
It has been further averred that the petitioners and the Store-keepers in the Industrial Training Department perform identical duties, possess similar qualifications and do not have any further avenue of promotion.
Thus, there is no basis for differential treatment melted out to them.
6.
The writ petition had originally come up for motion hearing before the Bench on March 15, 1989.
Their Lordships were pleased to direct the issue of notice of motion.
On the next date of hearing viz. May 24, 1989, the Additional Advocate General had appeared for the respondents and prayed for time to file the written statement.
The case was adjourned to July 19, 1989 for this purpose.
On the said date, a request for the grant of more time to file the written statement was allowed subject to payment of Rs. 200/- as costs.
The case was adjourned to September 19, 1989.
Written statement was not filed by the respondents even on September 19, 1989.
Accordingly, this writ petition was admitted.
The respondents did not file the written statement even till December 1, 1992 when the writ petition had come up for hearing.
On this date, the learned single Judge allowed the petitioners to amend the writ petition subject to payment of Rs. 5000/- as costs.
It was further directed that "let amended writ petition be filed on or before January 11, 1993 with advance copy to the Advocate General, Haryana.
It shall be open to the Advocate General, Haryana to file written statement to the amended writ petition within 3 weeks thereafter.
The writ petition be set down for final disposal on February 15, 1993."
This order was passed in the presence of the Additional Advocate General, Haryana.
The amended writ petition was filed on January 11, 1993.
Advance copies of the writ petition, as already noticed, were furnished to the office of the Advocate General, Haryana.
Written statement had to be filed within three weeks.
It has not been filed till today.
In fact, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, has prayed for the grant of more time.
There is no explanation for the failure of the respondents to file a written statement, either to the original or to the amended writ petition for a long time.
It appears to be only a dilatory tactic calculated to delay the decision of the writ petition.
In such a situation, I have been constrained to reject the prayer for adjournment.
In fact, the learned Judge had vide order dated December 1, 1992 specifically observed that the written statement may be filed within three weeks.
I find no ground to review that order.
7.
In this situation, the facts as stated in the writ petition have to be treated as having been admitted.
It is, thus, clear that the averment of the petitioners that the qualifications and the nature of duties performed by the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education are identical has not been denied.
No material has been placed before me to show that there is any difference in the nature of duties.
It further appears that the observations made by the Engineer-in-Chief in his letter dated January 24, 1989 were also not based on correct facts.
The petitioners have demonstrated clearly that the difference pointed out by the Engineer-in-Chief is based on a misconception of facts.
There is nothing before me to indicate that the petitioners are wrong in their claim.
8.
Irrespective of the above, it is well-known that the Stores in the Public Works Department consist of huge quantity of building material like cement, concrete, sand, bricks, steel etc.
Even wood used for doors etc. besides articles used for shuttering etc. are a part of those stores.
As against this, the stores in the Industrial Training Institutes are of a much smaller size.
Still further, even according to the comments, the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training "are required to maintain stores, accounts and have to operate issue and receipt of materials and have a lot of other responsibilities to be discharged."
Neither the Engineer-in-Chief nor Mr. Jaswant Singh have been able to point out "the lot of other responsibilities to be discharged by the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training."
There appears to be no difference in the nature of duties.
Further, a perusal of the document produced by the petitioners as Annexure P-5 shows that a new Stores Accounting System has been introduced in which details of the manner in which accounts have to be maintained and the material have to be issued and the accounting procedure that has to be followed, have been prescribed.
Even the job of adjustment of profit and loss on issue of stores has to be maintained besides the stores, ledgers, reconciliation civilisation of stock balances and the physical verification of stocks.
9.
It has been further pointed out that the Store-keepers have no authority to issue any stores from the stocks in Haryana PWD(B&R).
This, power vests only in Junior Engineer.
This has been specifically denied by the petitioners.
In fact, in paragraph 7 of the petition it has been inter alia mentioned that "a perusal of the instructions would reveal that the Store-keeper is not subordinate to a Sectional Officer/Junior Engineer as far as the maintenance of stores is concerned and the powers given to the two are concurrent.".
It has also been pointed out by the petitioners that the pay scale of Junior Engineer is not Rs. 1400-2300 but Rs. 1640-2900 with a selection grade of Rs 2000-3200.
Furthermore, the Engineer-in-Chief has observed that the Store-keeper does not operate any Store Account "as is done by the Store-keepers in the Industrial Training Department."
On a perusal of Para 444 of the Manual as mentioned above and the instructions a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5, it appears that the Store-keeper in the Public Works Department has to maintain accounts and the observation of the Engineer-in-Chief does not appear to be correct.
10.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that the decision was taken by the Government to place the Store-keepers in a lower scale of pay as compared to those in the Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education, without proper consideration of the factual position.
No qualitative difference in any respect has been pointed out either from the record or by the filing of written statement.
In this situation, there is no alternative except to hold that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
11.
The petitioners did not make any claim for parity of treatment in the matter of scales of pay prior to the submission of the representation on December 2, 1988.
This was done only after the issue of the Notification of the Government on April 20, 1987 by which the pay scales were revised w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
In this situation, their claim for parity of treatment w.e.f.
April 1, 1979 appears to be highly belated.
However, there appears to be no justification for denying them the relief w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
12.
Accordingly, it is directed that the petitioners shall be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 as has been granted to the Store-keepers in the Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
Consequential reliefs shall follow.
The writ petition is allowed to this extent.
In the circumstances of the case, there would be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.