NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
The plaintiff filed suit for declaration to the effect that orders of termination dated 1621982 passed by the Director, State Transport, Punjab, Chandigarh, is illegal, invalid, ultra vires, without jurisdiction, discriminatory and against the provisions of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short "the rules").
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff was working as a conductor in Punjab Roadways at Nawanshahar when the impugned order terminating his service was passed which he challenged terming the same to be illegal and ultra vires and that no valid charge sheet was issued before holding the enquiry etc.  3.
Defendant put in appearance, controverted the various allegations levelled by the plaintiff and further stated that a regular enquiry was held where in full opportunity was granted to the plaintiff to cross-examine the various witnesses.
This way the impugned orders do not suffer from any infirmity.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the impugned orders dated 11081 and 1621982 are illegal, without jurisdiction, invalid etc as per reasons alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Relief.
5.
The trial court after examining the relevant evidence on record came to the conclusion that the order of termination of services was according to the rules.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
The appellate Court once again examined the matter in all its details.
Referring to the enquiry file, it was noticed that the plaintiff was accused of misconduct on three different occasions i.e. in 1241980, 26121980 and 1011981.
Three different persons held him guilty of misconduct.
In nutshell, the charges levelled against the plaintiff were that he did not charge the requisite fare from three passengers.
Reply filed to the charges was found to be unsatisfactory and departmental enquiry was entrusted to Sh. Gurbachan Singh, A.D.M.
(Admn.
), who after affording opportunity to the parties to adduce evidence came to the conclusion that the charges levelled against the plaintiff are proved.
It is thereafter that show-cause notice was issued and after seeing the reply to the plaintiff impugned order was passed by the General Manager.
The lower appellate Court also found no merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that there has been non- compliance of Rule 8(11) of the Rules.
In fact, the appellate court observed that the appellant was given due opportunity to participate in the enquiry and to cross-examine the witnesses.
Accordingly, the appeal too was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge.
7.
The first submission of the appellant is that there has been non- compliance of Rule 8(11) of the Rules which are mandatory in nature and so the impugned order terminating services of the appellant is per se illegal.
Both the Courts have erred in law in not properly construing Rule 8(11) of the Rules.
As per Rule 8(11), in case a government employee does not plead guilty, it is incumbent upon the Presiding Officer to produce all evidence in support of its case i.e. the charges levelled and thereafter afford a reasonable opportunity to the aggrieved person to cross-examine the witness etc.  8.
Both the Courts after referring to the relevant evidence on record has come to the conclusion that there has been compliance of the mandatory provisions of Rule 8(11) of the Rules by the enquiry officer.
The plaintiff had been supplied with copies of necessary documents, given opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses and this way no prejudice was caused to the plaintiff in any manner.
In fact, the appellant has not been able to pin point any circumstance which could be construed as having caused prejudice to his case except to an application exhibit A-1 which is stated to have been addressed to General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Nawanshahar.
This document is undated and is not addressed to the enquiry officer.
No plausible explanation has been given by the plaintiff as to when this document was tendered or placed on record.
If a reference is made to the other evidence on record, it appears that this document came on the record somehow long after the conclusion of the case.
Had it been otherwise, the plaintiff would have made grievance of the same before the enquiry officer during the pendency of the enquiry.
In fact, the plaintiff has cross-examined all the witnesses without making a grouse that he needs the assistance of a co-worker or a prayer for supply of the copy etc.
This document thus has got no bearing at all.
9.
No other point has been claimed by the appellant.
This appeal is devoid of any merit and the same is consequently dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.