PK Bahari, J :- There was no appearance on behalf of Union of India.
I had required Mr. Madan Lokur, Standing Counsel for the Union of India, to make arrangement for arguments and Mr. Ashish Wad, Advocate, has appeared on his behalf to argue the matter.
2.
This second appeal involves a very short point.
It appears that the appellant, who was working with the Railways, was given promotions from one grade to another at different times and his salary came to be fixed at Rs. 290/- per month in a particular scale of pay in Grade-V vide letter dated December 10, 1969, with effect from January 26, 1970.
The authorities found that the salary ought to have been fixed at that particular scale and after refixing the salary at Rs. 280/- the order was passed for recovering the excess amount paid on the basis of the wrong fixation of salary.
3.
The grievance of the appellant, in brief, is that his salary should not have been re-fixed at Rs. 280/- per month without giving him a show-cause notice and opportunity of hearing as it adversely affected his right.
It is admitted case that no such show-cause notice was given.
However, the learned Additional District Judge while deciding the appeal had held that for correcting clerical mistakes in fixation of salary there is no need to give any show-cause notice.
I think that this expression of view is quite in consonance with law.
After all for every order which is to be made by the authorities, show-cause notice is not a must.
Rules of natural justice cannot be stretched to that extent that even for correcting typographical mistakes in the order passed on administrative side a show-cause notice must be given to the employee affected by such an order.
One would understand if the pay has been wrongly fixed by the authorities and remedy is sought by the employee in that connection but he cannot, on the mere ground that no show-cause notice was given, get his fixation of salary reversed by the court of law.
Two judgments were cited before me.
They were distinguished by the learned Additional District Judge because they pertain to different facts.
4.
More particularly the judgment in the case Divisional Superintendent Eastern Railway, Dinapur and others v. LN Kashri and others, AIR 1974 SC 1989, was strongly relied upon.
In that case it appears that at one point of time the scale of pay granted to the employee was Rs. 110-180 but later on it was reduced to Rs. 105-185.
In such a situation the Supreme Court held that the scale of pay cannot be reduced without giving show-cause notice to the employee concerned.
In the present case, there is no reduction in the scale of pay and there is only question of fixation of pay in a particular scale.
The case of the authorities is that by mistake the pay was fixed at Rs. 290/- instead of Rs. 280/- per month.
In such a situation I do not think that it was necessary to give any show-cause notice to the employee before fixing his pay.
If the employee was aggrieved of the said order he could make a representation to the authorities to point out as to how his pay had been wrongly fixed at Rs. 280/- per month.
So, on this point the judgment of the Additional District Judge cannot be assailed.
5.
There was one more point raised before the Additional District Judge as to whether, in fact, the salary of the appellant was liable to be fixed at Rs. 280/- per month with effect from January 26, 1970 instead of Rs. 290/- per month.
The learned Judge did not give any finding on that aspect of the case because he recorded that it was not disputed before him during arguments that the salary of the plaintiff could not be fixed at Rs. 290/- with effect from January 26, 1970.
Counsel who argued the matter before the Additional District Judge had filed an affidavit that he had not made any such concession.
So, on this point this appeal has to be accepted and case remanded back to the learned Additional District Judge for deciding this issue afresh.
The learned Additional District Judge should now decide whether the salary of the appellant should have been fixed at Rs. 280/- or at Rs. 290/- with effect from January 26, 1970.
If the Additional District Judge comes to the conclusion that the salary was to be fixed at Rs. 290/- with effect from January 26, 1970, then obviously he would give his finding accordingly and decide the issue Nos. 2 and 3 according to the merits.
The appeal is allowed to this extent and the case is remanded back to the Additional District Judge for deciding the matter afresh after hearing counsel for both the parties.
Costs in this appeal would abide by the decision which may be given by the Additional District Judge.
The parties are directed to appear before the district Judge on April 19, 1993 and the District Judge may hear the matter himself or assign the same to any other Additional District Judge.