KP Bhandari, J - Vide order dated 2721992 this appeal was partly allowed and judgment and decree of the appellate Court was upheld.
It was ordered in the judgment detailed reasons to follow.
Now I proceed to give reasons in support of the judgment dated 2721992.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that respondent-plaintiff was serving as carpenter with the Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar.
A penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was imposed upon him by the General Manager on 15121981.
The plaintiff filed a civil suit on 2641989 challenging the aforesaid order, dated 15121998, stopping two increments with cumulative effect, could not be imposed without holding departmental enquiry as laid down by the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) RSJ 413 : 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC).
Admittedly, no enquiry was held in this case.
Therefore, the impugned order imposing a penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect cannot be sustained.
The Subordinate Judge decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
3.
Aggrieved against the judgment and decree passed by the Subordinate Judge, the State filed an appeal before the District Judge, Jalandhar.
The District Judge also dismissed the appeal on 3171991.
4.
Aggrieved against the judgment and decree dated 3171991 passed by the District Judge, the state has come up in Regular Second Appeal in this Court.
5.
The learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab submitted that the order stopping two increments with cumulative effect was passed on 15121981 and the civil suit was filed by the respondent on 2841989.
He submitted that in this view of the matter the suit of the respondent-plaintiff was barred by limitation.
Any order which is passed contrary to the mandatory provisions of the Rules and the principle of natural justice is null and void.
It is not necessary for a party to get it set aside.
He can claim the relief ignoring the void order.
In the present case, the claim of the respondent-plaintiff in substance is for the release of two increments.
A Government servant is entitled to annual increment as a matter of course unless the increment is stopped.
If the order imposing stoppage of increment is passed in contravention of the mandatory provisions of the rules and the principle of a natural justice, such an order will be null and void.
A government servant can ignore such an order and claim arrears of pay and allowances which became due and were not given to him on account of the void order.
For claiming arrears of pay, the limitation for filing a suit is three years.
Right to claim wages arises at the end of every month because wages are payable monthly.
It continues to arise to a government servant upto the age of superannuation.
A right to salary cannot be interrupted by a void order.
There has to be a valid order in order to deprive the government servant of his right to claim salary.
If such an order is passed contrary to the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution or is mandatory to the rules, such an order would be void.
A government servant can ignore such an order would void.
A government servant can ignore such an order and he need not secure declaration if such an order is void.
He can enforce his claim of salary which became due to him preceding the date of the institution of the suit at any time.
So, the claim of the respondent-plaintiff for arrears of pay and allowances the years preceding the date of institution of the suit was plainly within limitation.
The claim for the remaining period was, however, barred by limitation in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Syed Qamarali, SLR 1967 (VI) page 228.
The claim for arrears of pay and allowances which is within limitation can be decreed by ignoring the void order.
6.
In this view of the matter, the appeal is partly accepted and judgment and decree passed by the District Judge and Subordinate Judge is modified.
The impugned order stopping two increments with cumulative effect is treated void.
However, the respondent-plaintiff will be entitled to arrears of pay and allowances which were due preceding three years of the date of the filing of the suit.
7.
The period for filing the suit where notice under section 80, Code of Civil Procedure, is given is extended.
So, two months' pay for the notice period will also be admissible to the respondent.
It is, however, clarified that after the institution of the suit, the respondent/plaintiff will be entitled to all the arrears of pay and allowances.
Appeal partly allowed.