KL Issrani, J - The present petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking quashing of the order dated 9.8.1990 (Annexure P-5) withholding two increments of petitioner with cumulative effect.
2.
The petitioner is a permanent employee of the respondent and is working as Assistant Engineer (Civil) under the respondent at Raipur.
It was alleged that while the petitioner was posted in Raigarh district, he certified some bills for payment in favour of one contractor and those items, for which he certified the bills, were not found on the spot on inspection.
The petitioner received letter for explanation Annexure P-1 on 30.4.1990.
The petitioner submitted his reply on 751990 to the respondent (Annexure P-2), denying his liability.
On 2371990, a memorandum Annexure P-3 said to be a show-cause notice to show as to why the petitioner should not be punished with stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect, was issued to the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted his reply again on 2771990 Annexure P-4 to the respondent.
On this, the respondent issued an order on 9.8.1990 Annexure P-5 withholding two increments of the petitioner with cumulative effect on the ground that the reply submitted by the petitioner was not satisfactory.
3.
According to the petitioner, no service rules for the employees of the Nigam have been framed and, therefore, the Nigam has followed the service rules which are applicable to the State Govt. employees.
According to the petitioner, the impugned order Annexure P-5 was passed without holding any enquiry and is liable to be quashed.
The petitioner has relied on a judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1990(6) SLR 73 : 1991(2) SCT 30(SC) Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab.
According to the petitioner, this is a major penalty and enquiry is a must.
4.
The respondent Nigam in its return has submitted that such penalty is a minor penalty in which enquiry is not necessary.
The respondent has, however, admitted that the Nigam has allowed the service rules which are applicable to the State Govt. employees (Para 6 of the return).
It was further submitted that as the petitioner's work was not satisfactory, instead of removing him from the job, he was asked to work without project allowance.
The respondent and other senior officials inspected the spot and on their inspection found that the petitioner deliberately had made a wrong recommendation for payment of Rs. 60,000/- to the contractor against a false bill.
According to the MP Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeals) Rules, 1965, punishment of withholding increments is a minor penalty.
The respondent is competent authority to pass such order.
5.
The only question involved in this petition is as to whether withholding of two increments with cumulative effect is a major penalty or a minor penalty.
The Apex Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab (supra), has considered the effect of stoppage of increments with cumulative effect and it has been held therein that the effect of such punishment would be that the employee is reduced in his time scale by a number of steps for which the increments are withheld and it is in perpetuity during the rest of his tenure.
It is a major penalty and the punishment of withholding of increment with cumulative effect cannot be imposed without holding a regular departmental enquiry.
Mere show-cause notice and consideration of explanation is not sufficient.
In this case, Rules 5(iv) 8, 9 and 5(v) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, were considered.
Rule 5 is reproduced below :  "5.
Penalties :- The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on a Government employee, namely  Minor Penalties :  (i) censure;  (ii) withholding of his promotions;  (iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any peculiar loss caused by him to the Government by negligence or breach of orders;  (iv) withholding of increments of pay;  Major Penalties :  (v) reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay.
(vi) reduction to a lower scale of pay, grade, post or service which shall ordinarily be a bar to the promotion of the Government employee to the time-scale of pay, grade, post or service from which he was reduced, with or without further directions regarding conditions of restoration to the grade or post or service from the Government employee was reduced and his seniority and pay on such restoration that grade, post or service;  (vii) compulsory retirement;  (viii) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for future employment under the Government;  (ix) dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for future employment under the Government."
6.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the MP Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1995 are akin to the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
7.
After going through the relevant provisions and the judgment of the Apex Court in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra), we are of the opinion that the present case of the petitioner is covered by the said judgment of the Apex Court.
Penalty of withholding of two increments with cumulative effect is a major penalty and such an order cannot be passed without holding due enquiry.
The order dated 9.8.1990 (Annexure P-5) is, therefore, illegal and is hereby quashed.
The respondent is, however, free to take action permissible under the rules.
The petition is thus allowed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.