Jaspal Singh, J - The petitioner is a Bachelor of Arts from Panjab University.
He obtained the degree after completing 14 years of study (10 + 1 + 3) as per the system of education prevalent in that State.
He is desirous of taking admission in the LL.B.
First year course conducted by the Faculty of Law, University of Delhi.
However, his grievance is that the eligibility condition imposed by the University of Delhi for admission into that course has rendered him ineligible.
The said condition runs as follows :-  "Plaintiff test is open to candidates - (a) who have passed Master's Bachelor's degree examination under 10 + 2 + 3 scheme of Delhi University or an examination recognised by Delhi University as equivalent thereto securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate and have completed 20 years of age as on 1101992.
Or  (b) Who have passed Bachelor's Degree examination recognised by Delhi University as Equivalent thereto leading to the award of the Degree after 14 years of study securing at least 55% marks in the aggregate and have completed 19 years of age as on 1101992."
It may be mentioned that the petitioner had obtained 53% marks in the aggregate, that is, 2% marks less than the required aggregate.
His case is that the distinction so made between graduates under 10 + 2 + 3 and under 10 + 1 + 3 scheme is illegal, discriminatory and arbitrary.
He claims that there is no rational basis for fixing the requirement of 50% marks in aggregate for graduates under 10 + 2 + 3 scheme and 55% marks in aggregate for graduates under 10 + 1 + 3 or any other scheme leading to the award of Bachelor's Degree after 14 years of study and that, in any case, the condition imposed has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
Hence this writ petition seeking the quashing of the condition requiring 55% marks in aggregate for graduates under 10 + 2 + 2 or 10 + 1 + 3 scheme or even 50% marks in aggregate with regard to other graduates/post-graduates, and the acceptance of the application of the petitioners for sitting in the entrance test for admission to the LL.B.
First Year course.
2.
Needless to say the respondents have contested the petition.
It is contended that the question whether the two categories of graduates should be treated alike in the matter of eligibility to sit in the entrance examination was considered in depth by the Law Courses Admission Committee, then by the Standing Committee and finally by the Academic Council and it was decided that since in the first category students had spent 15 years to get the Bachelor's degree while those in the other category had spent 14 years, a distinction had to be made between the two categories and that a handicap of 5% marks be given to the total percentage to marks obtained by the candidates who had graduated under 10 + 1 + 3 or 10 + 2 + 2 pattern of education.
It is claimed that distinction between the said two categories of graduates has been there since the academic year 1982-83 and that it is irrespective of the fact whether the candidate has graduated from the respondent University or from any other University.
3.
The respondents have further claimed that the objects sought to be achieved by prescribing minimum percentage of marks for sitting in the entrance test and for holding the test itself are :  "(a) Since the seats are limited and the number of candidates is much larger, the best amongst the available candidates, should be selected to promote the standards of legal education.
(b) The administrative inconvenience should be reduced to the extent possible in the process of selection without sacrificing the objective as at  (a)"  And that the condition laying down minimum percentage of marks in graduate/Post-graduate examination, has the purpose of :  "(i) ensuring that the final selection is made from amongst those candidates who have attained a reasonable degree of proficiency in their own discipline as reflected in the percentage of marks secured by them in their respective examinations, and  (ii) reducing the number of candidates from amongst whom the final selection is to be made.
It is also claimed that the condition of eligibility providing for an entrance test and making admission in the order of merit on the basis of the result of the said test, has the purpose of :  "(i) getting rid of the problems that arises on account of (a) varying standards of education prevalent in various Universities or (b) nature of courses pursued by the candidates;  (ii) providing competition for evaluation of relative merits and affording equal opportunity of selection to all those who satisfy the first condition of eligibility; thus making selection according to capability."
As per the respondents, both the conditions of eligibility have a direct nexus and rational relation to either of the two objects that are sought to be achieved.
4.
In Jayashree Ravi v. University of Delhi, 1993(2) SCT 157 (Delhi).
C.W.
2603, 192, I have already expressed my view that the prescribing of minimum percentage of marks for eligibility to sit in the entrance test is not violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
I have not been persuaded to take a contrary view.
This being the position I need not dilate on this aspect any further.
5.
Coming to the distinction made between the two categories of graduates, I do feel that the categorisation speaks neither of any class bias nor does it create any privileged species.
Here is a case where one category of students graduated in 14 years, while the students belonging to the other spent one year more.
This difference of one year has been rightly taken note of by the respondent University.
The time lag of long year necessarily creates two different sources having regard to the courses, the syllabus, the quality of teaching or instruction and standard of examination.
This being the position, and the central object being to make proper selection who can be more appropriate and better equipped authority to decide the matter than the University ?
In any case it would not be right for the court to sit in judgment over the decision of the University.
More so because it is not a matter on which the court possesses any expertise.
6.
In any case, and as already mentioned by me above, it is a case where the differentiation between the two categories of graduates has been made on a basis which is neither arbitrary nor fanciful.
It bears a just, rational and intelligible relation with the object sought to be achieved.
And, since the classification made results in no pronounced inequality, the court would not interfere.
I would thus dismiss the writ petition but with no order as to costs.