Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was recruited as a Constable in the Haryana Police Wireless Section, is aggrieved by the order dated April 18, 1991, by which he has been discharged from service.
A few facts relevant for the decision of this case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable in the Police Wireless Section on November 13, 1988.
He avers that on August 30, 1990, he along with Madan Lal, constable from District Kaithal, had a tiff with M/s. Sant Lal peon and Ram Lal, Octroi Inspector at an octroi post, Ambala City.
As a result, a case under Sections 353/332/333/452 and 427 I.P.C. was registered vide FIR No. 441 dated August 31, 1990 against the petitioner.
The petitioner was arrested on the same day.
Thereafter, on September 5, 1990, the petitioner was placed under suspension.
While he was still under suspension, vide order dated April 18, 1991, the petitioner was discharged from service under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
Aggrieved by the order the petitioner submitted a representation to the Director General of Police, which was rejected.
On August 5, 1991, the petitioner was acquitted by the Additional Sessions Judge, Ambala.
Thereafter he has approached this Court through the present writ petition to challenge the order dated April 18, 1991, by which he was discharged from service (Annexure P.3) and the order dated July 24,1991, Annexure P5, by which his appeal was rejected by the Director General of Police, Haryana.
The petitioner avers that the order is based on the solitary incident and has been passed in violation of the provisions of the Rules and Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the factual position is that on receipt of the above information, the then Superintendent of Police, Wireless, under whom the petitioner was serving had immediately placed the petitioner under suspension vide his Office Order No. 17074-79 dated 5990 (copy of the order annexed as Annexure R.1).
Later, the overall working of the petitioner was assessed and finding the same not up to mark, the answering respondent No. 2 was left with no option except to discharge the petitioner under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules."
4.
On this premises, it is claimed that the order of discharge has been passed on the overall assessment of the petitioner's performance.
It is further averred that once the petitioner had involved himself in a criminal case over a tiff with the employees of the Octroi department, no chance was left to believe that the petitioner would prove to be a good Police Officer in future.
5.
This case had originally come up for hearing before me on August 13, 1992.
I had directed the learned counsel for the respondents to produce before me the file where the petitioner's case may have been examined before the passing of the impugned order.
6.
Today, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, has produced before me the Character and Service Roll of the petitioner.
He has not been able to point out anything reflecting adversely on the petitioner's performance as a constable since his recruitment, except the fact that he was placed under suspension on September 5, 1990 for having been arrested in the case referred to above.
There is no examination of the case and consideration of facts on the basis of which the Superintendent of Police may be said to have formed an opinion that the petitioner was not likely to prove an efficient Police Officer.
Rule 1221 reads as under :- "A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the superintendent at any time within 3 years of enrolment."
7.
A perusal of the above rule shows that the Superintendent of Police has to consider and decide as to whether or not a constable is likely to prove an efficient police officer.
If on a consideration of material in his possession, he forms in opinion that he is not likely to prove an efficient officer, an order of discharge can be passed.
However, the order has to be passed on some objective data.
In the present case, this does not appear to have been done.
The petitioner was accused, of having committed an offence.
Soon after the registration of the case, he was placed under suspension.
He was never reinstated.
While he was still under suspension, the petitioner was ordered to be discharged from service.
Full salary was not paid to him for the period as suspension.
Even otherwise, nothing has been shown from his character-roll or any other record to indicate that there was any adverse report or comments regarding his performance.
On the contrary, there is an entry in his character-roll which shows that the petitioner has been awarded commendation certificate in recognition of doing conspicuously good work for the administration of law and maintenance of peace, safety and good order and for conduct displaying exceptional address.
acuteness, industry, fidelity for smooth functioning of government work during Independence Day, 1990 Celebrations.
He was also given a cash reward of Rs. 50/-.
In this situation, it is apparent that the order of discharge was passed solely on account of the allegations made in the above mentioned FIR against him.
These allegations do constitute misconduct.
However, on the basis thereof, an order of discharge could not have been passed.
If these allegations were found to be correct during enquiry, the petitioner could have been dismissed from service.
However, the procedure prescribed under the Rules had to be followed.
This was not done.
8.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am driven to conclude that he petitioner was in fact punished for the alleged misconduct and the order dated April 18, 1991 was not a simple order of discharge.
9.
As for the relief, the petitioner is present in Court.
He has admitted before me that he has been working on daily wages.
He has also stated that in the event of his being re-employed in the police, he will not make any claim for payment of salary for any period prior to his reinstatement in pursuance to the order of this Court.
In this view of the matter, while setting aside the impugned order and allowing the petition, it is directed that the petitioner shall be reinstated.
However, he will not be paid any arrears of salary.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.