HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The, present judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition No. 905 of 1980 and Civil Writ Petition No. 4265 of 1980.
The facts of the case have been taken from the latter case.
2.
The petitioner joined service in the erstwhile state of Punjab as Overseer on 11th.
of January, 1992, and was confirmed with effect from Ist November, 1971 vide order passed in 1978.
He took the AMIE examination in the year 1969 and was declared successful the following year.
It is the admitted case that the post, of Overseer is a class III post.
The petitioner was thereafter promoted as officiating Sub Divisional Officer, which is a class II post, on 22nd of December, 1978.
The promotion from class III service to class II is governed by the Haryana Service of Engineers, Class II, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter called `the rules').
Rule 6 provides that the recruitment to the service was to be made from four different sources including source 4 detailed below :  Method of Recruitment Proportion Allocation to each source in a lot of 40 vacancies 1 to 3 xxx xxx 4.
Promotion from members of the Haryana Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Overseers (Engineering) Service and the draftsmen members of that draftsmen and tracers service, possessing qualifications prescribed in Appendix `B' 40 - 1 1 1 1 40 -8 8 8 8 (2) In case suitable persons are not available from sources No. 4 the vacancies shall be filled from sources 2 and 3."
Rule 7 of the rules, prescribes the qualifications for promotion and the relevant extract reads as under :  "7.
Qualification :- No person shall be, appointed to the Service unless he  (1) xxx  (2) xxx  (3) In case of appointment by promotion from sources 4 under rule 6(1) -  (i) xxx  (ii) possess any of the qualifications included in Appendix B and has put in five years service in case he possess AMIE qualifications and two years service in case he is a degree-holder.
He will have to pass Departmental Examinations within three years of such promotion otherwise he will be reverted to his original post and his seniority will be determined from the date of his passing the examinations; ...."  3.
Although on the passing of AMIE examination in 1970, the petitioner fulfilled the eligibility requirement to be considered for promotion to the class II post on a regular basis, yet this was not done on account of the fact that the department read the rules to mean that a person was eligible for regular appointment to class II service only after he had put in five years of confirmed service in a class III post.
Certain other persons aggrieved by this interpretation of the rules filed Civil Writ Petition No. 645 of 1978, which was decided on 23rd March, 1978 holding that :  "In the result the petition succeeds and is accepted and respondents are directed to consider the case of such of the petitioners for promotion under category 4 of rule 6 of the class II Rules as are eligible thereunder.
Sd/- A.D. Khoshal,  Chief Justice.
Sd/- S.S. Dewan,  Judge."
March 23, 1978.
It was held that unconfirmed members of the service would be at par with the confirmed ones and would be entitled to further promotion on that basis.
Against the judgment of the Division Bench, a special leave petition was taken to the Supreme Court, but was ultimately dismissed.
It is the conceded position before me that the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 645 of 1978 were junior to the present petitioner although this petition was filed much later.
4.
The case set up by the petitioner by way of the present writ petition is that he was entitled to be considered for promotion to the class II service when he had five years service in class III, whether confirmed or not and fulfilled other requisite qualifications.
This position has not been denied in the written-statement, but justification is sought to be made on the ground that the department had been interpreting the rules so as to mean that the five years was to be determined from the date of confirmation in the class III service.
It has been admitted that by virtue of the Division Bench judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 645 of 1978 this interpretation has found to be erroneous.
An objection about the writ being belated has also been taken.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, urged that the interpretation put on the rules by the department being admittedly wrong in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court, his client should also be given benefit of promotion in the class II service with effect from the date he qualified the AMIE examination in 1970 as he admittedly had more than five years service on that date.
In other words, the argument is that he fulfilled the requisite qualification laid down for the recruitment from source 4 with effect from 1970.
Mr. SK Mongia, learned Deputy Advocate General, has, however, countered that the true interpretation of the rules is that the five years service is to be counted from the day he had secured AMIE examination in 1970, which would render the petitioner eligible for promotion in 1975.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the petition deserves to succeed.
The objection with regard to laches is untenable particularly as the petition has been pending in this Court since 1980 and the matter is covered in favour of the petitioner by a Division Bench judgment of this Court.
The interpretation sought to be put up by Mr. Monga is not borne out even at the casual took of the rules.
It is to be noted that rule 7(3) which is already quoted above, the requirement is that a person to become member of the service from source 4 has to put in five years service in case he passes AMIE qualification.
The requirement is five years service and not five years service after passing the AMIE examination.
Admittedly, the petitioner fulfilled both these qualifications in the year 1970.
7.
In view of what has been stated above, the present petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to class II post regular basis with effect from the year 1970 when he secured the requisite qualification.
The entire exercise would be completed within a period of four months from today and all consequential benefits in terms of seniority, promotion and payments, if any, would be made within two months thereafter.
Costs of the petition are determined at Rs. 500/- in each case.