KP Bhandari, J - In the present case the main grievance of the plaintiff-respondents before the trial Court was that they appeared in the trade test were declared successful.
The result of the test was subsequently cancelled without affording the plaintiff-respondents any opportunity of being heard.
No speaking order was passed and nor was it conveyed to the plaintiff- respondents.
The trial Court has found that the result was illegally cancelled and the declaration was granted that the plaintiff-respondents have qualified the examination.
Apparently no fault can be found with the finding of the trial Court that before cancelling the result it was incumbent upon the concerned authority to afford the candidates an opportunity of being heard.
There should be adequate ground for cancelling the result otherwise the order cancelling the result would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
As such an order would be wholly arbitrary, illegal and capricious.
In addition it was incumbent upon the concerned authority to pass a speaking order.
2.
The learned additional Standing Counsel for the Union of India has not been able to attack the finding of the trial Court on merits.
The learned counsel for the Union of India has strongly contended that respondents- employees are civilian serving in the defence and as such they are covered by the Administrative Tribunals Act of 1985.
3.
I find that the controversy raised in the suit was very short.
In the first place it is incumbent upon the authority to examine the grievance of the employees and pass the necessary orders.
The Central Government is vested with the power to review any order passed by the subordinate authority according to the provisions of Rule 29 of the Central Civil Services Classification Control and Appeal Rules, 1965.
The relevant rule reads as follows :  29.
Revision.
- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules :-  i.
The President, or  ii.
The Comptroller and Auditor-General, in the case of a Government servant serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department, or  iii.
The Member (Personnel) Postal Service Board in the case of a Government servant serving in or under the Postal Services Board and (Personnel) Telecommunications Board in the case of a Government servant serving in or under the Telecommunications Board, or  iv.
The head of a department directly under the Central Government, in the case of Government servant serving a department or office, (not being the Secretariat of the Posts and Telegraphs Board), under the control of such head of a department, or  v. The appellate authority, within six months of the date of the order proposed to be revised, or  Any other authority specified in this behalf by the President by a general or special order, and within such time as may be prescribed in such general or special order; may at any time, either on his or its own motion or otherwise call for the records of any inquiry and revise any order made under these rules or under the rules repealed by Rule 34 from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been referred or from which no appeal is allowed, after consultation with the Commission where such consultation is necessary, and may :  a. confirm, modify or set aside the order; or  b. confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by the order, or impose any penalty where no penalty has been imposed, or  c. remit the case to the authority which made the order to any other authority directing such authority to make such further inquiry as it may consider proper in the circumstance of the case; or  d. pass such other orders as it may deem fit."
4.
The respondents are directed to file the revision petition before the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, New Delhi, within a fortnight.
The Secretary will forward the same within one week of its receipt to the competent authority for disposal.
The competent authority will decide the revision petition on merits within one month of its receipt in the light of the observations made herein.
No objection regarding limitation is to be raised by the authority.
If the revision petition is allowed in favour of the respondents then the Union of India will grant the necessary relief to the respondents expeditiously preferably within a week.
A copy of the order passed by the competent authority should be produced on the next date of hearing.
Put up the Civil Misc.
Application along with the main appeal, for final disposal, on 11.3.1993 for determination of the question raised by the counsel for the Union of India.
A copy of the order be supplied to the learned counsel for the parties today by the Registry for compliance.
Order accordingly.