HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed as an Auction Recorder on 17.5.1972 in the Market Committee, Dhuri and promoted to the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on 14121974.
Vide Circular letter dated 3041982, Annexure P-1 it was provided that the parent Committee of the employee would be that Committee where the employee was appointed for the first time and as such the employee would be entitled to be considered for promotion in that very Committee at the appropriate time.
This matter was further clarified by the letter dated 11th November, 1982 Annexure P-2 with the petition.
It appears that in exercise of powers under Section 11 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961, the State Government created a new Committee at Sherpur vide order dated 1041987.
As there was obviously no staff available with that Committee, the Chairman of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board ordered that certain staff from the Market Committees at Dhuri and Malerkotla be allocated to the new Committee.
An extract of the communication allocating the petitioner from Dhuri to Sherpur has been appended as P-3/1.
It was also stated therein that in case any employee had any objection to his location, he could file objections within a period of 30 days.
The petitioner obviously dissatisfied with his allocation filed objections vide Annexure P-5 dated 1061987 and reiterated them in Annexure P-7 dated 581987 and P-9 dated 2681987.
It appears that during the course of his service at Sherpur, the petitioner passed the requisite departmental examination which entitled him to seek promotion to the next post i.e. of Accountant.
It further appears that a post of Accountant became available in Market Committee, Dhuri and the petitioner sought his promotion to that post but the same was not acceded to and vide resolution dated 19th December, 1991, Annexure P-17 to the petition, the Market Committee, Dhuri recommended the name of Shri Dev Raj respondent No. 4 the senior-most Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector (who also happened to be a scheduled caste candidate) for the promotion in preference to the petitioner.
The present petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking his promotion to the post of Accountant at Dhuri, being senior to respondent No. 4 primarily on the ground that his parent committee continued to be the Market Committee, Dhuri as provided by Annexure P-1 and P-2 and his allocation to Sherpur in 1987 was without jurisdiction.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been argued by Sh. DV Sharma, learned counsel that the very allocation of the petitioner to Sherpur being void, it should be presumed that he continued to be an employee of Market Committee, Dhuri and was, therefore, entitled to seek his promotion there.
It has also been urged by him that the Chairman of the Board was not entitled to allocate a person to another Committee although the petitioner being admittedly a Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector and dealing with accounts, could have been transferred in terms of Section 3(11) of the Act.
In answer to the assertion by the respondent that the petitioner slept over the matter for 5 long years before coming to this Court, it has been stated that as no reply had been received in response to the various objections filed by him, the delay, if any, in approaching this Court was required to be overlooked.
2.
The stand of the respondents in reply is that under Section 3(9) read with Section 3(11) of the Act, it was open to the Chairman to transfer the petitioner from one Committee to another as he was admittedly a person dealing with accounts.
It has also been stated that the petitioner had been allocated to Sherpur in 1987 and he should not be allowed to agitate that matter in 1992.
It has also been asserted in the reply that in view of Annexure P-16, which is a communication which dealt with the case of the petitioner when the allocation was made in 1987, the parent Committee after his allocation was the one at Sherpur.
Finally it is being asserted that the promotion had been given to the respondent No4 in accordance with the instructions Annexure R- 1/1 which provided for 25% reservation for the persons belonging to the scheduled castes.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the petition.
It will be seen from a reading of Sections 3(11) of the Act that the Board exercises superintendence and control over the committees and the Chairman of the Board can transfer any employee dealing with accounts from one committee to another.
I am of the view that merely because the word allocation has been used in the various orders appended and also in the reply, it does not detract from the fact that as far as the petitioner was concerned, it was an allocation by way of transfer to a new Committee.
If the petitioner was liable to be transferred to an existing Committee, I do not see how the inception of a new Committee and a transfer or allocation to it, could in any way detract from that liability.
This matter is further clarified by Annexure P-1, which states that henceforth the parent Committee of the petitioner would be at Sherpur.
This annexure by implication also over-rides Annexure P-1 and P-2 relied upon by the petitioner.
It is the admitted case of the parties that a Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector is a person dealing with the accounts and as such no fault can be found with the transfer from Dhuri to Sherpur.
This disentitles the petitioner to claim now that the Market Committee at Dhuri would continue to be his parent committee.
It is apparent that there are no rules which could determine as to which could be the parent Committee on allocation and as such the instructions issued by the Board would fill in the gap and govern the case.
It will be seen that although the act does not specifically deal with a case of allocation, but Annexure P-16 read with Section 3(9) and 3(11) does provide for a situation where a new committee is created.
It is to be noted that development & setting up of new Committees is one of the ongoing results of development, and this Court must necessarily keep this factor in view while construing a statute.
Mr. Sharma's assertion that the Board had no power to issue the instructions (Annexure P-16) to the Committee, is belied by even a casual glance at Section 3(9) of the Act which states that the Board shall exercise superintendence and control over the Committees which clearly means that the Board was in a position to issue instructions in exercising superintendence and control over the Committees.
Moreover if the Board was competent to issue the instructions Annexure P-1.
and P-2 which favour the petitioner, it was equally competent to issue the instructions Annexure P-16, which go against him.
4.
I am further of the opinion that the present petition is also highly belated.
It is to be noted that the allocation was made somewhere in the year 1987, and though the petitioner represented against it on a number of occasions in that year itself, he chose to come to this Court only in 1992.
I would, therefore, be most reluctant to unsettle things after such a long time gap.
5.
In view of what has been held above, I need not go into the question as to whether the private respondent was entitled to be promoted in preference to the petitioner on account of the policy of reservation.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.