MF Saldanha, J - The first submission canvassed by Mr. Chitnis is that the complainant's entire story which is to the effect that the accused demanded from him an amount of Rs. 30/- by way of illegal gratification, is in fact total fabrication.
Mr. Chitnis has pointed out to me the relevant parts of the evidence, and in particular, the evidence of PW 4 Bhalchandra Shantaram Patil, who is a colleague of the accused and working in the same office, who has admitted the suggestion that there was some sort of quarrel between the accused and the complainant at the time when the complainant had originally visited the Rationing Office on 721982.
As against this position, Mr. Lambay has submitted, that it would be too far-fetched to assume that the complainant, the panch and all the other witnesses on record would go to the extend of fabricating enough material to sustain a prosecution of the present type, merely because of a petty altercation.
The fact that there is some reference to an argument or a quarrel having taken place does undoubtedly appear on record but, to my mind, it would be rather unsafe to hold that even if there was some argument or quarrel, that the complainant would go to the extent of fabricating the entire case as made out before the Anti-Corruption Authority.
This challenge, to my mind, is rather weak.
2.
It is a paramount consideration that the sanctioning authority must apply its mind thoroughly to the material placed before it and thereafter alone accord sanction.
I do not need to quote the case law on this aspect of the case because, the position is well crystallised and does not require any repetition.
As indicated by me at the beginning of this judgment, the amount alleged to have been accepted by the present accused is a trifling sum of Rs. 30/-.
On the ground that he had accepted this amount and assuming that everything alleged against him by the Investigating Officer was accepted to be established, the moot question arises as to whether the accused who is alleged to have accepted a trifling amount of Rs. 30/- should be subjected to the rigorous of a criminal prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The sanctioning authority is well aware of the time-lag involved, once a case is sent up to Court, having regard to the arrears, and the consequent trauma that it will involve the employee in for years.
Suspension in such cases is inevitable and the payment of subsistence allowance for years is one of the avoidable drains on the department.
3.
An examination of the scheme of the Act will indicate that the law has prescribed a minimum sentence of one year apart from fine as punishment for a charge that is proved under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
This presupposes the fact that the Legislature had in mind two things : the first of them was that a very rigorous view should be taken in respect of all offences of corruption where the Court finds a person guilty about which there can be no dispute.
The second aspect of the matter which I propose to deal with is, that the Legislature obviously intended by putting in the requirement for sanction of prosecution under this Act, unlike several other offences which come to a Criminal Court, that the sanctioning authority must apply its mind to the gravity of the charge and decide as to whether or not assuming all the facts are established, the offence is serious enough to warrant a prosecution.
The Courts are groaning under the load of work which they are finding it difficult to come to grips with, and under these circumstances, it was certainly not the intention of the Legislature to embark upon prosecutions in trifling and petty cases.
We find a further indication of this intention in the proviso to Section 4 of the Prevention of Corruption Act dealing with the aspect of presumption wherein, again, a specific provision has been incorporated to the effect that if the case is a trifling one, that no adverse prosecution shall arise.
I have had occasion to deal with this aspect of section 4 in my judgment of OS Appeal No. 750 of 1987 in Writ Petition No. 655 of 1982 as also in Criminal Appeal No. 182 of 1984 decided on 1141991.
4.
To my mind, therefore, where a sanctioning authority is faced with the record of a case that is placed before him, the preliminary consideration that he is required to apply his mind to is the all importance question as to whether the facts alleged are serious enough to warrant a prosecution.
The question necessarily arises as to on what basis the authority is to be guided in this regard.
Undoubtedly, the issue is subjective and it cannot be left to the whims and fancies of the sanctioning authority to decide and to prosecute in a certain set of cases and refuse sanctioning in the remaining set of cases.
For this purpose, we have an unmistakable guideline on the scheme of the Act wherein we minimum punishment that has been referred to by me above has been indicated.
The guideline for the sanctioning authority would be to examine whether the case is established, warrants the minimum punishment that is prescribed under the Act viz., the short question as to whether the offence alleged is of such seriousness that it would warrant a conviction of one year RI which is prescribed under the Act.
To my mind, in trifling cases such as the present one, where even on a conviction for a solitary and single offence of acceptance of gratification of an amount of Rs. 30/-, a court would find it impossible to impose the minimum punishment, the sanctioning authority should evaluate the material and should withhold the sanction.
By following such a procedure, nor only would petty cases not be sent to the Courts for protracted and lengthy trials but speedy disposal of the matter would also be achieved.
Order accordingly.