Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - In the petition as originally filed the provisions of Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class-II) Rules, 1988 had been questioned.
However, at the hearing of the petition, the only contention pressed is that 43 posts of Secretaries of Market Committees had fallen vacant prior to the promulgation of the rules on May 2, 1988.
These 43 vacancies had to be filled up in accordance with the rules/criterion which were/was in force prior to the promulgation of the rules.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners are working as Head Clerks in different Market Committees.
In accordance, with the criterion prescribed by the competent authority the posts of Secretaries of Market Committees had to be filled up to the extent of 33 per cent by promotion from amongst Head Clerks-cum-Accountants of these Committees, and the remaining posts had to be filled up by direct recruitment or by promotion amongst the Assistants.
After the promulgation of the rules, the criterion was altered.
The only claim made by the petitioners is that the provisions of the rules shall apply only to the vacancies which occurred on or after May 2, 1988.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioners have an effective alternative remedy by way of revision petition under Section 42 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (hereinafter to be referred to as the Act).
It has also been pointed out that the matter is under consideration of the Apex Court in Spl (Civil) No. 10641 of 1991 (Pritam Singh and another v. The State of Punjab & others).
On merits, it is admitted that 43 posts of Secretaries, Market Committees were lying vacant prior of May 2, 1988.
It has also been averred that 8 Head Clerks had been promoted as Secretaries, Market Committees in compliance with the orders of this Court.
However, the incumbents cannot be reverted on account of the interim stay order granted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
4.
I have heard Mr. Avinash Chander Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mrs. Charu Tuli for the respondent.
5.
The only contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that in accordance with the decision of the apex Court, the vacancies which occurred prior to the promulgation of rules have to be filled up in accordance with the rules which were in force on that date.
This position of law is not contested by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Accordingly, it must follow that the vacancies which had occurred prior to May 2, 1988 had to be filled up in accordance with the criterion which was in force at that time.
This has admittedly not been done.
6.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the 43 vacancies of Secretaries of Market Committees which occurred prior to May 2, 1988 shall be filled up in accordance with the provisions of the rules or criterion which was in force that time.
The respondents will do the needful within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Consequential relief, if any, shall follow.
In the circumstanc of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.