Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners are Punjabi Stenography Instructors.
They were initially appointed on ad hoc basis during the years 1968 to 1970.
Their services were later on regularised with effect from different dates.
They were appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 160-10-280/15-400.
They claim the pay scale of Rs. 200-450 with effect from their date of appointment and Rs. 225-500 with effect from February 1, 1971.
2.
It is averred that Punjabi was declared as the State language in the year 1968.
As such, a number of posts of Stenography Instructors in Punjabi were created in the different Industrial Training Institutes and Centres.
A qualification of 5 years' experience had been prescribed.
However, at the relevant time the candidates with the requisite experience were not available.
As such, this requirement was relaxed.
In spite of the relaxation of the qualification regarding experience, the petitioners claim that they were not given the benefit of the revised scales of pay while others who were similarly situate were granted the said benefit.
As a result, the action has been challenged as being totally arbitrary and discriminatory.
The petitioners claim that they submitted a number of representations and finally they were granted the revised pay scales only with effect from October 13, 1975 on certain dates thereafter.
It is the claim of the petitioners that in spite of a decision of the Govt. to grant them the revised scale with effect from the dates when they had completed 5 years of experience, the needful was not done.
As a result, the petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 13890 of 1989 in this Hon'ble Court.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it was averred that the representation submitted by the petitioners was pending consideration.
As a result, the Division Bench vide its order dated March 29, 1990 directed the respondents to consider and decide the representation within 6 months.
This representation having been rejected by the Govt. vide its order dated November 21, 1990, in spite of a recommendation from the Director, the petitioners have again approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, two preliminary objections have been raised.
Firstly, it is claimed that a joint petition is not competent.
Further, an objection regarding the petition being highly belated, has been raised.
On merits, it has been pointed out that "5 years' experience was the basic condition for recruitment" of the Stenography Instructors.
Since the petitioners did not possess this qualification they were placed in the unrevised scale of Rs. 160-400.
It has been further explained that vide letter dated February 4, 1975, the State Govt. had only permitted the regularisation of services of Stenography Instructors who did not possess the requisite experience of 5 years at the time of their initial appointment.
It has been further pointed out that the department vide letter dated June 20, 1975, approached the State Govt. to allow the grade of Rs. 225-500 to all Instructors on their acquiring the five years experience.
The State Govt. accepted the proposal and issued instructions vide letter dated October 13, 1975 (Annexure P-5).
It was directed that "those Stenography Instructors of ITI's (in Punjabi/Hindi/English trades) who acquire the requisite experience of 5 years prescribed for the said posts be allowed the higher prescribed grade of Rs.
200-450/225-500."
Thereafter, the department vide its letter dated August 26, 1976 sought clarification regarding the date from which the instructions would be applicable regarding the grant of the scale of Rs. 225-500.
This clarification was necessitated by the fact that some Instructors had acquired the requisite experience of 5 years prior to October 13, 1975.
Vide letter dated September 7, 1977 (a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure R-2) the Govt. clarified that all such Instructors who have acquired 5 years experience even before October 13, 1975, may be granted the scale of Rs. 225-500 with effect from October 13, 1975.
Accordingly, the revised scale has been given to all the persons including the petitioners with effect from October 13, 1975 or such other later date when they had acquired the requisite experience.
In paragraph 13 of the written statement, It has been inter alia, stated that the petitioners did not have any genuine experience at their credit prior to their joining the department and "as such the experience was considered from the date they joined in the department even on ad hoc basis and after attaining the experience of 5 years, they were granted the scale of Rs. 225-500 from 13101975 or afterwards."
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Chopra, counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Arihant Jain, for the respondents.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioners that they have a right to be granted the scale of the post from the date of their entry into service.
In any event, the petitioners claim that there is no justification for the action of the respondents in not granting them the higher scale on the date on which they actually acquired the requisite experience of 5 years.
They further claim that the action of the respondents is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
On behalf of the respondents, besides pressing the preliminary objections raised in the written statement, it has been contended that the petitioners having accepted the pay scale of Rs. 160-400, are now estopped from claiming the higher scale of pay.
5.
As far the preliminary objections regarding the maintainability of a joint petition, it is clear that all the petitioners have a common cause of action.
All of them are claiming the benefit of the revised scale of pay.
The facts and the legal submissions relevant for the decision of the controversy are identical qua all the petitioners.
Therefore, there cannot be any valid objection to the maintainability of a joint petition on their behalf.
The objection is consequently rejected.
6.
Equally lacking in merit is the preliminary objection regarding delay.
The petitioners have produced various letters to show that even as early as February 18, 1980, the Director had informed the Principal that the matter was under consideration of the Govt. To a similar effect are the letters dated March 16, 1984, November 30, 1987 and February 9, 1988.
Further, when the petitioners approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 13890 of 1989, it was stated on behalf of the respondents that the matter was under consideration of the Govt.
Accordingly, directions for a decision of the case were issued by the Court.
The petitioners have filed this petition soon after the decision of the Govt. on their representation was conveyed to them.
In such a situation, the petitioners cannot be accused of any palpable delay on their part.
Accordingly, even this objection is rejected.
7.
Coming to the merits of the case, it is the admitted position that the qualification of experience of 5 years for appointment to the post of the Stenography Instructors in Punjabi had been waived off.
Admittedly, the petitioners did not possess this qualification at the time of their entry into service.
In spite of that, they were offered appointment as Instructors in the scale of Rs. 160-400.
They accepted the appointment without any reservation.
Having accepted the appointment, the petitioners cannot be permitted to claim the revised pay scale from the date of their initial appointment.
The objection raised on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners are estopped from claiming this revised scale has to be sustained.
Accordingly, the claim of the petitioners regarding the grant of revised scale with effect from the date of their initial entry into service is rejected.
8.
The petitioners then claim that in accordance with the decision of the Govt. they are entitled to the grant of scale atleast with effect from the dates when they had acquired the requisite experience of 5 years.
It is further claimed by them that in spite of the decision of the Govt., the benefit has not been given to them.
By way of an illustration, it may be noticed that petitioner Gurcharan Singh had joined service on ad hoc basis on December 12, 1969.
His services were admittedly regularised with effect from November 28, 1970.
It is not disputed that he has been given the higher scale with effect from October 13, 1975 i.e. almost 10 months after he had actually completed 5 years service in the department.
Similarly, petitioner No. 5 Charanjit Singh had joined service on ad hoc basis on November 15, 1969 but he has been given the revised scale of pay with effect from April 6, 1976.
In reply to the objections raised by the petitioners in this behalf, the averment made on behalf of the respondents is that the "experience was considered from the date they joined in the department even on ad hoc basis and after attaining the experience of 5 years, they were granted the scale of Rs. 225-500 from 13101975 or afterwards."
This does not appear to be factually correct.
The revised scale should have been given to petitioner No. 2 viz Gurcharan Singh with effect from December 12, 1974 and petitioner No. 5 with effect from November 15, 1974.
This has admittedly not been done.
Similar is the position with regard to some to the other petitioners.
Consequently, the claim on behalf of the petitioners that the revised scale to the petitioners be granted to them with effect from the date they completed the service of 5 years including the period of ad hoc service has to be accepted.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed to the extent that the petitioner shall be replaced in scale of Rs. 225-500 with effect from the date they completed 5 years of service, ad hoc or otherwise, in the department.
On this basis, their pay in the present scale of pay shall be refixed.
The arrears of salary that fall due and the date of increment shall also be accordingly determined.
The needful shall be done within 3 months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.