MS Liberhan, J - The services of petitioner Darshan Jit Singh Dhindsa were terminated on 971986, inter alia, on the ground that he is unsuitable to be retained in service in the interest of the disciplined force and security of the State/Country, general law and administration as he had links with the extremists while posted as Station House Officer, Oadian.
No enquiry was held against him.
The provisions of Article 311(i)(b) of the Constitution of India read with Police Rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules were invoked to dispense with the enquiry by observing that since terrorists or their supporters may not cause bodily harm to the Enquiry Officer or the prosecution witnesses, consequently no enquiry is feasible  2.
The petitioner challenged the order of his dismissal from service, inter alia, on the grounds : (i) That there was no material on the record on the basis of which Appointing Authority i.e. Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, could have subjectively formed an opinion or could have derived satisfaction that holding of an enquiry is not practicable, (ii) The order of dismissal has been passed by the competent authority for extraneous consideration i.e. the order was passed on the direction of the Director General of Police, Punjab, (iii) The Senior Superintendent of Police was not competent to dismiss as the petitioner was promoted by the Deputy Inspector General, (iv) The orders passed by the Appellate Authority as well as of the Revisional Authority are not speaking orders, (v) The Punishing Authority did not apply his mind independently as would be obvious from the order passed by the District Magistrate, Gurdaspur, whereby he held that there was no material on the record to detain the petitioner under the National Security Act as recommended by the Director General of Police.
3.
Lastly, it was claimed that the punishment awarded was not commensurate with the offence attributed to the petitioner; his past record was not taken into consideration; no charge-sheet was served upon him nor explanation called for, much less holding of an enquiry.
Thus, the impugned order of his dismissal is liable to be set aside.
In order to support his contentions, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(1) SCT 125 : JT 1990(4) SC 554; Ram Karan v. Union of India and others, 1975(2) SLR 683; Atam Parkash Mohan son of Shri Vir Bhan and others v. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, through its Registrar and others, 1970 SLR 16; Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR (39) 1952 SC 16; Bachabhai Ramsinhji v. Shri Shivlal, IPS 1971 SLR 588, Ikramuddin Ahmed Borah v. Superintendent of Police Darrang AIR 1988 Supreme Court 2245 and Ashok Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1990(2) RSJ 209.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents refuted the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner and contended that the enquiry could not have been held in the circumstances of the case.
It was vehemently argued that the ground of dismissal of the petitioner themselves spell out that had an enquiry been held, the extremists or the terrorists or their supporters might have caused bodily harm to the Enquiry Officer or to the witnesses.
The order of dismissal was passed on the basis of the material supplied by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur and from the Head Quarters, Chandigarh.
His appeal was dismissed after considering the material on the records.
5.
We have sent for the records, perused the same and considered the arguments, addressed by the learned counsel for the parties.
6.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh's case (supra) has categorically laid down that on the satisfaction of the condition i.e. existence of a situation where an enquiry is not reasonably practicable; which the disciplinary authority by recording in writing its reasons for his satisfaction with respect to practicability of holding an enquiry in the existing facts, situation or other surrounding circumstances prevailing on the date of passing the order or dismissal, the enquiry could be dispensed with by the disciplinary authority.
It is only when the disciplinary authority comes to above conclusion and records the finding, that the enquiry can be dispensed with, and the compliance under Article 311(2) is not required.
It was categorically observed that the reasons recorded for the subjective satisfaction of the disciplinary authority are subject to judicial scrutiny.
It was made incumbent for the Court to interfere if it is found that the reasons recorded for dispensing with the enquiry are arbitrary or mala fide or motivated by extraneous consideration or merely an abuse to dispense with the enquiry.
Holding of an enquiry should not be lightly dispensed with.
To the similar effect are the observations made in Ikramuddin Ahmed Borah's case (supra).
7.
The morsel information available on record and imbibed in the order is only to the effect that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry.
It would be expedient to reproduce the satisfaction recorded by the Appointing Authority in his own words, which runs as under :-  "And whereas I am satisfied that the circumstances of the case are such that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry in the manner provided in the Police Rule 16.24 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934, terrorists or their supporters may cause bodily harm to the Enquiry Officer or the witnesses.
Now, therefore, I S.C Jain, IPC, Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, in exercise of my powers vested in me by virtue of proviso to Article 312(2)(b) of the Constitution of India read with PPR 161, 1 do hereby dismiss 1.
Darshanjit Singh".
Factually, the allegations made against the petitioner for dismissing him from service is that he had got links with Sikh extremists and hence is unsuitable to be retained in disciplined force of police.
8.
There is no gain saying that the order of dismissal was passed on 971986 when a letter was addressed by Superintendent of Police (J) dated 1961986 informing Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur that the petitioner is suspected to have links with Sikh extremists, in view of the facts stated in the said letter.
He further conveyed that Director General of Police had ordered that petitioner be dismissed from service under Article 311 of the Constitution of India and further to be detained under NSA.
It is not disputed that the District Magistrate, Gurdaspur, came to the conclusion that there is no material on record to detain the petitioner under the NSA.
Except a bare letter from the office of the Director General of Police, there is not an iota of material or events by reference to which, it could have been reasonably attributed to the petitioner that he had links with the terrorists.
In the course of arguments an attempt was made to point out that there was a statement of Tarsem Singh Kohar, recorded by the CIA Inspector, (during his investigation that he had been visiting Qadian where Darshanjit Singh was posted as Station House Officer.
In spite of a number of adjournments given, no such statement was brought to our notice nor any such statement was before the disciplinary authority while coming to the subjective satisfaction of the necessity of dispensing with the enquiry under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution.
9.
In our considered view, there is nothing on record from which one can come to the conclusion that holding of an enquiry is or was not practicable.
Even the charge of petitioner having links with the extremists is too vague particularly in view of the service record of the petitioner prior to his dismissal whereby commendation certificates were issued for the courageous acts performed by the petitioner in curbing the terrorists activities.
Mere reproduction of the words of the statute are not sufficient to justify the finding of fact with respect to the satisfaction of the authority concerned.
We find no reasons either recorded on the file or on the other itself, on scrutiny of which, one could have come to a conclusion that the appointing authority had come to the subjective satisfaction for dispensing with the enquiry.
In view of facts and circumstances, observed above, it can be reasonably inferred that the appointing authority was prima facie influenced by the letter addressed from the DGP office, ordering dismissal of the petitioner.
The enquiry against the petitioner appears to have been dispensed with on excusals.
The appointing authority has given his conclusion for dispensing with the enquiry but has not stated any reason for coming to such a conclusion.
Nothing has been pointed out as to what impelled the appointing authority to come to a conclusion with respect to impracticability of holding an enquiry or even simply giving a show cause notice to the petitioner for his having links with undesirable elements and calling for his explanation which might have satisfied the appointing authority with respect to the defence of the petitioner.
The cardinal principles of natural justice cannot be dispensed with on mere pretexts real or imaginary.
10.
In the light of the documents placed on record before us we are of the considered view that there was no material before the authorities to come to a conclusion regarding the non-practicability of holding the enquiry or any material connecting petitioner's assumed links with the terrorists.
11.
A perusal of the order of the appointing authority would show that some statement of Tarsem Singh Kohar to the effect that he used to visit Qadian was taken into consideration but even this statement would not lead to an inference that Darshanjit Singh petitioner did not make any effort to arrest him.
Even the allegation that one Pehalwan was rounded up who was released later on and though it was attributed that Tarsem Singh Kohar got him released from the petitioner, does not lead to an inference that the petitioner had links with the extremists.
These are mere allegations which are not supported by any material on record.
Even the statement of Tarsem Singh Kohar is not on record.
Thus, the appointing authority or the appellate authority never had an opportunity to read the statement of Tarsem.
Singh Kohar.
There is nothing on the record what the said Tarsem Singh stated and in what context it was stated by him.
In the absence of any material, it would be too much to infer that mere allegations of the facts, would be deemed to be proved facts.
12.
In view of the findings returned above, we need not deal with the other submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The order of dismissal on the face of it, having been passed under the orders of the Director General of Police, without application of independent mind or satisfaction of the appointing authority, cannot be sustained.
Thus the orders Annexures P-3, P-8 and P-10 are hereby quashed.
This writ petition is accordingly allowed and the respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner with all other consequential reliefs including the back wages.
There would be no order as to costs.
The respondents would, however, be at liberty to proceed against the petitioner afresh in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.