Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an Ahalmad in Sessions Division, Bathinda, claims the benefit of army service rendered by him during the proclamation of emergency.
His claim for the grant of various benefits having been rejected by the District and Sessions Judge, Bhatinda vide orders dated January 3, 1987, he has approached this court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner had joined the Indian Army as a Sepoy on July 20, 1959 and he served there till November 9, 1977.
He was appointed as a Clerk in the Sessions Division, Bathinda on January 8, 1980.
The petitioner claims that the period of service rendered by him from October 26, 1962 to January 8, 1968 and December 3, 1971 to March 27, 1977 falls within the ambit of 'military service' as defined under the provisions of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
His representation to the District and Sessions Judge, Bathinda having been rejected, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that the writ petition having been filed after an inordinate delay deserves to be dismissed.
It is also maintained that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of army service as claimed by him as he had joined the army force prior to the proclamation of emergency and that the benefits under the rules are admissible only to a limited class of persons, who had respondent to call of nation during the period of emergency.
4.
I have heard Mr. JS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Arihant Jain, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, for the respondents.
Rule 2 defines the military service as under :-  "2.
Definition :- For the purpose of these rules, the expression 'military service' means the service rendered by a person who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on the 26th October, 1962, in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including the service as Warrant Officer) during the period of the said emergency or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purpose of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
The above provision does not differentiate between a person who was enrolled or commissioned in the Indian Army prior to the proclamation of emergency or thereafter.
The service rendered "by a person who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President....... on 26th October, 1962........." is defined as military service for the purpose of the Rules.
Accordingly, the period from October 26, 1962 to January 8, 1968 qualifies for the grant of benefit it under the Rules.
Under Rule 4, the period of military service has to count for increments, seniority and pension.
The said rule is as under :-  4.
Increments, seniority and pension.
Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under :- (i) Increments - The period spent by a person on military service, after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall court for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribe the minimum age shall be laid down in Rules 3.9, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority.
- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii) Pension.
- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :- (1) The person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question; (2) Any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government.
(3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Government shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government."
5.
So far as the benefit of increments is concerned, since the period of service rendered by the petitioner during the proclamation of emergency falls within the ambit of definition of military service as defined under Rule 2, the increments have to be granted to the petitioner.
As for seniority, there is a hurdle in the way of petitioner.
Persons, who are likely to be affected by the grant of this benefit, have not been impleaded as parties.
No order affecting their seniority inter se, in any manner, can be passed in their absence.
All such persons, who are likely to become junior to the petitioner by the grant of this benefit having not been impleaded in spite of their being necessary parties, no relief can be given to the petitioner.
6.
Mr. Randhawa submits that he will make a representation to the authorities and in case it becomes necessary, he will approach this Court through appropriate proceedings.
He may do so.
So far as this petition is concerned, it is allowed to the limited extent that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of increments for the period of military service rendered by him during the proclamation of emergency made by the President on October 26, 1962.
7.
The petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.