Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Prem Parkash has filed two petitions viz. Civil Writ Petition Nos. 485 and 486 of 1990.
Firstly, the factual position as in Civil Writ Petition No. 485 of 1990 may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner herein is aggrieved by the initiation of departmental proceedings.
A few facts relevant for resolving this controversy may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner is working as a Patwari in the Revenue Department.
A case under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act was registered against him vide FIR No. 63 dated June 20, 1986.
He was tried by the learned Special Judge, Barnala.
Vide order dated August 29, 1988, the learned Judge found that the prosecution had been unable to prove the case against the accused beyond a shadow of doubt.
Accordingly, the petitioner was "acquitted of the offences alleged against him by giving him the benefit of doubt."
Thereafter, a charge-sheet dated June 27, 1989 was issued by the Collector, Sangrur to the petitioner calling upon him to show cause as to why he be not paid anything beyond the subsistence allowance which had already been paid to him.
The petitioner submitted his reply.
Thereafter, vide memo No/NSK, dated nil, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet under Rules 8 and 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
It was alleged that the petitioner had demanded an amount of Rs. 500/- and had actually received an amount of Rs. 400/- on June 20, 1986, as illegal gratification.
Aggrieved by the show cause notice dated June 27, 1989, and the charge-sheet, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
The orders have been challenged as being wholly illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional and violative of the principles of natural justice.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was acquitted of the charge by the Special Judge by "giving him the benefit of doubt".
In accordance with the instructions issued by the Govt. vide its letter dated December 23, 1976, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure R-1 departmental proceedings have been initiated against the petitioner.
These instructions inter alia provide that in a case where the Court has merely expressed a doubt as to the correctness of the allegation, then there may not be any objection to hold a departmental enquiry on the same allegations if better proof than what was produced before the Court or was then available is forthcoming."
So far as the show cause police dated June 27, 1989 is concerned, the respondents aver that it has been withdrawn vide letter dated August 31, 1989, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure R-2.
5.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner has been acquitted of the charge levelled against him by the Special Judge, Barnala.
However, the petitioner has been merely given the benefit of doubt.
In a criminal case, a charge has to be proved beyond all reasonable doubt before a person can be convicted.
However, the standard of proof required in a criminal case is entirely different from that required in a departmental proceeding.
The proceedings are conducted to find out as to whether or not an employee is suitable for continuing in Govt. service.
The standard of proof required is not beyond reasonable doubt.
The allegation has not to be proved as in a criminal charge beyond any shadow of doubt.
If the evidence on record creates a doubt regarding the integrity of the employee and the competent authority finds that the charge is proved on the basis of that evidence, appropriate action as permissible under the rules can be taken.
Consequently the mere fact that a civil servant has been acquitted by the court of a criminal charge, does not debar the appropriate authority from initiating or continuing departmental proceedings under the relevant rules governing the matter.
6.
In this view of the matter, I find no ground to quash the charge-sheet issued to the petitioner.
7.
The writ petition is consequently dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Civil Writ Petition No. 486 of 1990  8.
In this petition, a prayer has been made for the issuance of an appropriate writ or direction commanding the respondents to promote the petitioner as Kanungo with effect from the date his juniors were promoted as such during the pendency of the criminal case against him.
Consequential reliefs have also been claimed.
9.
Keeping in view the fact that a departmental inquiry on the charge of accepting the illegal gratification is pending against the petitioner, I am not inclined to issue any direction at the present moment.
However, it is directed that in case the petitioner is exonerated of the allegation against him, the competent authority shall consider his claim for promotion with effect from the date the person/persons junior to the petitioner were promoted to the rank of Kanungo.
In case the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc. shall be granted to him.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.