Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Manager, Electronics Data Processing Cell in the Haryana State Cooperative Apex Bank Limited (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) on October 13, 1989.
On September 25, 1991, the Board decided to dispense with the services of the petitioner "because of lack of fulfilment of prescribed qualification."
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court though the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On September 4, 1989, the Bank published an advertisement inviting applications for various posts including the post of Manager, Electronic Data Processing.
Following qualifications were prescribed :-  "1.
E.D.P.
Manager (One)  Pay Scale : Rs. 3700-125-4700-150-5000.
Qualification :- BE (Computer SC)/Electronics or MBA (Computer Information System) from a recognised University or equivalent with at least 5 years experience.
Preference would be given to candidate also possessing commerce/accounting qualification and background."
In response to the above advertisement, the petitioner submitted an application stating that as an MBA in Computer information systems along with an accounting background I should blend in well to your Organisation's requirements.
Kindly accept my application for a suitable position in your EDP department.
Along with this application, the petitioner submitted his bio-data.
Relevant portion may be usefully extracted :-  "6.
Educational Qualification :  Exam passed Board/University Year of passing Subjects % age Division of Marks BCom.
(Hons.)
Panjab University 1983 Accounting Business-Management Statistics Post B.Sc.
Diploma in Computer Sc.
& Appl.
Kurkshetra University 1986 Business Data Processing.
Prog.
Languages 59% IInd M.B.A. New Hampshire College 1989 Computer Infor.
Systems Mktg.
Finance Production & Operations Management 7.
Experience : Designation Employer's name Duration Responsibilities Auditor Chopra & Chopra Chandigarh 07/83-05/85 Auditing Books of Accounts.
Computer Instructor DAV College Chandigarh 10/86-08/87 Teaching Programming Language FORTRAN COBOL Programmer Analyst System Analyst Public Service Co. New Hampshire Haryana State Electronics Dev.
Corpn.
(Haryana).
03/89-06/89 08/89 Present Developing a complete System, Incharge of all processing work done at centre.
A Staff Sub-Committee, as constituted by the Board of Administrators vide its decision dated December 15, 1988, met on October 6, 1989 to consider the appointment to the posts advertised by the Bank.
This Committee consisted of Shri Manage Ram, M.L.A., Shri Bhagwati Prashad, Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana and Shri JC Kanwar, Managing Director of the Bank.
It may be noticed here that Mr. Kanwar is the petitioner's father.
It appears that he did not participate in the interview and selection for the post of EDP Manager.
The Committee selected the petitioner for appointment as Manager in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-125-4700-150-5000.
Copy of the proceedings of the Committee is at Annexure P-3.
The Committee also decided that the letter for appointment will be issued to the petitioner only after observing the required formalities under the provisions of the Cooperative Societies Act, Rules and Bye-laws.
Vide letter dated October 12, 1989, the Govt. granted approval to the appointment of the petitioner as required under rule 4 of the Govt. Employees Conduct Rules, 1966.
The Registrar also granted approval as required under rule 112 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Rules, 1989.
Immediately thereafter, vide letter dated October 13, 1989, the post was offered to the petitioner.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
3.
The petitioner avers that his father was close to Ch.
Devi Lal who was the Chief Minister in the State of Haryana, Mr. JC Kanwar retired from service in November, 1989.
He was re-employed for one year till November 1990, as Additional Registrar and allowed to continue as Managing Director of the Bank.
He was again re-employed for another year till November, 1991.
On the dissolution of the Govt. and the imposition of the President's rule, the term of the petitioner's father which was to continue till November, 1991 was terminated in May, 1991.
After the Elections, Mr. Bhajan Lal assumed power as Chief Minister and appointed respondent No. 2 Shri Lehmber Singh as the Managing Director of the Bank.
It has been stated that during the period 1977-1979 when Shri Bhajan Lal was the Cooperation Minister respondent No. 2 was the Managing Director of the Confed.
The petitioner alleges that respondent No. 2 was responsible for a loss of approximately Rs. 4 crores as he had created a larger number of posts without any authority and employed the near and dear ones of Shri Bhajan Lal to the said posts.
Subsequently, he was suspended from the post of Managing Director and a charge-sheet was served on him.
Thereafter, when Shri Bhajan Lal became the Chief Minister in 1982, respondent No. 2 managed to get the charge-sheet hushed up and was appointed the Managing Director of the Haryana State Land Mortgage Bank.
The petitioner avers that respondent No. 2 committed irregularities, even in the Mortgage Bank in the matter of appointments and creation of posts.
He was again placed under suspension.
Thereafter when Shri Bhajan Lal came to power, the respondent was appointed as Managing Director of the Bank.
The petitioner claims that he has reasons to believe that he has assured Shri Bhajan Lal that he would remove all those employees who had been selected to various posts over to past 3/4 years and would employee (employ) the favourites of the present regime.
It is alleged that respondent No. 2 circulated an agenda for meeting to be held on August 28, 1991, in which it was proposed to review all the appointments made during the last four years.
One of the proposals was to review the progress and working of the EDP Cell.
The petitioner alleges that he became the victim of the wrath of respondent No. 2 who was biased against him for the reason that he is the son of Shri JC Kanwar who according to him was close to the last regime and publically announced that the petitioner's services would be terminated.
Reference has also been made to a news item which was published in an issue of Jansatta dated September 11, 1991.
In order to prove the bias of respondent No. 2, the petitioner has referred to four particular matters which shall be noticed at the relevant stage.
4.
The petitioner was given a show cause notice dated September 3, 1991 in which it was observed that "he did not fulfil the requisite educational qualifications or of experience of at least 5 years for the post of EDP Manager as prescribed by the Service rules of the Bank."
Various details were furnished and the petitioner was called upon to clarify his position.
The petitioner submitted his reply vide letter dated September 16, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-20.
The Board of the Bank, in its meeting held on September 25, 1991, resolved that the services of the petitioner be terminated as he did not fulfil the qualifications.
This decision was conveyed to the petitioner by respondent No. 2 vide dated September 25, 1991.
Copy of this letter is at Annexure P-22.
Aggrieved by the resolution of the Board and the order conveying the decision to terminate his services, the petitioner has filed this petition and challenged the action.
It is claimed that the order is mala fide and wholly without jurisdiction.
5.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondent No. 1 (the Bank) and respondent No. 2 (Mr. Lehmber Singh, the Managing Director).
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Bank, it has been inter-alia stated by way of preliminary objection that the petitioner does not possess the basic educational qualifications as also those relating to experience.
It has be further stated that the petitioner was offered an opportunity to explain his position and on finding that he was not qualified for appointment to the post, the petitioner's services have been dispensed with during the period of his probation.
6.
On merits, it has inter-alia been pointed out that nine persons including the petitioner were considered for the post of EDP Manager (although the petitioner had not specifically applied for this post).
Two interviews were conducted of the various candidates.
The first was conducted by two members of the Committee namely, Shri JC Kanwar (father of the petitioner) and Shri RK Behl, Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
Eight persons appeared for the preliminary interview.
The petitioner's interview was conducted by Shri RK Behl, Deputy Registrar alone.
As a result, short-listing was done and only two candidates were chosen to be considered for final selection, namely, the petitioner and Shri Ravi Ranjan.
This preliminary interview took place on September 22, 1989.
Subsequently, on October 6, 1989, another meeting of the Committee took place in which all the three representatives were present and out of the two short-listed candidates, the petitioner was selected.
On the same day, the Managing Director sent a communication to the Registrar seeking his approval under rule 112 for the appointment of his son in the bank.
The petitioner's averment regarding his father's rapport with the then Chief Minister Mr. Devi Lal etc. have been described as irrelevant.
It has been pointed out that the extension given to the petitioner's father was terminated in May 1991 and Shri PN Bhardwaj was appointed as Managing Director.
It has been further pointed out that respondent No. 2 was appointed as the Managing Director on July 10, 1991.
It is also averred that various complaints alleging inter alia irregularities in recruitment in recruitment in the respondent-Bank during the tenure of Shri Kanwar were sent by the Government of Haryana to the respondent-Bank on 1361991 for making enquiries into this matter.
It was in this background that agenda items for the meeting of the Board to be held on August 28, 1991 were issued.
It is further averred that on the reviewing of the qualifications of the petitioner, it was found that he neither possessed the requisite prescribed degree nor the prescribed length of experience to qualify for the post.
Accordingly, the notice at Annexure P-19 was sent to him.
The reply submitted by the petitioner which is substantially a confession that he does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed by the rules was considered before the final order was passed.
On these factual premises, the impugned order is sought to be supported.
7.
Respondent No. 2 has filed a separate affidavit.
In this affidavit, the various allegations made by the petitioner suggesting bias or malafides against respondent No. 2 have been denied.
Reference to the various averments shall be made at the relevant stage.
8.
The petitioner has filed a replication to which the respondent has filed a rejoinder.
9.
I have heard Mr. PS Patwalia for the petitioner and Mr. JK Sibal, learned counsel for the respondents.
Mr. Patwalia contends that the action suffers from the vice of malafides.
He further contends that the petitioner was fully qualified for the post.
He had disclosed full facts.
The competent authority had considered and decided the matter.
The decision was acted upon.
Thereafter, it was not open to the successor in office to review the order.
He also contends that the action is arbitrary.
On the other hand, Mr. Sibal appearing for the respondents points out that the allegation of malafides is wholly baseless.
He further points out that the petitioner did not fulfil the academic or other qualifications.
He was ineligible for appointment in the year 1989 and continued to be ineligible even on the date when his services were actually terminated.
He submits that the power of appointments includes the power to review the appointment and that there can be no estoppel against law.
He further contends that the petitioner was in any case a probationer, and he had no right to the post.
10.
Does the action suffer from the vice of malafides ?
The petitioner relied on the following circumstances to contend that respondent No. 2 was biased against him -  (1) He asked the petitioner, vide order dated August 20, 1991 to route all files through the Deputy General Manager (Monitoring) who was an officer junior to the petitioner.
(2) A branch of respondent-Bank is functioning in house No. 916, Sector 8, Panchkula.
The first and second floors of the said house were lying vacant.
The Board of Directors in the meeting held on March 27, 1991 decided to lease out the 1st and second floors of the said house to the petitioner for a period of three years.
After his appointment, respondent No. 2 on August 8, 1991 ordered the petitioner to vacate the Annexe which was on the first floor.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 proposed to the Board to review the earlier decision regarding the leasing out of the premises to the petitioner.
As this proposal was likely to be accepted, the petitioner claims that he vacated the accommodation on September 8, 1991.
(3) Respondent No. 2 issued an order on September 19, 1991 asking the petitioner to refund the entire amount of Rs. 70,000/- within seven days which had been paid to him on account of a car loan.
(4) The petitioner's telephone was ordered to be disconnected.
So far as the allegation regarding the disconnection of the telephone is concerned, no such averment has been made in the petition.
Therefore, Mr. Sibal objected to the contention being raised by the counsel for the petitioner.
In view of the fact that no such averment has been made in the petition, it appears to be unfair to the respondents to allow the petitioner to raise such a contention.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that a reference to this matter occurs in one of the representations submitted by the petitioner.
That is not enough.
To prove the allegation of bias, the averment has to be specifically made in the petition.
There being none, the respondent had no occasion to answer.
The petitioner cannot now be allowed to make a grievance in this behalf.
This leaves the only three other matters to be considered.
11.
It deserves notice at the outset that besides denying the various allegations made in the petition, it is specifically averred that "the answering-respondent has been appointed Managing Director of the respondent-Bank being the senior-most officer in the State."
The suggestion that he had given any assurance to Shri Bhajan Lal for removing all the employees recruited over the last 3/4 years and to employ persons who are favourites of the present regime, has been denied.
It has been further stated that a circular had been received from the Govt. regarding the review of the appointments made during the last four years and subsequently the matter had been circulated for the meeting of the Board which was fixed for August 28, 1991.
It is further averred that the respondents are in no way averse to or angry with the petitioner.
The suggestion that the respondent had publicly announced that the services of the petitioner would be terminated, has been denied.
It has been stated that the newspaper report is inspired and false and only the petitioner knows in what circumstances it has appeared and who is responsible for its publication.
With regard to three specific matters pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the reply of respondent No. 2 may be briefly summarised as under :-  (1) With regard to the allegation that the petitioner had been directed by respondent No. 2 to route the files through the Deputy General Manager (Monitoring), it has been pointed out that the order had been issued on June 26, 1991.
Respondent No. 2 had joined as Managing Director of the Bank on July 10, 1991.
It is suggested that the allegation is wholly false and baseless.
It has been further pointed out that the Deputy General Manager (Monitoring) is not an officer junior to the petitioner.
(2) With regard to the allegation that respondent No. 2 had directed the petitioner to vacate the Annexe on the first floor of the house at Panchkula, it has been pointed out that the Annexe was in possession of the gunman who was required to live in the premises of the Bank.
The petitioner had evicted the gunman and occupied the Annexure which he was not permitted or authorised to do as the gunman was required to live in the premises of the Bank and the action of the petitioner was unjustified.
The Annexe was restored to the gunman.
Further it has been averred that there were no threats by the respondents or any other person to evict the petitioner from the premises.
(3) Similarly, with regard to the order dated September 19, 1991 regarding the refund of the amount of car advance, it has been pointed out that the office had prepared a proposal dated June 24, 1991 pointing out various irregularities for the release of car loan, and the utilisation thereof.
This proposal had been prepared much before the respondent had joined the post.
It was on the basis of the office proposal that the decision to ask for refund was taken.
12.
A perusal of the written statement clearly shows that all the suggestions of bias or that any assurance had been given to the Chief Minister to terminate the services of the employees appointed during the last four years and to employ the favourites of the present regime have been specifically denied.
Even the basis for the suggestion that respondent No. 2 was biased against the petitioner has been clearly controverted.
The explanation given by respondent No. 2 is reasonable and plausible.
If the predecessor of respondent No. 2 had directed that the petitioner should route his files through the Deputy General Manager (Monitoring), the petitioner cannot accuse respondent No. 2 of any bias.
In fact it only indicates the petitioner's thinking.
He is prepared to impute motives to respondent No. 2 even when there is no basis.
Similarly, even with regard to the allegation that the petitioner was called upon to vacate the Annexe, it is not unknown that the Bank employs an armed guard in the interest of the security.
In the very nature of things, the guard has to be available all the time in the bank premises.
If some accommodation had been allotted to him for this purpose, which was in his possession he was entiteld to continue to stay there.
The petitioner has brought nothing on record to show that the Board of Directors or any other person had authorised him to get the premises vacated.
In such a situation, it appears unreasonable to contend that respondent No. 2 was biased against the petitioner merely because he was called upon to restore the possession of the Annexe to the gunman.
In fact, it appears from the record that the Manager had made a report on July 15, 1991 that the residential use of the premises be discontinued.
If in view of this report, a copy of which has been produced on record, as annexure R-2/3, respondent No. 2 had directed the matter to be placed before the Board of Directors, one cannot even remotely draw an inference of bias.
Similarly, even with regard to the order for refund to car loan, the operation of which had been stayed by RS Mongia, J by an interim order, it appears that office had prepared and submitted a proposal on June 24, 1991 before orders of appointment of respondent No. 2 had even been issued.
Acceptance of such a proposal cannot lead to an inference of bias on the part of respondent No. 2.
13.
Mr. Patwalia urged that the bias of respondent No. 2 is also obvious from the fact that the meeting had been convened without compliance with the rules and within one day only.
This allegation has been denied on behalf of the respondent.
It has been pointed out that the notice of the meeting was given on September 12, 1991.
The meeting was fixed for September 27, 1991.
The chairman had expressed some difficulty as a result of which the meeting had to be preponed.
Reference was made by the Bank to the Registrar.
He had granted permission for the preponement of the meeting from September 27 to September 25, 1991.
It has been further pointed out that out of a total of five members of the Board, the majority viz. three members had attended the meeting.
Consequently, there is no basis for any suggestion of bias on this account.
14.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter, I am not satisfied that the petitioner could have any reasonable basis for entertaining the apprehension that respondent No. 2 was biased against him.
The material on record does not justify such an inference.
Furtheremore, one cannot also lose sight of the fact that the Managing Director is only one of the five members of the Board of Directors.
He is not the final authority.
The Chairman presides over the meetings of the Board.
The Board also has the Registrar or his nominee and other senior officers of the Govt.
The suggestion of bias or malafides in the circumstances of the case has no basis, whatsoever.
It is consequently rejected.
15.
The next question that arises is, as to whether or not, the petitioner was qualified for the post of Manager, EDP.
Mr. Sibal submits that the petitioner neither possesses the academic qualification nor that of experience.
Mr. Patwalia on the other hand conceded that the petitioner did not fulfil the qualification of experience.
A perusal of the advertisement shows that to be eligible, the candidate should have a degree of Bachelor of Engineering in Computer Science or Electronics.
The petitioner did not have that.
The alternative academic qualification is MBA (Computer Information System) from a recognised University.
Mr. Sibal raised a twofold contention.
Firstly, the petitioner had not qualified from a recognised University but only from a college.
Secondly, it was contended that the petitioner had not acquired a degree in MBA (Computer Information System).
He had only studied Computer Information System as one of the subjects for his MBA.
16.
I have heard the learned counsel.
It has not been shown that any institution in this country or abroad is awarding a degree of MBA in Computer Information Systems.
A perusal of the documents produced by the petitioner along with his application shows that he had been awarded the degree of MBA and that the Compueter Information System was one of the subjects.
This was accepted as adequate by the Selection Committee.
In the circumstances of the case, it appears prima facie that the appointing authority could have reasonably thought that the petitioner possessed the academic qualifications.
17.
This bring me to the next aspect.
Did the petitioner fulfil the requirement of the atleast 5 years' experience ?
In order to resolve this controversy it is first necessary to determine the nature of the experience contemplated.
The academic qualifications relating to the subject of Computer Science, Electronics and Computer Information System.
In the very nature of things, experience must relate to this very field.
The post of Manager, EDP obviously requires a person to be able to a mange computers and have the experience of processing the data.
Such an experience one can have only after one has qualified one of prescribed examinations.
Any experience prior to acquiring the requisite qualification would not in the context of the advertisement in the present case be of any help.
18.
Mr. Patwalia, however, contends that the advertisement does not require that the experience should have been acquired after obtaining the degree.
He is undoubtedly right.
The advertisement does not say that the experience should have been acquired after the award of the degree.
However, keeping in view the fact that incumbent of the post has to manage the Electronic Data Processing Department and has to have a degree of graduation in Computer Science or Electronic or MBA in Computer Information System, it is reasonable to conclude that even the experience should be in the fields of Computer Science, Electronic or Computer Information System.
One cannot have any experience in these fields unless one has acquired the requisite academic qualification.
Consequently, Mr. Sibal appears to be right in contending that the experience should be only after one has qualified an examination in the field of Computer Science Electronics or Computer Information System.
19.
Mr. Patwalia, however, points out that experience in the fields of commerce, accounting entitles a person to a preferential treatment.
The stipulation in the advertisement is to the following effect :-  "Preference would be given to candidate also possessing commerce/accounting qualification and background."
On a reading of the prescribed qualification, it appears that one of the academic qualifications and five years experience are essential.
If a candidate also processes the qualification in commerce/accounting and has a background of either of the fields, he could be preferred.
It does not mean that five years experience could embody the experience in commerce and accounting.
For instance, if a person had only five years experience of commerce and none of electronics, computer or computer information system, he could not be considered to be eligible for the post of EDP Manager.
Now, what is the experience of the petitioner ?
He claims to have passed a Post B.Sc.
Diploma in Computer Science from the Kurukshetra University in the year 1986.
Thereafter, he passed the MBA examination in the year 1989.
A reference to Annexure P-26 produced by the petitioner with his replication shows that he had completed the required graduate study in Computer Information System and in recognition of the fulfilment of the requirements for that, the certificate was given on September 9, 1989.
It is apparent from the record that the petitioner had never qualified the B.Sc.
Consequently, it is not clear as to what kind of diploma in Computer Science, the petitioner had passed.
Even if it assumed that he had acquired some familiarity with the working of the computers, this did not prima facie qualify to be counted towards five years experience.
Thereafter the petitioner was actually appointed as Manager, EDP on October 13, 1989.
The petitioner has claimed the following experience :-  1) July 83 to May 1985 as Auditor  2) October 86 to August 1987 as Computer Instructor  3) March 89 to June 1989 as Programmer Analyst  4) August 89 onwards as System Analyst at Haryana State Electronics Development Corporation.
So far as the experience as Auditor is concerned, it has no relevance to the required experience of five years.
Even though a Diploma in Computer is not the required qualification, taking a liberal view, even if it is assumed that the petitioner had worked as a Computer Instructor at DAV College, Chandigarh from October 1986 to September, 1987, it would give him an experience at about 10 months.
While studying at Hampshire he seems to have worked for 3 months during the year 1989.
That gives him another experience of 3 months.
From August 1989 onwards he may have worked for two months at Heathrow.
This makes a total experience of 15 months.
Consequently, even if the petitioner's experience prior to his acquiring the degree of MBA is taken into consideration, he had at best a total experience of 15 months.
20.
Mr. Patwalia however contends that the petitioner's experience of nearly 22 months as an Auditor should also be taken into consideration.
There appears to be no warrant for such a claim.
It is thus apparent that the petitioner did not have the requisite experience of 5 years on the date on which he applied for the post or was considered in the Bank or was appointed to the post.
He was thus ineligible to be considered.
His appointment was thus illegal.
Even at the time of the termination of his services, the petitioner had not completed the requisite experience of 5 years.
Consequently, it is apparent that the petitioner's appointment continued to be illegal till the order terminating his services was passed.
21.
Counsel for the petitioner, however, contends that the petitioner had disclosed full facts, still the Sub-Committee selected him.
The Registrar and the Govt. approved the appointment and only then the petitioner was appointed.
He contends that once it had happened, his services could not be terminated on the ground that he did not fulfil the qualifications.
On the other hand, Mr. Sibal points out that the petitioner was appointed only because his father was the Managing Director of the Bank.
Otherwise, he was not qualified for the post.
In such a situation the Bank was not barred by any principles of law or equity from terminating his services.
22.
The facts as noticed above clearly show that the petitioner did not have the requisite experience at the time of appointment.
Even Mr. Patwalia could not dispute the factual position.
He had to concede that the petitioner was not qualified in so far as the qualification or experience is concerned.
23.
That being so, the action of the Bank in appointing the petitioner cannot be treated as legal under any circumstances whatsoever.
The fact that his father was the Managing Director assumes importance.
Even if it is ignored, the appointment was per se wrong and illegal.
The petitioner was ineligible.
Mr. Sibal was at pains to point out that while the petitioner was patently ineligible, the other candidate who had been interviewed along with the petitioner was much better qualified.
Still he was by-passed on the pretext of pay.
Be that as it may.
The petitioner's appointment was not legal.
24.
Mr. Patwalia, however, points out that once the competent authority had taken a decision, the successor-in-office cannot review that decision.
He relies on the judgments of this Court in The General Manager, Northern Railway, Baroda House, New Delhi and another v. Madan Lal Chopra and others, 1971(1) SLR 629 and Ranjit Singh Sidhu v. State of Punjab, 1990(2) SLR 314.
In both these cases, the situation was vitally different.
So far as Madan Lal Chopra's case is concerned, it relates to the grant of certain monetary benefits.
In that context, it was observed that once the competent authority had passed an order which had been acted upon, the benefit could not withdrawn without compliance with the principles of natural justice.
Similarly, even in latter case, Agnihotri, J had referred to the decision of the Privy Council in RT Rangachari v. Secretary of State, AIR 1937 Privy Council 27.
The action was primarily set aside on the ground that it was in violation of the principles of natural justice.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
In any event, one cannot lose sight of the fact that a Full Bench of this Court in Sunder Lal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1970 SLR 59 has clearly held that an erroneous action has not to be perpetuated.
It can be corrected at any time.
The bank had made a mistake in appointing the petitioner.
It was entitled to rectify the mistake.
Even otherwise I am of the view that the power to make an appointment includes the power to review an appointment.
This principle has been recognised by the Apex Court in Dr. Bool Chand v. Chancellor, Kurukshetra University, AIR 1968 SC 292.
25.
It is thus held that the petitioner did not fulfil the qualification for appointment to the post of Manager EDP.
His appointment was illegal.
It was terminated after following the principles of natural justice.
The action is neither lacking in jurisdiction nor in propriety.
26.
It was then contended that the action is barred by the principle of estoppel.
It is admitted that the qualifications for the post of Manager EDP are laid down in the Common Cadre Rules framed by the Bank in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
It is equally settled that these rules are statutory and that there can be no estoppel against law.
This principle was laid down as far back as 1955 in Thakur Amar Singh and another v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1955 SC 504.
It has been reiterated more than once.
I am unable to hold that the action is barred by the principle of equitable estoppel.
27.
Nor is there anything in the action of the respondents to suggest that the action was in any way arbitrary or unfair.
The petitioner had earned an undeserved benefit.
He was granted an appointment to which he was not entitled.
Some qualified person lost a chance to get the job.
A wrong has been undone.
It would have been arbitrary and improper if it had not been undone.
28.
No other point was urged.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed with costs.
Costs are quantified at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition dismissed.