Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By the present judgment, I propose to dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3294 of 1980, 4574 of 1982 and 4048 of 1983 and 5310 of 1984.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 4574 of 1982.
2.
The petitioner, who had joined as Lines Man in the Electricity Department of the Municipal Committee, Amritsar (presently the Municipal Corporation Amritsar-respondent No. 1) in the year 1949 was promoted as an Assistant Engineer Class-I in October, 1980, in view of the fact that he was a Diploma Holder in Electrical Engineering, whereas respondent No. 2 who is a degree holder was promoted as such on the same date.
It has been averred that Assistant Executive Engineers whether Diploma or Degree holders constituted one cadre having a joint seniority performing the same functions and drawing the indentical emoluments.
As per the requirement of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter called the 'Regulation') which are alleged to have been adopted by the Corporation, Assistant Executive Engineers were entitled to be promoted as Executive Engineers provided they fulfilled the qualifications given in Regulation 9(8)(b).
On the availability of a post of Executive Engineer (Electrical), the petitioner claimed promotion thereto.
The matter was considered by the respondent-Corporation and in its resolution dated 4th August, 1982, appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition, it was resolved that No. 2 be promoted as such as there was no post available for the quota of diploma holders.
The challenge has been made to the order Annexure P-1 on the ground that as the degree and diploma holders constituted one cadre having a common seniority and performing the same functions, the fixation of quota for promotion from amongst the decree and diploma holder was not warranted and, as such, Regulation 9(8)(b) was liable to be struck down.
3.
The stand of the respondent is that the petitioner was, infact, not even a diploma holder and as such his initial appointment as an Assistant Engineer was in fact not warranted.
It has also been denied that the Regulations had been adopted by the Corporation and it has been averred that the Corporation being an independent institution could frame and adopt its own policy in the appointment and promotion of its officers.
The stand of the respondent in the written statement has been reiterated by their counsel at the time of arguments.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find merit in these petitions.
Regulation 9(8)(b) which requires to be interpreted is reproduced below :  "Out of the officers who have been promoted as Assistant Executive Engineers, only diploma Assistant Executive Engineers (Electrical and Mechanical) shall be eligible for consideration for further promotion as Executive Engineers (Electrical) to the extent of 10 per cent of the total posts in the category excluding the posts with B.M.B./B.C.B.
and deputation post or posts were P.S.E.B.
cannot directly post its officers i.e. Hydel Design Directorate, Chandigarh on completion of total 20 years service out of which 12 years service must have been rendered as Assistant Engineer and Assistant Executive Engineer provided further that out of the above 12 years service a minimum of 4 years service be as Assistant Engineer and a further minimum of six years as Assistant Executive Engineer.
On promotion as Executive Engineers, they shall be posed on operation and construction side."
5.
The matter is covered in favour of the petitioner by a judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ravinder Kumar Sharma and others, 1986(3) SLR 778 in which it has been held that the fixation of quota for promotion between diploma and non-diploma holders for promotion to the post of Line Superintendent was held to be unsustainable.
It is also pertinent to note that a Division and Single Bench of this Court has also held to the same effect in Sukhdev Raj Sharma and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1980(3) SLR 75 and Vinod Kumar Virmani and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1981(2) SLR 346, respectively.
In view of what has been observed in the aforesaid judgments, I am of the view that the quota fixed for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer from the diploma and degree holders is not sustainable and an Assistant Executive Engineer is entitled to promotion keeping in view his seniority and other relevant considerations.
6.
The argument of the respondent-Corporation that in fact the petitioner was not even qualified to be appointed as Assistant Engineer at the very initial stage as he was not even a diploma holder, is also to be rejected for the simple reason that it has been the case of the respondent-Corporation throughout that the petitioner was, in fact, a diploma holder and was entitled to be promoted against the 10 per cent quota reserved for that category.
This would be clear from a reading of Annexure P-1, referred to above, as also a copy of the resolution dated 21st August, 1984, filed with CM No. 3686 of 1986 in the present writ petition.
From a reading of these two documents, it is clear that the petitioner was, in fact, a diploma holder in the relevant trade and also that the Regulations had been specifically adopted by the respondent-Corporation.
It would be seen that the respondent-Corporation has denied promotion to the petitioner on the solitary ground that as only 10 per cent of the posts were to be offered to non-degree holders which in the context of Regulation 9(8)(b) would mean Assistant Executive Engineers holding a diploma no post for this category was available.
It is also to be noted that the petition was in fact promoted as an Executive Engineer in 1984 after the quota rule had been struck down by this Court.
7.
The present writ petitions are, therefore, partly allowed inasmuch as that the petitioner is said to have retired from service, who would be entitled to his emoluments and other benefits with effect from the date respondent No. 2 had been promoted as an Executive Engineer.
The amounts determined will be paid to the petitioner with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date they fell due to the date of payment within three months of copy of this judgment being supplied to them.
It is, however, made clear that the promotion of the private respondents which took place years ago, will not, in any manner, be disturbed, No costs.
Petition Partly allowed.