NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner who is working as Dean of Colleges, Kurukshetra University has filed this petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution challenging the non-renewal of his term for another three years.
2.
By an advertisement issued in early 1987, the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra (for short the University) invited applications for the post of Dean of Colleges which was to be filled up on tenure basis for three years extendable for another term of three years but not beyond the age of 65 years.
Petitioner alongwith some other candidates applied for the post.
A Selection Committee was constituted which interviewed the applicants including the petitioner.
The Committee as per its report dated July 14, 1988 recommended the petitioner alongwith another for this post.
The petitioner was placed at serial No. 1.
The Executive Council of the University which is the competent authority to appoint Dean of Colleges, in its meeting held on July 27, 1988 considered the recommendations of the Selection Committee and approved the same.
Thereafter, the Registrar of the University issued to the petitioner a letter of appointment dated July 20, 1988.
Clauses 2 and 3 of this letter which are relevant read as under :  "2.
On the recommendation of the Selection Committee, and with the approval of the Executive Council you have been appointed to the post of Dean of Colleges in this University in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2500 (UGC old).
Your pay will be protected as per University rules.
3.
The appointment is on tenure basis for three years in the first instance extendable for another term of three years but not beyond the age of 65 years.
The appointment can be terminated after giving one month's notice from either side."
3.
The petitioner joined his new post on August 1, 1988.
Since the appointment of the petitioner was on tenure basis, the condition of notice period as laid down in Clause 3 of the appointment letter was deleted.
It may be mentioned that before joining the present assignment, the petitioner was working as Professor of Sanskrit in the Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla and had also been head of the Sanskrit department of that University.
His date of birth is June 15, 1929 and was about to superannuate when he was appointed by the University in July 1988.
The term of three years for which the petitioner was initially appointed was to expire on July 31, 1991 and his date of birth being June 15, 1929, he was to attain the age of the 65 years on June 15, 1994.
For this reason the University did not give him another term of three years as it would have gone beyond the age of 65 years.
The matter regarding grant of extension in the term of appointment of the petitioner was considered by the Executive Council of the University in its meeting held on July 22, 1991 and after considering the agenda note which contained the details of his appointment, the Council took the following decision :-  "THE VICE CHANCELLOR STATED AT THE OUTSET THAT THE WORK AND CONDUCT OF DR. BALDEO SINGH HAS BEEN GOOD.
HOWEVER, RESOLVED THAT EXTENSION IN THE TERM OF APPOINTMENT OF DR. BALDEO SINGH AS DEAN OF COLLEGES, KURUKSHETRA UNIVERSITY KURUKSHETRA BE NOT GRANTED."
4.
The Registrar of the University then, as per his letter dated July 25, 1991 informed the petitioner that since the latter had been appointed Dean of Colleges on tenure basis for three years which term was expiring on July 31, 1991, he would be relieved of his duties on the said date.
This action of the University in not extending the term of appointment of the petitioner as Dean of Colleges has been impugned in the present writ petition.
5.
Mr. Hawa Singh Hooda, Sr. Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner strenuously contended that since the advertisement as also the letter of appointment issued to the petitioner stated that even though the term of appointment was for three years to begin in with, it was extendable and the implication, therefore, is that it had to be extended for another period of three years but not beyond the age of 65 years.
The argument thus, is that by making it explicit that the term was extendable, the University held out a promise to the petitioner that after expiry of his term of three years he would be given another term of three years till he attained the age of 65 years.
I am unable to accept this contention despite the vehemence with which it was advanced.
As is clear from the letter of appointment the petitioner was appointed on tenure basis for a period of three years in the first instance.
It is true that the letter of appointment did mention that the term after its expiry could be extended by another term but this, in my opinion gave a discretion to the competent authority to extend the same or not.
It is inconceivable that merely because the term was extendable, the University was obliged to extend the same, In this view of the matter it cannot be said that the petitioner acquired any indefeasible right to claim an extension in the term of his appointment nor was there a legal duty cast on the University to extend the same.
The matter was one of discretion with the competent authority and this Court will not issue a mandamus to control the exercise of discretion.
6.
Strong reliance was placed on behalf of the petitioner on a Full Bench decision of this Court in Hardwari Lal v. GD Tapase, AIR 1982 Punjab and Haryana 439.
I have carefully gone through this judgment and find that it is of no help at all to the petitioner.
In this case the Chancellor of Maharshi Dayandand University had given an assurance to the Vice-Chancellor while appointing him as such that his term would be renewed and the learned Judges constituting the Full Bench held that the Chancellor was bound by that assurance.
In the instant case, no question of any assurance arises and rather, on the other hand, the matter of grant of extension was left within the discretion of the University.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the petition which stands dismissed.
The petitioner has benefited from the interim order issued by this Court and is continuing in service till date despite the University not having granted him any extension.
In the normal course I would have burdened him with costs but in the peculiar circumstances of this case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.