Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioners herein were appointed on different posts in the Ladwa Cooperative Marketing-cum-Proceessing Society Ltd, Ladwa (hereinafter referred to as 'the Society').
By a resolution dated November 10, 1986, the Society found that it had no work and a salary of approximately Rs. 35,000/- was being paid to various employees.
Accordingly it decided to abolish five posts and terminate the services of the incumbents thereof.
Initially, there was a note of dissent recorded by the representative of the Government.
However, in accordance with the provisions of Section 29(3) of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984, the Government affirmed the resolution of the Society vide its order dated 29121987.
Aggrieved by the resolution passed by the Society and its affirmation by the Government the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has raised a two-fold contention.
He submits that the petitioners have a right to be heard by the Society before it could resolve to abolish certain posts.
This right of hearing is sought to be claimed, even at the consideration of the matter by the Government.
It is further submitted that after the filing of this writ petition, the Society had in fact appointed one Shri Sandeep Kumar, whose father was working as an Assistant Manager.
It was on the death of Shri Hari Krishan that his son Sh. Sandeep Kumar was offered the appointment as a Salesman.
On this premises, it is contended that the petitioners had a better right than Shri Sandeep Kumar to be appointed.
My attention has also been drawn to an interim order passed by GC Mittal, J (as His Lordship then was) on January 9, 1989 in CM No. 14603 of 1988.
By this order, it was held that the petitioners had a better right than Shri Sandeep Kumar, the son of a deceased employee, to be appointed to the post of Salesman.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
3.
The employer has a right to determine the number of posts that it requires.
If on consideration of various relevant factors, like finances, quantum of work and efficiency in the office, the employer finds that certain posts are surplus and deserve to be abolished, its action cannot be normally interfered with by this Court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
It is only when the order is found to be arbitrary and passed on wholly extraneous considerations, that the Court can interfere.
Nothing of the sort has been pointed out in the present case.
Learned counsel, however, contends that the petitioners have a right to be heard.
I do not find any principle of law on which it may be held that the employer has to hear the employees before it can decide about the number of posts or persons that it requires.
It is the exclusive power of the employer and the employees have no right of hearing in the matter.
Accordingly the contention raised by the learned counsel is rejected.
4.
It is no doubt correct that on the death of Mr. Hari Krishan, his son Sh. Sandeep Kumar has been appointed as a Salesman.
However, the appointment of Sh. Sandeep Kumar has not be challenged in this petition.
He is not even a party to this petition.
His appointment was made in pursuance to the instructions of the Government by the Society.
Neither those instructions have been challenged nor the order of appointment has been impugned in this petition.
If the Society has proceeded to make an appointment in pursuance to the instructions of the Government and no provision of any rule has been violated, I find no infirmity in the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioners.
In any event, it appears that the son of a deceased employee is placed in an entirely different situation than the petitioners.
The petitioners cannot claim parity of treatment with him.
There is, thus, no question of the violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in the present situation.
5.
So far as the interim order passed by GC Mittal, J is concerned, it may be mentioned that it was passed in the absence of Shri Sandeep Kumar.
In any event, LPA No. 70 of 1989 was filed against it by the Society.
It was disposed of vide order dated October 31, 1990, which reads as under :-  "This Letters Patent Appeal is directed against the order of the learned Single Judge dated 9th January, 1989, passed in Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 14603 of 1988 filed in Civil Writ Petition No. 212 of 1988."
6.
By virtue of the impugned order it was directed that the senior-most petitioner would be offered the post of salesman which is now being occupied by Sandeep Kumar and Sandeep Kumar would be employed only after all the petitioners are given employment.
It is, therefore, evident that it was Sandeep Kumar who could feel aggrieved against the said order.
He was neither a party to the writ petition nor is the party to the letters patent appeal which has been filed on behalf of the Ladwa Cooperative Marketing-cum-Processing Society Ltd, Ladwa.
7.
Apart from that, in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in Faqir Chand & others v. The Financial Commissioner, Punjab & ors, 1978 P.L.R.
357, no letters patent appeal against such an order is maintainable passed in Civil Miscellaneous application No. 14603 of 1988 in writ jurisdiction.
Consequently, the appeal fails and is dismissed as not maintainable.
8.
However, it would be open to Sandeep Kumar, who was not a party to the writ petition, to seek his remedy in accordance with law if he feels aggrieved against the impugned order dated 9th January, 1989.
9.
In any event, this was an interim order passed by the learned Single Judge.
After having heard the case, I find no ground for interference in the action of the respondents.
10.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition and it is dismissed.
It is, however, made clear that if one or the other vacancy in the cadre of posts in which the petitioners were working arises, the Society shall first accommodate the petitioner(s) in order of seniority and then fill up the remaining posts by any other method.
This would apply even to a vacancy of a seasonal nature.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.