HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - It is the case of the petitioner that the services of respondent No. 1, who was employed as a part-time Chowkidar on a fixed salary of Rs. 25/- per month which was in September, 1969 enhanced to Rs. 35/- per month, were terminated on 111979 because the post that he was holding was abolished.
The respondent made an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, claiming an increase in salary from Rs. 35/- to Rs. 250/- per month and payment of the difference of pay for the last seven years.
The Labour Court, after recording evidence, made an order on 18th April, 1980, computing the benefits at Rs. 100/- per month.
The case of the petitioner is that even assuming that the grant of Rs. 100/- per month was in order yet an amount of Rs. 35/- per month which the workman respondent was already drawing, was to be deducted from that amount.
Although there is some merit in the argument made by the counsel for the petitioner, I find that in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case it would be highly inequitable to allow the petition as admittedly with effect from 111979 respondent No. 1 is not in the employment of the petitioner.
Moreover, on the filing of the present petition an interim direction was made on 19th December, 1980, in which it was directed that the amount awarded to respondent No. 1 should be deposited with the Labour Court and could be drawn by him on furnishing adequate security to the satisfaction of the Labour Court and in case, the deposit was not made within six weeks from that date, the respondent would be entitled to take out execution proceedings and, in that event, the condition of his furnishing security would not operate.
Be that as it may, the amount due to the workman-respondent No. 1 must have been deposited either voluntarily by the petitioner or recovered through execution proceedings taken out by the workman.
In this view of the matter and particularly keeping in view the fact that respondent No. 1 is no longer in the employment of the petitioner, it would be most unjust to recover any amount after so many years.
For the reasons recorded above, the present writ petition is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.