Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was employed as a Laboratory Assistant with respondent No. 1 with effect from 21.9.1976 on daily wages and he continued to work as such till 6.8.1977 when his services were terminated.
The petitioner raised an Industrial Dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication and the said Court vide its award Annexure P-3 while declining the reference held :-  "In my opinion daily wager whether he is working on post of temporary or permanent nature can be terminated at any time without going through any formalities.
The termination of the workman is therefore justified and in order."
2.
The petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging the aforesaid award of the Labour Court on the ground that he had the requisite continuous service as required by Section 25(B)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, (hereinafter called the Act) as he had put in regular 240 days of service.
The averments of the petitioner to the above effect have not been denied by the respondents but it has been stated by way of justification that as the petitioner had been appointed on a stop-gap basis till a regular employee from the Headquarters was made available, the order terminating his services was in order.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, I am of the view that the petition must succeed.
It is to be noted that the Act makes no distinction between those employed on a regular wages and those employed on daily wages.
As already indicated the fact that the petitioner had worked for 240 days, has not been denied.
The termination of the service of the petitioner was, therefore, in the nature of retrenchment and this could be done only by following the procedure and complying with the conditions given in Section 25(F) of the Act.
This had admittedly not been done.
As a matter of fact, when the matter was put before the Lok Adalat on 2771991, the respondent-Management had offered to reinstate the petitioner and put him on regular employment but without back wages but this consideration was not acceptable to the petitioner.
I am also of the view that the petitioner has been wrongly thrown out of his employment which entities him to reinstatement with all attendant benefits.
4.
For the reasons recorded above, the petition is allowed and the impugned order of the Labour Court annexure P-3 is quashed.
A direction is issued to the respondents that the petitioner will be reinstated in service forthwith and will be entitled to recover all the back wages and other benefits that would have accrued to him had he continued in service.
These benefits would be made available to him within a period of three months from today.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.