Ashok Bhan, J - Shortly stated the facts are as under :-  Petitioner was enrolled as a Gunner on 14.10.1972 in the regiment of Artillery of the Indian Army.
Petitioner took up the trade of Technical Assistant.
He earned his promotions in the service and ultimately he was promoted as a Junior Commissioned Officer on 141985.
Thereafter, he was promoted as Naib Subedar (General Duty) and not as Technical Assistant i.e. the trade in which he had specialised.
2.
Petitioner was not given promotion to the next rank of Subedar and was in fact superseded on 141988 for the first time.
Petitioner filed representation Annexure P/3 against the said supersession to his Commanding Officer.
Petitioner was again superseded on 141989 and three persons junior to the petitioner were promoted as Subedar while denying the same to the petitioner.
Petitioner filed a statutory complaint under Section 26 of the Act (copy Annexure P/4).
The statutory complaint was dismissed vide order Annexure P/5 seemingly by one line order "as it lacks substance".
Petitioner has come up in writ petition challenging his supersession primarily on two grounds, that is :-  (i) that the supersession is arbitrary; and  (ii) that the statutory complaint filed by him has been disposed of by passing a non-speaking order which does not indicate the reason for rejecting the statutory complaint.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner at length.
Question No. 1 raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is being left unanswered at this stage and the writ petition is being disposed of on question No. 2 only.
4.
Statutory complaint is in the nature of an appeal and, therefore, should be disposed of by passing a speaking order.
It has been held by a Single Bench of this Court in Major SS Balaggan Central Ordinance Depot, Delhi Cantt v. Union of India and others, 1991(1) SCT 466 : 1991(1) SLR 743, as under :-  "The order does not indicate the reasons for rejecting the statutory complaint.
The quasi-judicial authorities dealing with the statutory complainants, which has got all trappings of appeal, to dispose of the same by passing a speaking order.
The order must contain reasons for the decision arrived at.
The order should not be cryptic.
In the instant case, the order does not conform to the requirement that a quasi judicial authority must indicate the reasons for rejecting the statutory complaint."
Somewhat similar view was taken by this Court in another unreported judgment in Naib Subedar Karam Singh Padda v. Union of India and others, CWP 11563 of 1988, decided on 7th July, 1990 wherein it was observed as under :-  "The petitioner submitted a statutory complaint making a grievance but the authorities did not appreciate the legal position and did not grant redress.
The statutory complaint was dismissed vide order Annexure P-8 summarily by one line order "as it lacks substance."
In my opinion, in order to administer justice to the Army Officer, it would be just and fair to disclose reasons why a statutory complaint is being dismissed.
If reasons are disclosed that would give satisfaction to the officer.
If the reasons are given, it will also facilitate the Court to review the reasons which permitted the authorities to pass an order declining statutory complaint."
I am in respectfully agreement with the view taken in both the above cases.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents argued that Annexure P/5 is only a communication informing the petitioner that his complaint has been rejected but otherwise there may be reasons recorded on the file.
No averment has been made in the written statement stating therein that Annexure P/5 is only a communication informing the petitioner that his appeal has been rejected but, otherwise reasons for rejecting the statutory complaint do exist on the file on the record.
In the absence of such averment in the written statement, the statement made by the learned counsel for the respondent, cannot be accepted as it lacks in factual foundation.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is accepted, the impugned order dated 18.12.1989 Annexure P/5 passed by Union of India rejecting the statutory complaint of the petitioner is quashed since it does not contain reasons.
The respondents are directed to dispose of the statutory complaint of the petitioner in accordance with law as indicated above within a period of six month from the communication of this order.
If the petitioner's statutory complaint is accepted then his case for reconsideration for promotion to the post of Subedar, shall be considered by the authorities in accordance with the statutory rules.
No costs.
Petition allowed.