Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioners, 16 in number, who are employed as teachers and peons in the Government Middle School, Behbal Kalan and Government Middle School, Burj Harika, District Faridkot, have jointly filed this writ petition, seeking direction restraining the respondents from recovering House Rent Allowance.
They have further sought a direction to restore the benefit of House Rent Allowance as was being given earlier.
2.
The case of the petitioners is that the villages Behbal Kalan and Burj Harika, where they are working, are situated within 8 K.Ms from the qualifying limit of Municipal Committee, Kotkapura.
As such, they are entitled to claim House Rent Allowance.
In support of their claim, they have placed on record certificates to this effect issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Faridkot, which are Annexure P-1 and P-2 to the writ petition.
3.
At the outset of hearing, Mrs. Charu Tuli, the learned State Counsel contends that the matter is now squarely covered by this Court's decision rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 8534 of 1988 Nand Lal v. State of Punjab, 1990(1) Recent Service Judgments 131.
As such the present writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
4.
I have perused the aforesaid decision and I find that the matter is squarely covered by the judgment wherein it was held that earlier to Government decisions dated 3081988, copies Annexures P-2 and P-3, which came into effect from 1st September, 1988, the Govt. employees were drawing House Rent Allowance at certain rates payable to employees residing within 8 K.Ms.
of the cities/towns.
In view of the policy decision contained in Annexure P- 2, the House Rent Allowance payable earlier was discontinued and a new policy decision was taken that it would be payable only to those employees living in cities and towns and at the rates specified therein according to the grade of cities.
To others, who are living beyond the cities and towns, rural area allowance was made payable vide Policy decision contained in Annexure P-3.
As a result of Annexure P-2, to employees, who are living within 8 KMs/5 Miles of periphery of cities, the House Rent Allowance was discontinued and instead they were to be paid new rural area allowance which was at a lower rate.
Further, it was held that the grant of House Rent Allowance is a concession, which can be withdrawn by the State Government.
The State Government was entitled to recover the amount which was paid to them in pursuance of the stay order granted by this Court.
5.
Since the matter is squarely covered by this Court's decision referred to above, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.