GR Majithia, J - The unsuccessful plaintiff/appellant has come up in Regular Second Appeal against the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court affirming on appeal those of the trial Judge whereby his suit for declaration was dismissed.
2.
The principal question raised in the suit is whether there were two separate and distinct cadres of civil engineers, namely, (i) General Cadre of Civil Engineers; and (ii) Hydel Cadre of Design Engineers in the Punjab State Electricity Board (for short, the Board).
The other points are only incidental to the principal question.
Reference to relevant facts is necessary to appreciate the points raised.
3.
The plaintiff joined the Board as Assistant Engineer Class II (Civil) in August, 1959.
He was eligible for promotion as Assistant Engineer Class I (Civil) in Junior scale on the principle of seniority-cum-merit under the rules of the Board governing his appointment and conditions of service.
He was due for such promotion but it was deferred because of the enquiry pending against him.
In the meantime, the Board took a decision for recruiting Assistant Engineers Class I (Junior) (Civil) in the Hydel Design Directorate.
Pursuant thereto, an advertisement appeared in 'The Tribune' dated October 1, 1961 inviting applications for five posts in the said category.
The plaintiff and respondent/defendant Nos. 1 and 2 applied for the said posts and after interview were selected for the same.
In the list of selected candidates prepared in order of merit, the plaintiff appeared at Sr. No. 10 whereas defendant No. 1 was at the top and defendant No. 2 was placed at Sr. No. 4 of the list.
Because of the higher merits, defendant Nos. 1 and 2 joined as Assistant Engineers Class I (Junior) (Civil) prior to the plaintiff.
They were also confirmed in that rank earlier to the plaintiff and likewise they advanced in their career on the next promotional post in that cadre.
The following chart gives a clear picture of the relevant dates on which the three officers earned their appointments, confirmations and promotions in the cadre :  S. No. Name of officer As Asstt.
Engineer (Jr.)(C) Date of Confirmation as Asstt.
Engineer I Date of Promotion as Xen Date of Confirmation as Xen 1.
Shri C.S. Grover 11.4.62 1469 30.11.65 9.9.65 2.
Shri A.L.
Bharana 6.6.62 1469 30.11.65 9.9.69 3.
Shri KC Verma 1962 1165 8/9 - (As AEII Dec.1965) 4.
The appointments and other conditions of service of the officers belonging to the service of Engineers (Civil) of the Board are regulated by the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Civil) Regulations, 1965 (for short the Regulations).
Rule 15 of the Regulations provides that prior to confirmation, the seniority inter se of the members of the service in a particular class of posts shall be determined by the days of their continuous appointments in that class and after confirmation, their respective dates of confirmation will determine the same.
Rule 11 of the Regulations provides that appointment from one grade to the next higher grade shall be by promotion and the promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit provided that the minimum service under a particular rank as specified therein is met.
Promotion even upto the highest rank of Chief Engineer is also made by the said criterion of seniority-cum-merit and not purely on merit.
5.
Defendant No. 1 was promoted to the rank of Superintendent Engineer (for short SE) with effect from September 6, 1973.
The plaintiff has challenged the said order of promotion of defendant No. 1 in the suit that he brought on that date.
During the pendency of the suit defendant No. 2 was also promoted as SE with effect from June 9, 1975.
The plaintiff amended his plaint to challenge the legality of order of promotion of defendant No. 2.
The plaintiff also subsequently earned his promotion to that rank.
Defendant No. 2 was promoted to the rank of Chief Engineer during the pendency of the first appeal.
An amendment was sought to challenge that order of promotion but was not allowed.
Obviously, the last promotion of defendant No. 2 involves supersession of defendant No. 1.
6.
In this background, the plaintiff brought the suit challenging the orders of the Board whereby defendant Nos. 1 and 2 were confirmed as Assistant Engineers Class I and also the orders of their promotion as Executive Engineers and their confirmation in the rank and their further promotions as S.Es., in supersession of his claim for promotion to the said post.
Basic plea raised by the plaintiff to assail the promotion of defendant Nos. 1 and 2 as S.Es., with effect from September 6, 1973 and June 9, 1975 respectively and the earlier orders of their confirmation and promotion in the lower rank is that both these officers were selected and appointed to the Hydel Cadre of Design Engineers which is distinct and separate from the general cadre of Civil Engineers to which the plaintiff belongs and as such he is the senior-most officer in the general cadre and consequently the said two officers could not have been promoted even as Xen much less S.Es.
in the general cadre and that their appointments and promotions as such involve his supersession which is illegal.
7.
Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 filed joint written statement controverting the allegations made by the plaintiff and asserted that the impugned orders are unexceptional.
It was averred that there was only one cadre of Civil Engineers in the Board and there is no distinct and separate cadre for Design Engineers and since they were senior to the plaintiff from the very start of their career as Assistant Engineer Class I, they had been rightly promoted to the higher rank earlier to him and, therefore, their confirmation in the ranks held by them substantively is not open to objection.
8.
The Board in its separate written statement controverted the allegations.
An objection was also taken by the defendants that the suit was beyond limitation for challenging the impugned orders confirming defendant Nos. 1 and 2 respectively in the ranks of Assistant Engineers and Executive Engineers.
9.
The Courts below after examining the evidence on record gave a firm finding of fact that no separate cadre for Hydel Design Engineers of the Board was constituted.
The first Appellate Court reversed the finding of the trial judge whereby it was held that the suit challenging the impugned orders of confirmation of defendant Nos. 1 and 2 as AE and Xen was beyond limitation.
The plaintiff who appeared in person reiterated the same pleas which were urged before the First Appellate Court and submitted that there exists a separate cadre for the Hydel Design Directorate.
10.
The submission is devoid of merits.
The Board is a statutory body constituted under Electricity Supply Act, 1948.
It is required to discharge its duties and functions in accordance with the provisions of that Act and the rules framed thereunder.
The Board is competent to make rules and regulations for recruitment and other conditions of service of its employees.
The final authority for the constitution of a Cadre of a service or formation of a distinct organisation in a cadre so constituted is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Board, though it may be guided by the policy instructions of the State Government issued from time to time in this behalf.
The Board did not take any decision for constitution of a separate cadre for Design Engineers.
The plaintiff drew my attention to some correspondence between the State Government and the Board and to the agenda of the meeting of the Committee given the name of Hydel Projects Committee.
In the Committee's meeting dated May 25, 1961, it was decided that the Administrative Member of the Board be requested to draw up a cadre for the New Design Cell.
No follow up action was taken.
Apart from this decision of the Committee whereby the Administrative Member was asked to draw up a Cadre for the Design Cell, there is no order of the State Government or of the Board for constituting a separate Cadre for the Design Cell.
The Board did not take any decision to constitute a separate Hydel Cadre of Design Engineers.
The Board may have intended to create a separate Hydel Cadre of Design Engineers but it never materialised.
The Board only maintained one Cadre of Civil Engineers.
The Hydel Design Directorate is manned by the officers of the said cadre and the incumbents are interchangeable.
The contention of the plaintiff that there existed a separate cadre for Hydel Design Directorate and that defendant Nos. 1 and 2 were selected and appointed in that cadre which is distinct and separate from the general cadre of Civil Engineers is bereft of any merit.
There is only one general cadre of Civil Engineers.
The plaintiff and defendant Nos. 1 and 2 were members of the general cadre and they were rightly appointed in that cadre and given promotions to the next higher ranks.
11.
The plaintiff was appointed as an Assistant Engineer Class II (Civil) in August, 1959.
Under the rule, he was eligible for promotion as Assistant Engineer Class I (Civil) in the junior scale on the principle of seniority-cum-merit.
He was not promoted.
The Board issued advertisement for direct recruitment of Assistant Engineers Class I (Junior) (Civil) for the Hydel Design Directorate.
The plaintiff and defendant Nos. 1 and 2 applied for these posts and were selected.
As a result of it, their inter se seniority was determined under the Regulations of the Board.
The plaintiff cannot legitimately say that in fact he was not selected as a result of interview but was promoted as Assistant Engineer Class I (Junior) (Civil).
The First Appellate Court has explained in detail that in the order of his appointment as Assistant Engineer Class I (Junior)(Civil), he was wrongly described as promoted and in the subsequent order, it was clarified that he was selected as a result of interview.
The plaintiff has tried to make much capital because of the mistake made by the Board in his letter of appointment in which it was stated that he was promoted.
The subsequent clarification that he was selected and not promoted is consistent with the correct state of facts.
12.
For the reasons aforesaid, the appeal is devoid of any merit and is accordingly dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.