RS Mongia, J - Applicant Virender Kumar, alongwith 20 others, had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 514 of 1990, primarily claiming two reliefs i.e. (i) that they are entitled to the increments in accordance with the service rendered by them; and (ii) that they were not liable for transfer from one Canteen to another which are known as Golden Lion, Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh Area canteens, and since they were apprehending transfers, the respondents be restrained from transferring them.
The writ petition was admitted.
During the pendency of the writ petition, an order dated 30th October, 1991 was issued by the Director, Canteen Cell of the Golden Lion PH & HP Area Canteen the Headquarters at Simla, by which applicant Virender Kumar was sought to be transferred from Narnaul Canteen to Ghumarwin Canteen of Himachal Pradesh.
The applicant moved the present Misc. application for staying the operation of the order of transfer dated 30th October, 1991, which has been attached as Annexure A-1 to this application.
Notice was issued to the respondents on 13th November,1991 and the order of transfer was stayed by me.
In response to the notice, the respondents have put in their appearance and have also filed reply to the Misc. application.
2.
It has been contended by the learned counsel for the applicant-petitioner that in fact the appointment of the petitioner as sales-man was for the Canteen at Narnaul anti he could not have been transferred to an other Canteen.
He further contended that in fact there is no power with Respondents to transfer an employees of one Canteen to another.
The referred to the Policy decision of the respondents, which was taken on 20th September, 1989, by which it was decided as under :-  "Adjustment of Canteen employees near their homes.
Our endeavour is to adjust our canteen employees nearer to their home so that he could live with his family."
It has further been contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that according to the Standing Orders applicable to the employees of the Canteen at the time when the applicant was appointed, there was no provision to transfer an employee from one Canteen to another.
It has still further been contended that in fact the transfer is on account of mala fide on the part of the respondents, inasmuch as the applicant is the Vice-President of the Canteen Employees Union and it is by way of punishment that the applicant has been transferred from Narunaul to a far off place in Himachal Pradesh.
3.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents drew my attention to the Security bond (Annexure R2/4 with the reply) executed by the applicant wherein it has been specifically agreed upon by the applicant that he can be transferred to any place.
It is mentioned in the Security Bond as under :-  "........ whereas by virtue of such office and other office office or offices to which the employee may hereafter be transferred or appointed ........ Now the conditions of the above written Bond or obligations as such that if the said employee shall all along during the continuity of his service under the employee, whether on the "original post or transferred post, keep and maintain ......" The learned counsel for the respondents also drew my attention to some of the transfer orders the copies of which have been attached, by which various employees have been transferred from one Canteen to another.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner-applicant argued that it is clear from the advertisement Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, that the posts were advertised for a particular Canteen and the appointment letter did not envisage that the employee appointed against a particular post in a particular Canteen could be transferred from one Canteen to another.
5.
For the purpose of the Misc. application, suffice it would be to mention that earlier on one Har Pal Singh was transferred from Rewari to Jhajjar by the same Authority, which has transferred the applicant-petitioner.
He challenged the order of transfer by way of civil suit.
While disposing of the application for temporary injunction, the trial Court held that in view of the Security Bond (which was similar to the one that the applicant has executed), the power of transfer was there.
The trial Court had also relied upon the earlier instances of transfer ordered by the respondents.
Har Pal Singh was unsuccessful in appeal before the Additional District and Sessions Judge, which led him to file a Civil Revision in this Court, being CR No. 1854 of 1990.
The learned Single Judge, while dismissing the revision on 24th August, 1990, observed as under :-  "The plaintiff was working as salesman in the Canteen at Rewari.
He has been transferred from Rewari to Jhajjar.
This order of transfer is being challenged in the suit, inter-alia on the ground that in the order of appointment, the power of transfer was not there.
However, during arguments it is brought to my notice that at the time of appointment surety bond was furnished by the plaintiff whereon, the power of transfer was recognised.
The orders of the Courts below further show that like the petitioner there were others also, who had been transferred from time to time.
Further in the matter of master and servant, no injunction can be granted regarding compulsion of service at a particular place."
That being the position, as far as this Court is concerned, I do not find that any case for staying the transfer ordered on 30th October, 1991 is, made out.
6.
It is not necessary for me to deal with the point in this Misc. application as to whether each Canteen is a single separate unit or employees of all the Canteens run by the respondents form one cadre.
This could be decided in the main writ petition.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, find no merit in this application, which is hereby dismissed.
Application dismissed.