RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner, who is a Lt.
Colonel in the Army impugns two orders passed by the Respondent-Authorities dated 20-10-1987 (Annexure P-3 to the writ petition) as well as order dated 2641991/151991 (Annexure P-11 to the writ petition by the former order, a Severe Displeasure (to be recorded) of General Officer Commanding-in-Chief was conveyed to the petitioner which was by way of punishment.
By the latter order, a sum of Rs. 573750 was ordered to be recovered from the salary of the petitioner on account of alleged loss of 5 blank Railway Warrants Forms.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that in the year 1984, the petitioner was the Officer Commanding of 277 Petroleum Contract Unit Type 'C' Jalandhar Cantt.
It is alleged in the petition that he was working about 9 kms.
away from the location of the Unit where the Indian Oil Pipeline Terminal was situated.
On 29.9.1984 it was detected that 5 blank railway warrants forms were lost.
A Court of Enquiry was ordered by the Headquarters Jalandhar Sub Area to investigate the circumstances under which 5 blank railway warrants forms were lost.
The proceedings of the Court of Enquiry were placed before the GOC-in-Chief who observed that the loss of abovesaid forms had occurred due to negligence on the part of the petitioner in performance of his duties, inasmuch as the petitioner did not ensure safe custody of the said forms in accordance with Para 15 of the Army Order 145/79.
3.
On the directions of the GOC-in-Chief, a show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner asking him to explain as to why administrative action within the powers of the GOC-in-Chief be not taken against the petitioner for the lapse referred to above.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was handicapped in submitting his reply inasmuch as certain documents and even the opinion and findings of the Court of Enquiry were not supplied to him.
After considering the reply of the petitioner, which according to the petitioner was just an interim reply, the abovementioned impugned orders were passed.
The petitioner's counsel raised following points while assailing the impugned orders :  1.
Rules 180 and 184 of the Army Rules had been violated.
2.
The opinion and the findings of the Court of Enquiry was not supplied to the petitioner and even some documents asked for were also not given to him and, therefore, the rules of natural justice were violated.
3.
Before issuing of the show-cause notice, a decision had already been taken to take administrative action against the petitioner and a finding had also been recorded that the petitioner was negligent in performance of his duties without really affording him any opportunity to disprove this finding of being negligent.
4.
Only an interim reply was given and no opportunity was given to submit final reply and without waiting for final reply, punishment was given.
5.
That there is no rule under which punishment as awarded by Annexure P-3 is envisaged.
6.
That there has been no violation of Army Order 145/79 regarding the custody of the railway warrants.
7.
There is no evidence on the record that the railway warrants which had been lost were really used by any person and consequently, the question of recovery of any alleged loss vide order Annexure P-11 did not arise.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the written statement in which the allocation regarding the safe custody of the railway warrants has been admitted.
Paras 2 and 3 of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents reads as under :-  "2.
That the contents of Para No. 2 of the writ petition are admitted.
However, it is submitted that at the time of taking over of the Unit, JC-106357 Nb/ Sub Clk (GD) SP Sharma was holding the charge of all accountable and classified documents including railway warrants and the said JCO continued to do so till 29 Sep 84, when the loss of five blank rail warrants, including their counterfoils was detected.
The Unit was then deployed in OP Blue Star from 4 June, 84 to Oct 85.
3.
That the contents of Para 3 of the writ petition are wrong and denied.
It is submitted that unused Railway Warrants were kept in Wooden Almirah in the main office and the key of the almirah was kept with Nb/Sub Clk (GD) SP Sharma.
On 29 Sep 84, the warrant book, then is use, was handed over by Nb/Sub Clerk (GD) SP Sharma to the dealing Clerk (NK Clerk GD Sharma) to prepare some Railway Warrants.
The NCO Clerk noticed that the serial numbers of the warrants were not in continuation and reported the discrepancy to Nb/Sub Clerk (GD) SP Sharma, on checking, it was detected that five blank warrants bearing serial numbers 684461 to 684499 were missing.
The matter was then reported to the petitioner who in turn informed Stn HQ Jalandhar and HO Jalandhar Sub Area, of the loss.
During the period of cause of action the JCOs were not entitled to hold warrants officially.
The petitioner has delegated this duty to his JCO 4 own risk thereby incurring various liability."
Clause 15 of the Army order 145/79 reads as under :-  "15.
No Railway Warrant/Credit Note Book will be allowed to be taken out of the room of the officer holding charge thereof.
Whenever any form is required to be issued, it will be completed either by the officer himself, or, if that is not practicable by a clerk in officer's own room and in his immediate presence.
The rubber should of the unit/formation issuing the forms should also be affixed on them clearly without any smudging after the forms have been duly prepared, signed and ready for issue.
JCOs in charge checking and packing section in all the seven Stationary Depots are however, allowed to hold custody of the forms, subject to the condition that the Officers Commanding themselves will sign and issue these forms and also be personally responsible for any loss or misuse of the forms while in the custody of the JCOs and that they also assure by periodical inspection etc. that the forms are being properly kept and maintained."
Learned Counsel on the basis of the written statement submitted that in fact the custody of the warrants was with the JCO SP Sharma, who was keeping it under his lock and key.
It has been pointed out that even before the petitioner had taken over charge of the Unit, the warrants were in the possession of the JCO.
At the relevant time the Officer-Incharge of the Unit could get a Station Order issued that such and such JCO or any other officer would be authorised to keep such documents as railway warrants.
No ipso facto without any authorisation the JCOs are empowered to keep the custody of the railway warrants.
On the basis of these facts, the submission proceeding that the question of the petitioner being negligent did not arise inasmuch as the forms were kept in the safe custody of the JCO which is admitted in all hands.
It is also not the case of the respondents that those warrants have been authorisedly used by any person and in fact there is no evidence to that effect either pleaded on behalf of the respondents or shown to me.
4.
Under the above circumstances, I am of the view that the question of the petitioner's being negligent did not arise at all as there was no such violation of any Army Order which would constitute negligence in the performance of his duties.
The warrants were being kept by the JCO even prior to his taking over the charge in the Unit and now under present Law, JCOs are entitled to keep the custody of the railway warrants.
That being the position I am of the considered view that there was no evidence on the record to come to a conclusion that the petitioner was negligent in the performance of his duties and, therefore, any punishment was uncalled for.
For the foregoing reasons, the order of punishment of `Severe Displeasure' dated 20-10-1987 (Annexure P-3) is liable to be quashed.
5.
As has already observed by me there is no evidence on the record and moreover none has been shown to me that the warrants which were lost had ever been used by any person.
That being so, the question of any loss occurring to army authorities did not arise.
Consequently no recovery could be ordered from the petitioner as no loss is proved.
For this reason, order dated 2641991/151991 (Annexure P-11) regarding recovery from the pay of the petitioner is also liable to be quashed.
6.
For the view I have taken in the matter, it is not necessary to deal with other points raised by learned Counsel for the petitioner.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the orders dated 20101987 (Annexure P-3) and 2641991/151991 (Annexure P-11) are hereby quashed.
Recovery of the money, if has already been affected vide Order Annexure P-11, would be refunded to the petitioner.
Needless to mention that by and quashing of the orders Annexure P-3 an Annexure P-11 all consequential benefits would flow to the petitioner.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allosed.