VK Bali, J - The petitioner who was a member of Scheduled Caste and selected on the post of Taxation Inspector challenges by way of present Writ Petition order dated September 5, 1989 Annexure P-3 passed by the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana vide which his services were terminated on the ground that he could not qualify the departmental examination in three years even though the period of two years is provided under the Rules.
Brief facts that have necessitated the petitioner to come to this Court need be noticed first.
2.
On the recommendation of 'the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana' petitioner was appointed and posted as Taxation Inspector on temporary basis in the grade of Rs. 600-1100 plus usual allowances as admissible to Haryana Government employees from time to time.
His appointment was to be regulated by the Haryana Excise and Taxation Inspectorate (State Service Class III) Services Rules, 1969 (hereinafter to be as Rules of 1969).
As per Rule 12 of the Rules of 1969, a person appointed to the service has to remain on probation for a period of two years which may be extended for one year by the appointing authority.
Rule 14 of the Rules aforesaid prescribes that the persons appointed to the service shall pass the departmental examination within two years from the date of their appointment which period may be extended by the appointing authority for another one year.
Rule 14 runs as follows :-  "14(1)(S) No person appointed to the service shall be retained therein unless he has passed the departmental examination within two years of his appointment in accordance with the regulations prescribed in Appendix 'C' to these rules, nor shall such a person be appointed substantively to any post in the service nor shall he draw his next increment as Inspector :  Provided that the appointing authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the period for passing departmental examination by one year :  Provided that if an official passes the departmental examination within the prescribed period, he shall draw all previous increments and arrears of pay withheld on that account.
(2) The Government may, as and when considered necessary, amend Appendix 'E' subject to the condition that such an amendment is notified at least two months prior to the commencement of the next departmental examination."
3.
Regulations for conducting departmental examination are provided in Appendix 'E' to the Rules and as per Regulation (I), the departmental examination is required to be held twice a year in the third week of February and 1st week of August or on other such dates as are notified by the Commissioner, Excise and Taxation.
As per Regulation (II), the names of the officers who intend to sit in the examination together with the subjects in which they shall be examined have to be forwarded to the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana before first of January and 15th of August each year or within one month after the publication of results of the last examination whichever is later.
The names have to be forwarded by the Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner of the Division.
Further, as per Regulations, reference of which has been given above, all Taxation Inspectors are required to pass at least five subjects out of seven prescribed in the Appendix in a total of six chances which are provided to them under Rule 14 read with Regulations contained in Appendix 'A'.
Petitioner applied for permission to take the examination which was to be held in November, 1986.
His name was forwarded and in the examination, the petitioner passed in two subjects namely Law of Crimes and Language of Business.
In the next examination which was held in April, 1987 the petitioner applied for an opportunity to take the examination but as per his case his name was not forwarded to respondent No. 2 and, therefore, he was denied the chance of taking the examination.
The name of petitioner was forwarded for examination held in November, 1987 but in the said examination, the petitioner failed to pass in any other subject.
In April, 1988 the petitioner was again permitted to take the said examination and he passed the subject of Sales Tax Law.
In the next examination of November, 1988 the petitioner could not pass in any other subject.
However, in April 1989 he passed the subject of Allied Taxes.
In the manner aforesaid, the petitioner cleared four subjects in the five chances that were made available to him.
When the petitioner learnt that a letter has been written so as not to retain him in service after September 28, 1989, he filed this petition in this Court.
4.
The main ground on which initially the impugned order of termination of services of petitioner was challenged was that the petitioner was entitled to six chances for passing at least five subjects in the total period of three years from September 26, 1986 and inasmuch as he was denied the six chances, there was no justification for the respondents to terminate his services as also that the provisions of Rule 14 which enabled respondents to terminate the services of Taxation Inspectors who had joined service for being selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board in case he does not pass the five subjects are bad in law inasmuch as the object of Rules and Regulations requiring the passing of the departmental examination is to increase the efficiency of the departmental officers.
Such a rule cannot be utilised for terminating the services of an officer who had been duly recruited to the service after being selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
5.
The respondents filed written statement opposing the claim of the petitioner and pleaded in the written statement that as per provisions contained in Rules of 1980 a member of the service is required to pass the departmental examination in five subjects within two years from the date of his appointment in four chances and not in six chances as sought to be made by the petitioner.
It was further mentioned that the petitioner could not pass in all the departmental papers prescribed under the Rules and, therefore, his services were liable to be terminated on completion of two years but taking a lenient view, he was allowed to pass the departmental examination in next one year and, therefore, the period of passing the departmental examination was extended by the competent authority by one year ie upto the declaration of result of departmental examination held in April, 1989.
It is admitted that the petitioner joined service on September 26, 1986 and applied for permission to take the examination held in November, 1986.
His name was forwarded to take the said examination.
It is stated that the petitioner passed in two subjects.
The name of the petitioner was also recommended to appear in the departmental examination to be held in April, 1987 but he wilfully remained absent and did not appear in the said examination.
In support of the afore-stated averment in the written statement, a supplementary list of the candidates has also been attached with the written statement as Annexure R1.
In the manner aforesaid, it has been pleaded that the petitioner was actually afforded six opportunities to qualify the departmental examination within three years.
6.
When the written statement was filed, the petitioner sought an adjournment for filing the amended petition.
The request was allowed by Motion Bench vide order dated January 11, 1990 but it appears from the records of the case that even though time was allowed to file the return on four/five dates yet no written statement to the amended petition was filed and the matter was admitted on June 4, 1990.
Vide order dated April 9, 1990 the Motion Bench also permitted the petitioner to take the departmental examination subject to the decision of the Writ Petition.
7.
Civil Misc. 140 of 1991 was filed by the petitioner during the pendency of the Writ Petition wherein it was specifically mentioned that the petitioner had cleared the departmental examination in the sixth chance made available to him in June, 1990 in view of the orders of this Court dated April 9, 1990.
A copy of the result (Extract) was also annexed with the aforesaid Civil Miscellaneous.
This application was allowed subject to all just exceptions vide order dated January 10, 1991 but no reply to this application as well was filed by the respondents.
In the amended petition that came on the records of the case, an additional point was also taken in paragraph 9A wherein it was mentioned that the respondents had been granting more than three years time and more than six chances to many Taxation Inspectors including Shri Suresh Kumar, Shri Gulzari Lal, Shri Bishamber Dayal and Shri Randhir Singh Yadav for clearing the departmental examination.
A copy of the letter showing the grant of more than three years time to the aforesaid four Inspectors was also annexed with the petitioner as Annexure P2.
Inasmuch as no written statement to the amended petition was filed, averments made in paragraph 9-A shall be deemed to have been admitted.
8.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner contends that the object of introducing departmental examination for Government servants is only to improve their efficiency and not to terminate their services or to revert them on the ground that they have failed to pass one of the papers especially when the overall performance of the employees is fairly satisfactory.
For his aforecited contention, the learned counsel squarely relies upon a decision of this Court in "HL Salaria v. The State of Punjab and others," 1987(2) S.L.R.
278.
It is no doubt true that the ratio of the judgment upon which reliance has been placed does support the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner but I would prefer to determine the controversy in this case on the basis of discrimination which has been amply proved on the records of this case.
As referred to above, the averments of the petitioner to the effect that four Taxation Inspectors were actually granted time beyond the one prescribed in the Rules to clear the departmental examination has not been denied at all inasmuch as no reply to the amended petition has been filed.
The State cannot discriminate between the persons equally situate.
Assuming that the name of petitioner was forwarded for taking the examination that he alleges was not permitted to him yet on the ground of discrimination alone, the present petition deserves to succeed.
It may be highlighted that the petitioner did appear in examination during the pendency of the present petition and has cleared the only remaining paper which he was required to clear so as to be absorbed in the service permanently.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it will be inequitious to throw him out of job.
9.
For the reasons stated above, this petition succeeds.
The order of termination dated September 5, 1989 Annexure P3 is quashed.
The petitioner would be deemed to be in service ever since the date of his appointment after selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
The respondents would also consider the regularisation of his services in view of the fact that he has now actually appeared in all the papers that he was required to be passed for his confirmation in service.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.