RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who belong to the category of backward class was appointed as Sub Divisional Engineer in the Punjab Service of Engineers, Public Works Department, B & R Branch Class-II service in August, 1972.
He was confirmed as such w.e.f.
6th September, 1974.
He crossed his efficiency bar w.e.f.
1st February, 1982.
2.
Onward promotion on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer is to the post of Executive Engineer, which is a Class-I post in Punjab Service of Engineers (in short PSE Class-I).
Appointment and other conditions of service to PSE Class-I service are governed by the rules known as Punjab Service of Engineers Class I, P.W.D.
(B & R) Rules, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Rule 6 of the Rules lays down the eligibility for promotion from PSE Class-II to PSE Class I.
An officer for promotion of PSE Class-I has to have 8 years of service in PSE-II Class and should pass a departmental examination as provided in Rule 15.
The procedure for appointment by promotion in PSE Class-I is given in Rule 8 of the Rules, which is reproduced below for ready reference  "8.
APPOINTMENT BY PROMOTION  (1) A Committee consisting of the Chairman of the Punjab Service Commission or where the Chairman is unable to attend and other member of the Commission representing it, the Secretary, P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) and the Chief Engineers, Punjab, P.W.D.
Buildings and Road Branch) shall be constituted.
(2).
The Chairman or the member of the Commission as the case may be, shall preside over the meetings of the Committee.
(3) The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year, and consider the cases of all eligible officers for promotion to the senior scale of service, as on the first day of January of that year.
(4) The Committee shall prepare a list of officers suitable for promotion to the senior scale of the service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
(5) The names of the officers included in this list shall be arranged in order of seniority in Class-II Service : Provided that any junior officer, who in the opinion of the Committee is (sic) assigned a place in the list higher than that of officers senior to him.
(6) The list so prepared shall be revised every year.
(7) If in the precess of preparing the list or its revision, it is proposed to supersede any eligible candidate, the Committee shall draw up a list of such officers and may record its reasons for the proposed super-session.
(8).
The list prepared or revised in accordance with sub-rules (4), (5) and (6) shall then be forwarded to the Commission by Government alongwith - (i) the records of all officers included in the list; (ii) records of all officers proposed to be superseded as a result of the recommendations made by the Committee.
(iii) the reasons, if any, recorded by the Committee for the proposed supersession of any officer; (iv) the observations, if any, of the State Government on the recommendation of the Committee.
(9) The Commission shall consider the list prepared by the Committee alongwith other documents received from the State Government and, unless it considers any change necessary approve the list.
(10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from the government, the Commission shall inform the Government of the changes proposed and after taking into account the comments, if any, of the Government, may approve the list finally with such modification, if any, as may, in its opinion, be just and proper.
(11) Appointments to the Service shall be made by Government from this list in the order in which names have been placed by the Commission.
(12) Appointment by promotion may be made to an ex-cadre post, or to any post in the cadre in an officiating capacity from the list prepared under this rule.
(13) It shall not ordinarily be necessary to consult the Commission before appointments under Sub-rule (11) or (12) are made, unless during the period intervening between the inclusion of the name of the officer in the list and the date of the proposed appointment there occurs any deterioration in the work of the officer which, in the opinion of the State Government, is such as to render him unsuitable for appointment to the Service."
3.
The petitioner became eligible under Rule 8 of the rules for consideration for promotion to PSE Class-I w.e.f.
1.1.1981 as he had completed 8 years of service in PSE Class-II.
The eligibility has to be seen on 1st day of January each year, in view of the provisions of Rule 8 quoted above.
It will seen from Rule 8 quoted above that the process of screening is to be conducted on yearly basis.
It has been averred in the petition, and not denied by the respondents, that no process of screening as envisied under Rule 8 was conducted after the year 1979 till 1989.
To cope up with the work the available regular vacancies were being filled up from amongst the eligible PSE Class-II Engineers on ad hoe basis form time to time.
Petitioner was promoted as Executive Engineer (a PSE Class-I) on ad hoc basis against the regular vacancy from Backward Class category w.e.f.
331986.
4.
It is an admitted case on both hands that according to the roster, a vacancy for the Backward Class category for promotion to PSE Class-I was available w.e.f.
111985.
The Screening Committee contemplated by Rule 8 held its meetings on November and December, 1989 for screening eligible candidates for finding their suitability for promotion to PSE Class-I posts.
Petitioner's case was also considered in the category of Backward class candidates w.e.f.
111985 onwards but the Screening Committee did not find the petitioner suitable and passed the following remarks against his name which have been quoted in the written statement on behalf of Punjab Public Service Commission (respondent No. 2) :-  "There is no adverse report of the relevant period.
There are two enquiries one of which pertains to the later period i.e. 1988 and the 2nd enquiry relates to the period 1973 for which charge-sheet was served upon him in 1975.
The enquiry has been completed and it is at the final stage of decision.
It has been tentatively decided to punish him.
Therefore, his name is not approved."
The Punjab Public Service Commission (Respondent No. 2) purporting to exercise powers under Rule 8(9) and 8(10) of the Rules included the name of the petitioner and sent the list of the approved candidates to the government, which has been annexed as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
While many officers mentioned in the list Annexure P-5 were given appointments by the State Government, petitioner was not given appointment and it was mentioned in the appointment order of other officers that the case of the petitioner and some other officers for appointment was under consideration.
Ultimately petitioner was not given appointment on the ground that the Commission had later on concurred with the initial recommendations of the Screening Committee whereby Screening, Committee had held the petitioner not to be suitable for promotion to PSE Class-I.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following points to impugn the action of the Government in not promoting the petitioner to PSE Class-I :-  (1) The select list as framed by the Commission under rule 8(9) and 8(10) of the rules is the final list and the Government is bound to make appointments to PSE Class-I on the basis of that list under Rule 8(11) of the Rules; (2) The Commission is not vested with the powers to review its earlier decision regarding the framing of the select list under rule 8(9) and 8(10) of the Rules; and (3) The petitioner had been held to be unsuitable on the basis of the record which legally could not be taken into consideration.
6.
It seems that points No. 1 and 2 raised by the learned counsel are based on some misconception of Rule 8(10) of the Rules.
Petitioner in his petition has quoted Rule 8(10) in an unamended from which reads as under :  "8(10) If the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from Government, the Commission shall make the changes it proposes and forward the list it considers suitable to the State Government."
Under the amended rule 8(10), which has earlier been reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment where the Commission considers it necessary to make any changes in the list received from the Government, the Commission has to inform the Government of the changes proposed and after taking into account the comments, if any, of the Government, may approve the list finally with such modification, if any, which in its opinion, be just and proper.
After following the procedure under Rule 8(10) the list so framed by the Commission attains finality.
However, in the present case when the Commission changed the list and included the name of the petitioner (which had been approved by the Screening Committee) the Commission did not propose the changes to the Government and asked for its comments.
It was under these circumstances that the Government wrote back to the Commission and in a meeting held later on between the representatives of the Government and the Commission, the Commission changed its earlier views and agreed with the recommendations of the Screening Committee.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the Commission strictly reviewer its earlier decision inasmuch as the earlier decision of the Commission was not in accordance with Rule 8(10) of the Rules.
So to argue that the initial list of the suitable candidates sent by the Commission (Annexure P-5 with the Writ petition) had attained finality qua the petitioner is not correct.
7.
Now coming to the third point.
It will be seen from the remarks of the Screening Committee which were recorded to ignore the petitioner from promotion that the only thing which weighed with the Screening Committee against the petitioner was that there was an enquiry pending against the petitioner which related to the period 1973 for which charge-sheet had been served in the year 1975 and that enquiry had been completed and was at the final stage of decision, wherein it had been tentatively decided to punish the petitioner.
Learned counsel argued that the enquiry or the punishment thereon, if any (which is yet to be imposed) would relate back to the year 1973 or at the most to the year 1975 when the charge-sheet was served and could not be taken into consideration for promotion w.e.f.
111985 for which admittedly only 5 years record prior to the date was to be taken into consideration.
Moreover, according to the learned counsel it was not disputed that the enquiry had been completed in November, 1986, but no action thereon had been taken against the petitioner till the Screening Committee held its deliberations in the year 1989 and even till date no action has been taken.
It has been mentioned in the written statement that it has been tentatively decided to impose punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that pendency of an enquiry could be taken into consideration for judging the suitability of the petitioner and specially when it has been tentatively decided to impose punishment of stoppage of our increment with cumulative effect.
Therefore, the petitioner could not be held suitable for promotion.
(sic).
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find force in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner.
The punishment when awarded would relate back to the period when the alleged offence/misconduct was committed or in any case when the same was detected.
Even if any punishment is awarded to the petitioner now that would relate back to the year 1973 when the alleged misconduct/irregularities took place or the year 1975 when the charge-sheet was served (as it can be said that the irregularities were detected about that time).
In fact the Commission itself had taken this view earlier while approving the names of S/Shri BS Sood, Ram Parkash and OP Satija after the Screening Committee in the year 1983 had approved their names, on the ground that the cause of action for the punishment awarded to those officers in the department arose more than 5 years prior to the date of promotion.
The Commission wrote to the Government on 17121984 on the above subject as follows :-  "With reference to your DO letter No 4189/1/84/3235 dated 9.6.1984 addressed to the Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission Sarvshri B.S.
Sood, Ram Parkash, OP Satija who were found fit for promotion to PSE-I in the meeting of the Screening Committee in December, 1983 the record of the officers for the previous five year was satisfactory.
Hence the Screening Committee has recommended them for promotion unconditionally.
The cause of action for the punishment awarded to these officers in the Department arose more than 5 years prior to the date of promotion.
Hence these punishment cannot be a bar to the promotion of these officers.
But in the cases of Sarvshri M.S.
Kaushal and NS Kailey, the cause of action for the punishment awarded in departmental cases arose within the last 5 years.
Hence in the above situation, the Commission reiterates its decision contained in its earlier No. 199/76/183 dated 2061984."
9.
There is no reason as to why the petitioner should not have been dealt with similarly.
If at all punishment is awarded to the petitioner that would relate back to the date of cause of action for the punishment i.e. 1973 or 1975.
This enquiry certainly could not be taken into consideration against the petitioner.
It is further apparent from the letter dated June, 1984 from the Financial Commissioner, Punjab to the Chairman; Punjab Public Service Commission (copy Annexure P-7) that Shri B.S.
Sood was awarded punishment of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect but was found fit for promotion by the Screening Committee.
Similarly, Ram Parkash whose three grade increments were stopped with cumulative effect had also been found fit for promotion to Class-1.
On the same parity even if the proposed punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect is awarded (which in fact yet to be decided) the petitioner could not have been ignored for promotions on this ground.
From the remarks by the Screening Committee for ignoring the petitioner (which I have already quoted above) it is obvious that the only reason for not finding the petitioner suitable was the pendency of the 1973 enquiry.
I have already held that this record pertaining to enquiry of 1973 could not have been taken into consideration as only record prior to 5 years of the promotion had to be taken into consideration.
The petitioner was ignored by taking into consideration irrelevant record.
I may not be taken to be laying down that the Court can go into the question of suitability of a particular officer, but the Court can certainly go into the question whether the consideration was on the relevant record/material.
The adverse report for the year 1984-85 was rightly not considered by the Screening Committee against the petitioner inasmuch as the representation of the petitioner against those remarks has so far been decided by the Government.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner could not be ignored on the ground taken by the screening Committee and approved by the Commission.
Since I do not find any other material on record which was taken into consideration by the Screening Committee/Commission to ignore the petitioner, ipso facto it would follow that the petitioner was suitable for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer w.e.f.
111985.
There will be no order as to costs.