Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By the present judgment, I propose to dispose of CWP Nos. 10780 and 12550 of 1991.
The facts of the case have been taken from the former writ petition.
2.
The petitioner-Institute (hereinafter called the 'Institute') is affiliated and recognised by the Punjab Nurses Registration Council for the purpose of imparting training to Multi-Purpose Health Workers (Female).
The affiliation, as also the conduct of examination and other allied matters, is governed under the Punjab Nurses Registration Act, 1932 (hereinafter called 'Punjab Act').
The Punjab Nurses Registration Council (hereinafter called the 'State Council') has been constituted under the Punjab Act, and as per spirit of the said Act, the State Council has been authorised to frame by laws for the conduct of its functions.
By virtue of these powers, the State Council has notified the by-laws by which the method and procedure for seeking affiliation has been laid down.
It has been mentioned in the aforesaid by laws that the following particulars are required to be given in an application for affiliation as such :  "(a) the constitution and personnel of the Managing Body; (b) Subjects and courses in which it gives or proposes to give instructions; (c) Accommodation, equipment and the number of students for whom provision has been proposed to be made; (d) The strength of the staff, their salaries, qualifications, experience and the research work done by them; (e) Fee levied or proposed to be levied and the financial provisions made for capital expenditure on building and equipment and for the continued maintenance and efficient working of the Institution.
It has also been provided that after the State Council has satisfied itself about the quality of training to be imparted by the applicant, it may grant affiliation to such a body.
The extract of the by-laws along with some inconsequential amendments made are Annexures P-1 and P-2 to the petition.
3.
As already stated above, the petitioner was already affiliated for the purpose of imparting training to multi-purpose health workers (female) but as it intended to start a course in General Nursing and Mid-wifery (hereinafter called the 'GNM Course') it moved an application to respondent No. 3, the Indian Nursing Council, for necessary sanction, but that body vide letter dated 18.1.1990 advised the petitioner to make the necessary application through the State Council.
The Institute thereafter applied for sanction to the State Council on the prescribed proforma along with the required registration fees.
It appears that as a follow up action, an inspection team of the Indian Nursing Council inspected the premises of the Institute in September, 1990 with regard to its suitability for running classes for the GNM Course, and vide report Annexure P-5 dated 12.6.1990, recommended that as the Institute seemed to be interested in starting GNM training classes it should have a planned school of Nursing building plus further staff as recommended by the Indian Nursing Council.
Thereafter, another inspection team of the State Council inspected the premises of the institute and vide report dated 3041991 recommended that as the Institute had already admitted about 20 students to the GNM Course in September, 1990, the said students should be allowed to appear in the examination to be held in September, 1991.
It was also stated that the list of teaching staff, attached with the inspection report, was in accordance with the norms settled by the Indian Nursing Council.
Yet another inspection was conducted by the State Council and vide report dated 2551991, it was once again recommended that the 20 students who had already been admitted in September, 1990, should be allowed to take the examination.
The State Council, however, seems to have taken an adverse view of the fact that the 20 students had been admitted in the GNM Course without its sanction and, vide letter Annexure P-9 dated 7th June, 1991, informed the Institute that as the admission of the students to the GNM Course was illegal, they would not be allowed to take the examination.
Aggrieved by this decision, the affected students filed C.W.P.
No. 12550 of 1991 (which is also being disposed of by this judgment) and secured an interim order from this Court on 22nd August, 1991, that they could take the examination on provisional basis, subject to the result of the petition.
I am told by the counsel for the parties that the students in question have taken the examination though the result has not been declared.
4.
The controversy between the parties would hinge on the question as to whether the Institute is entitled to the grant of affiliation by the State Council or not.
The stand of the Institute is that the requisite application had been made at the initial stage to the Indian Nursing Council on a misconception that the said body was the affiliating body and thereafter the application was, on the advice of the Indian Nursing Council, made to the State Council as well.
The counsel for the Institute has, however, urged that no decision had been taken on the application made by the Institute and, on the contrary, Annexure P-9 has been passed.
The stand taken by respondents 1 and 2, i.e., the State of Punjab as also the State Council is that the Institute never applied for the affiliation for imparting training in GNM Course and, as such, the question of the grant of affiliation does not arise.
It has been admitted that the various inspecting committees of the State Council did make the recommendations vide Annexures P-5, P-7 and P-8, to which reference has already been made above.
It has also been stated in para 11 of the reply, that the necessary information with regard to the facilities required for imparting the training had, in fact, not been conveyed to the effect that the school and hostel buildings had been built up and qualified staff as per norms of the Indian Nursing Council had also been appointed.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and, more particularly, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the view that the writ petitions deserve to be allowed.
6.
Admittedly, 20 students were admitted to the Institute and have completed one year of their training and have also, under the orders of this court, taken the examination.
It has also been admitted in the written statement that the facilities that have been provided by the Institute are as per the norms of the Indian Nursing Council.
The only argument raised by the counsel for the respondents was that the requisite application on the prescribed proforma had not been made.
This fact has been denied by the Institute in its replication and has appended certain documents thereto, to show that the application had, in fact, been made.
It is also the admitted case that an application had been made to the Indian Nursing Council as the Institute as also the State Council appeared to be under the impression that it was only the Indian Nursing Council which could grant affiliation to impart training in the GNM Course.
This impression was set at naught by a judgment of this Court rendered in C.W.P.
No. 837 of 1991 (Mata Amrit Kaur Welfare Trust v. The State of Punjab and others) decided on 23rd May, 1991, in which it was held that it was the State Council alone that had the power to grant recognition and affiliation, and the argument that the Indian Nursing Council was required to do the needful, had to be rejected.
7.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has argued that as per norms, the Institute is required to apply for affiliation every year.
He has stated that the admissions which are the subject-matter of dispute in these writ petitions, had been made in 1990 and no admissions were made in the year 1991.
The applications for the year 1992 have yet to be called.
He has urged that keeping in view the facts of the case, the Institute may be directed not to make any admission for the year 1992 unless prior affiliation has been obtained from the State Council.
I find that there is force in this contention of the learned counsel.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition and direct that the Institute will continue to impart training to the 20 students who were admitted in the year 1990 and the State Council will not interfere in the completion of their training which is said to last for three years.
The State Council will also declare the result forthwith of the students who were granted permission to appear in the examination vide interim orders dated 22nd August, 1991 passed in C.W.P.
No 12550 of 1991.
It is further directed that the Institute will not make admission for the GNM Course for the year 1992 unless the requisite affiliation is obtained from the State Council.
However, a direction is issued to the State Council that should a complete application for affiliation be made to it, the said application will be disposed of within a period of six weeks from its receipt, failing which, it would be presumed that affiliation had been granted to the applicant Institute.
8.
With the directions aforesaid, the writ petitions stand disposed of with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.