Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated March 28, 1988.
By this order the petitioner was given the benefit of army service rendered by him from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1969 with effect from February 17, 1979 when he had been selected for appointment as Photographer through the Subordinate Services Selection Board and not from February 9, 1971 as claimed by him.
The petitioner's claim for the grant of benefit of army service with effect from February 9, 1971 when he had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis as Assistant Photo and Cinema Officer having been rejected, he has approached this Court through this petition.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the controversy may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined the Indian Air Force in the year 1954.
He was discharged from Army service after completion of 15 years.
Thereafter on February 9, 1971 he was appointed as Assistant Photo and Cinema Officer on purely temporary and ad hoc basis.
He held this post upto January 27, 1977.
On January 28, 1977 another person was regularly promoted to this post.
The petitioner was adjusted as Assistant Exhibition Officer which was a totally different and independent post.
Even this appointment made by the order dated January 28, 1977 was on purely temporary and ad hoc basis.
He continued working as such till April 18, 1979 when on the recommendations of the Subordinate Service Selection Board the petitioner was offered appointment as a Photographer.
As the post of Assistant Exhibition Officer was still available till March 10, 1980 in its original scale of pay of Rs. 300-550, the petitioner continued to work on this post from December 21, 1977 to March 10, 1980.
In December, 1977 this post had been redesignated as Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer.
However, on March 10, 1980 he was required to join the post of photographer in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500.
The petitioner contended that this amounted to reversion.
He consequently filed C.W.P.
No. 1533 of 1980.
Later on when the department agreed to protect the petitioner's pay, the petitioner withdrew the petition.
As a consequence the petitioner's basic pay of Rs. 500/- per mensum was protected and he joined the post of Photographer but was allowed to draw the salary which he was already drawing.
3.
Having served the Army from the year 1954 to 1969, the petitioner claimed the benefit of military service towards seniority.
Vide orders dated March 28, 1988, the department accepted the petitioner's claim and granted him the benefit of service of 5 years 2 months and 15 days viz. the period of service rendered during the period when proclamation of emergency was in operation towards seniority in the post of Photographer w.e.f.
February 17, 1979.
The petitioner's claim for the grant of this benefit w.e.f.
the date of his original appointment on ad hoc basis as Assistant Photo & Cinema Officer has been rejected.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner's appointment on February 9, 1971 had been made on purely ad hoc basis.
The petitioner's service as such as was sought to be got approved from the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
However, the Board did not accord the approval and the services of the petitioner were liable to be discontinued/terminated.
It has been averred that to save the petitioner from hardship likely to ensue on losing his job, he was appointed on ad hoc basis as Assistant Exhibition Officer, with effect from January 28, 1977 "on compassionate grounds.
He was not eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Exhibition Officer the scale of which was 300-25-450/25-600."
The petitioner continued to work as Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer on ad hoc basis with effect from December 21, 1977 to March 10, 1980.
It has been further averred that the petitioner has been promoted as Assistant Photo and Cinema Officer in the scale of Rs. 1640-60-2600-EB-75-2900+ Rs. 150/- as special pay on regular basis from the post of Photographer vide orders dated November 4, 1987.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that during the pendency of the petition, the date of petitioner's appointment as Assistant Photo & Cinema Officer has been made with effect from December 31, 1982.
This position is not disputed by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioner that he having been appointed on ad hoc basis on February 9, 1971 and having continued without any break in service, has a right to be treated as regular from the post of original appointment and that the benefit of Army service should be given to him on that basis.
It has been further argued that the action of the respondents in not granting this benefit to the petitioner is discriminatory as the similar benefit has already been given to one Mr. Balbir Singh.
It has also been contended that the petitioner had actually worked as Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer from January 28, 1977 to March 10, 1980.
This post, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner is in the scale of 300- 550 and on principle of "equal pay for equal work" the petitioner has to be given the pay scale of Rs. 300-600.
The petitioner, the counsel contends, was wrongly given the scale of Rs. 300-600 with effect from January 28, 1977.
It has also been claimed that on the basis of the instructions dated January 1, 1980, the petitioner had a right to be considered for the regularisation on the post of Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer.
Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the respondents, has controverted this claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
7.
So far as the petitioner's claim for the grant of benefit of army service on the post of Assistant Photo & Cinema Officer is concerned, the sequence of events, as indicated above, clearly shows that the appointment was made on purely ad hoc basis.
Further the petitioner had held this post till January 28, 1977, when his services were due to be terminated on account of a regular appointment having been made on the said post.
On that date he was adjusted as Assistant Exhibition Officer (which post was later on redesignated as Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer) on purely ad hoc basis.
While he was working as such, he was selected for regular recruitment as Photographer in February, 1979.
On his appointment to that post, the Department has given the petitioner the benefit of army service.
It is also not disputed before me that the petitioner had actually joined the Air Force in the year 1954.
He had, thus, chosen to join the Air Force as a career.
Strictly speaking it is doubtful if the petitioner was entitled to grant of any benefit of Army service under the rules called The Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
This is all the more so in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in RS Dhul v. State of Haryana & others, AIR 1991 SC 1047 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
539.
However, since the benefit has already been given and the order has not been questioned before me, I need not to go into the matter any further.
The fact remains that the benefit of army service during the operation of emergency has been given to him with effect from the date of his regular appointment.
There is no rule or instructions directing for the grant of this benefit from the date when a person is appointed on ad hoc basis.
This is all the more so, as the ad hoc appointment on the post of Assistant Photo & Cinema Officer as also on the post of Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer stood terminated with effect from January 28, 1977 and March 10, 1980.
In this view of the matter I find no infirmity in the action of the respondents in giving benefit of army service with effect from February 17, 1979.
8.
I am also not satisfied that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination as alleged in paragraph 17 of the writ petition.
It has been averred that benefit in similar circumstances had been given to Mr. Balbir Singh, who was working as Accountant.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the benefit of military service towards increments was wrongly allowed to Balbir Singh and it is now being withdrawn.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, appearing for the respondents, has further pointed out that Mr. Balbir Singh had initially joined as Information Cinema Assistant on ad hoc basis.
Later on his services were regularised on that very post.
He was given the benefit of military service on that post.
Such is not the position here.
It has also been pointed that the post of Information Cinema Assistant and Accountant are interchangeable.
It is on that account, Mr. Balbir Singh was appointed as Accountant.
In view of the fact that the services of Mr. Balbir Singh had been regularised on the same post on which he had been initially appointed on ad hoc basis, I find that there is no similarity of the petitioner's case with that of Balbir Singh.
Accordingly, the charge of discrimination cannot be sustained.
9.
So far as the petitioner's claim with regard to the grant of scale of Rs. 300-600 from January 28, 1977 to March 10, 1980 is concerned, it is totally lacking in merit.
According to the written statement, the petitioner was not qualified for the post of Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer.
He was accommodated on compassionate grounds.
He was allowed to work on the post of Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer, from which his services were likely to be terminated.
In such a situation, the petitioner can have no claim to the salary of the post for which he was not qualified.
Furthermore, the claim is highly belated.
The cause of action, if any, had accrued to the petitioner in the year 1977.
The writ petition has been filed on May 5, 1988.
The claim cannot be entertained at this stage.
It has been further claimed that the petitioner had a right to be considered for regularisation in view of the notification dated January 1, 1980.
A perusal of this notification would show that a person can be considered for regularisation on a post held by him, if he has held it for a minimum period of two years on December 31, 1979.
It is further provided that "only such ad hoc employees as have been recruited through the employment exchange should be regularised."
Admittedly, the petitioner had not been appointed as Assistant Photo & Exhibition Officer viz. the post held by him at the time of the issue of these instructions, through the employment exchange, Consequently, the question of his regularisation on this post also does not arise.
In fact, he was not qualified to be regularised under the notification.
Furthermore even this claim for regularisation is highly belated.
Another fact, which cannot be lost sight of is that the petitioner had been selected and had been given the offer of appointment vide letter dated April 18, 1979 as Photographer.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am not satisfied that any case is made out in this petition.
Accordingly, I find that the petition is lacking in merit.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.