AL Bahri, J - In this Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioner challenges order dated September 25, 1991, Annexure P/3, whereby his result of 10 + 2 Examination was cancelled and he was debarred to appear in the next one examination.
2.
Punjab School Education Board (hereinafter called "the Board"), the respondent, conducted 10 + 2 Examination in April, 1991.
A complaint was received by the Board that in different centres the Superintendents in connivance with Controller of Examinations, leaked the papers in three subjects, i.e. Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, before the examination and their solutions were got prepared from the experts, which were photocopied and such copies were circulated among the students and there was mass-copying.
The Board took action on the complaint.
The examiners and head-examiners were asked to report.
The answer books were examined.
Some of the examiners reported that there was mass-copying.
Others reported to the contrary.
Ultimately, the Board came to the conclusion that it was not a case of mass- copying.
The Board detected the cases of 28 students and took action for use of unfair means in the examination.
Subsequently, only 12 students were found to have copied, as some answers to questions or portions thereof were fully tallying with the answers in the photocopies of the solution papers submitted alongwith the complaint.
Their result was cancelled and they were debarred from taking one examination.
Out of them the petitioner has approached this Court in this writ petition, questioning the action of the Board.
3.
The Board issued show-cause notice to the petitioner, asserting that the answers of some of the questions or portions thereof were tallying with answers in the photostat copies of solution papers, submitted with the complaint and, thus, he had violated Regulations 9(a), 10 and 11 of the Punjab Education Board (Penalties for Misconduct and Use of Unfair Means in the Matriculation and Higher Secondary Examinations) Regulations, 1979.
The petitioner in his reply denied the allegation of copying.
The petitioner was not asked to attempt the questions again.
The Unfair Means Committee recorded the finding that the petitioner had copied during the examination from photostat copies of the solution paper and passed the impugned order.
The stand of the petitioner is that as the photostat copies of the solution papers were neither recovered from him nor from the examination-hall, the regulations on which reliance was placed by the Board, were not applicable.
On merits, he stated that he had not copied.
In other words, the stand is that there was no evidence before the Unfair Means Committee to record findings of use of unfair means by the petitioner in copying.
The Board's stand, as already stated above, is that the petitioner had violated the Regulations in copying and his case is covered by the Regulations aforesaid.
In the alternative, reliance has also been placed on Regulation 19 to the effect that the petitioner answered the questions or portions thereof by seeking help from other sources.
4.
Regulations 9(a), 10, 11(i) & 19 are as under :  "9.
If during an examination, a candidate is found : a) in possession of a paper book or note, or (b) to (f) xxx xxx xxx his result for that examination shall be cancelled and he may be disqualified from appearing in any examination of the Board for a period which may extend to three consecutive examinations : Provided that if a candidate is found having in his possession or accessible to him papers, book(s) or notes due to inadvertence and which could be of assistance to him, but has not made use of them, he may be debarred from passing in that paper as a disciplinary measure and without any implication of moral turpitude."
"10.
Possession of solution of question - If a candidate is found in possession of solution to a question, set in the question paper or a part thereof, received through the connivance of any inside or outside agency, except any other candidate sitting in the examination hall, his result for that examination shall be cancelled and he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination of the Board for a period which may extend to three consecutive examinations."
11.
Copy or rendering help in copying - If during the course of an examination a candidate is found - (i) having copied or indulging in copying from any paper, book or note, or (ii) to (iv) xxx xxx xxx his result for that examination shall be cancelled, he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination of the Board for a period which may extend to three consecutive examinations."
"19.
If an answer book of a candidate shows or it is otherwise established that he had received or attempted to receive help from any source or in any manner or has given help to or attempted to give help to another candidate in any manner; his result for that examination shall be cancelled and he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination of the Board for a period which may extend to three consecutive examinations."
The aforesaid regulations deal with different situations and contemplate action for use of unfair means in the examinations.
Regulation 9(1) covers cases when during the examination a candidate was found using unfair means or he was found in possession of a paper, book or a note on the subject, which could assist him in answering the question paper.
Regulation 10 deals with the situation when a candidate is found in possession of solution of questions, which have been set in the question paper.
This may be with the connivance of inside or outside agency.
Regulation 11 further covers a situation where during the course of an examination a candidate is found having copied or indulging in copying from any paper book or note and other situations covered by sub-clause (i), (ii) to (iv) are not relevant for decision of this case.
Regulation 19 contemplates situations, which are not covered by Regulations 9, 10 and 11, referred to above.
However, if subsequently it is found that the answer book of the candidate showed or it was established otherwise that he had received or attempted to receive help from any source in answering the question paper, that action can be taken.
No rule or regulation trained by the Board has been brought to our notice to show the procedure to be followed for taking action under the aforesaid regulations.
However, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Board from the past practice has stated the procedure, which is, in brief, as under :-  5.
When any matter of use of unfair means is detected, the matter is referred to the Unfair Means Committee.
A notice is given to the candidate giving details of the allegations mentioning therein the breach of regulation/regulations.
The candidate is asked to reply to the aforesaid show cause notice.
A personal hearing is also given to the candidate, where he is called upon to rewrite the answer to the particular question/questions and ultimately the decision is recorded by the Unfair Means Committee and subsequently the result is declared of such candidate, imposing the necessary punishment of debarring the candidate from appearing in the next examination/examinations.
The principles of natural justice are required to be followed in such like cases and if sufficient opportunity is allowed to the candidate to explain the allegations levelled against him and personal hearing is also given, it can reasonably be said that such principles were followed.
By merely following the principles of natural justice, as referred to above, it cannot be said that the finding arrived at by the Unfair Means Committee would be a finding based on any evidence or material, if such a finding is supported by evidence or material, the Courts are not to sit over the judgment of the Unfair Means Committee or the Board.
However, if the finding is based on no evidence, it would be open to the Courts to quash the final decision taken by such Committee or the Board.
This view has earlier also be taken by this Court in Jaswinder Singh v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 16 and in Harsharan Bir Singh v. The Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 652.
6.
Record of the Unfair Means Committee was shown which has been examined.
In the petition, the allegation was that even before the Unfair Means Committee the petitioner was not asked to attempt the disputed questions, which the Committee had earlier, prima facie, found to have copied from the solution answer.
This plea was not specifically denied in the written statement filed by the Board.
The record of the Committee produced shows that the petitioner was not asked to attempt the disputed questions, thus the finding of the committee is based on no evidence.
As already stated above, the solution paper was not recovered either from the petitioner or from the examination-hall during the course of examination.
Regulations 9, 10 and 11, as aforesaid, thus, would not be attracted to the case of the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the Board relied upon Regulation 11(i), as reproduced above, and stated that this regulation covers the case of a candidate, who had already copied, though he was not found copying during the course of examination.
We have given due consideration to this aspect of the matter but have failed to appreciate the same.
As already discussed above, Regulation 11 is attracted only if during the course of examination a candidate is found either to have copied or was found copying from any paper, book or note.
As the solution paper, as referred to above, was not recovered from the petitioner during the course of examination, it cannot be said that he was copying or had copied therefrom.
7.
Counsel for the Board ultimately relied upon Regulation 19 and has argued that since the answer book of the petitioner tallied with the answers given in the solution paper, it should be presumed that the petitioner had copied from the solution paper and in this manner he must have received help from inside or outside the examination hall.
It may be stated that Unfair Means Committee or the Board never relied upon Regulation 19.
In the show cause notice as well as in the impugned order, reliance was placed on Regulations 10 and 11, reproduced above.
8.
If Regulation 19 is to be applied to a case, not only that Unfair Means Committee was required to give finding that the candidate had either received help or attempted to receive help from any source.
By merely establishing that the answer of the candidate was tallying with any solution paper, book or note, per se will not attract Regulation 19.
It is common knowledge that books on the subject are always available to a candidate during the course of his study.
Help books, guess papers and their solutions likewise are also available in the market.
Merely by proving that the answers of the candidate were tallying with the answers given in such like books or papers will not show of any help having been sought by the candidate in answering the question paper.
The cases, which are contemplated under Regulation 19 may be such where the candidate during the course of examination sought help either from the invigilators present in the examination hall or from such like books, solution papers, notes, placed outside the examination hall.
For such a finding, it is necessary to have some type of evidence, which is lacking in the present case.
9.
Be that as it may, if the facts were such, which could also attract regulation 19, mere non-mentioning of the appropriate regulation will not make any difference.
However, as discussed above a finding is to be recorded by the Committee on evidence and to attract Regulation 19, it was required to have evidence of receiving or attempting to receive help from any source.
That evidence being lacking, it will be a case of finding based on no-evidence and liable to be quashed.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
Order dated September 25, 1991, Annexure P/3, is quashed with the direction to the Board to declare the result of the petitioner.
Rs. 1,000/- quantified costs are allowed to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.