GC Garg, J - As a result of enquiry, a composite order imposing penalty of stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect and depriving the employee of pay and allowances during the period of suspension, was passed.
Hari Singh, appellant, filed a suit for declaration challenging this order being illegal, arbitrary and being violative of mandatory provisions of Punjab Punishment and Appeal Rules besides principles of natural justice.
It was also pleaded that a composite order of punishment could not be passed whereby four annual increments were ordered to be stopped with cumulative effect and also depriving him of pay and allowances for the period of suspension.
Other allegations made were that proper procedure had not been followed during the course of enquiry.
On notice the suit was contested by the defendants and written statement was filed controverting all the allegations made in the plaint.
On the pleadings of the parties, the only relevant issue framed was whether the order dated 28th September, 1984 was illegal.
2.
Learned trial Court by judgment and decree dated January 8, 1988, dismissed the suit by holding that the Punishing Authority before passing the order of punishment had served a notice on the plaintiff giving him an opportunity to show-cause besides affording him an opportunity of being heard in person.
The contention of the plaintiff that the Disciplinary Authority was under an obligation to record reasons in case it differed with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer exonerating the employee before issuing a show cause notice regarding the proposed punishment and that the order was vitiated on that count alone was not considered.
3.
The plaintiff preferred an appeal and the same was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge on 15121989.
Again two contentions were raised in appeal i.e. (i) the employee could not be punished by imposing a penalty of stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect and simultaneously deprive him of pay and allowances for the suspension period, and (ii) the plaintiff having been exonerated by the Enquiry Officer and the Punishing Authority, disagreeing with the report of the Enquiry Officer and tentatively holding him guilty of the charges, was required to communicate brief reasons of its disagreement before calling upon him to show cause against the proposed punishment.
On the aforesaid counts it was argued that the order of penalty was vitiated being illegal and contrary to the rules.
These contentions were repelled stating that objection regarding composite notice had not been taken in reply to the show-cause notice and in any case no prejudice was caused to him on this count.
It was further observed that since a personal hearing had been afforded to the plaintiff, he had no grouse against the order of penalty.
With these observations, the appeal, as already stated, was dismissed.
Hence, the second appeal.
4.
The first contention of the learned counsel for the appellant was that stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect would be a major penalty and would fall under Clause (v) of Rule 5 in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 : 1991 SLJ 450 wherein the same rule was involved.
The learned counsel further contended that a perusal of the enquiry report available at pages 123 to 127 of the enquiry file, Ex.P-1, clearly showed that the plaintiff had been completely exonerated of all the charges levelled against him after appreciating the evidence available on record and if the Disciplinary Authority having regard to the findings on all the articles of charge was of the opinion that a major penalty was required to be imposed then it was incumbent on the said authority to record brief reasons of its disagreement with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer as contemplated by sub-rule 4(1)(a) of rule 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The notice requiring to show cause could be issued only thereafter so that the plaintiff could meet with the precise reasoning recorded by the Punishing Authority while disagreeing with the conclusions arrived at by the Enquiry Officer.
The precise submission was that recording of brief reasons for the disagreement with the findings of the Enquiry Officer as contemplated by sub-rules 4 and 9 was mandatory and the procedure having not been followed, the order of punishment was illegal and was liable to be set aside.
The last submission of the learned counsel was that if the Disciplinary Authority was inclined to deprive the petitioner of pay and allowances for the period of suspension, a separate show cause notice was required to be issued after the order of penalty had been passed and a composite order of penalty depriving the plaintiff of pay and allowances could not be passed.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the plaintiff deserves to succeed in this Second Appeal.
It could not be disputed by the learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State of Punjab that the order of penalty passed in this case was a major penalty in view of the latest judgment of the Apex Court in Kulwant Singh Gill's case (supra).
On the second submission of the learned counsel for the plaintiff I was taken through the entire enquiry file by the State counsel to persuade me to hold that the procedure as contemplated by rule 9 of the Rules had been fully complied with, but I find myself unable to agree with the learned State counsel.
As already noticed, the Enquiry Officer exonerated the plaintiff of all the charges levelled against him by a detailed report and had come to a conclusion that the accident had been caused not on account of the negligence of the plaintiff but on account of the failure of machinery.
Notice dated 31st July, 1984 was served on the plaintiff, by the Punishing Authority only by stating that he did not agree with the enquiry report and the plaintiff was required to show cause as to why a penalty of stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect be not passed against him.
No reasons or even brief reasons for his disagreement with the report of the Enquiry Officer were indicated in the said notice, which is available at page 129 of the enquiry file, Exhibit P1.
The only submission of the learned counsel for the respondent was that since the plaintiff was afforded a personal hearing by the Punishing Authority recording of reasons for disagreeing with the report of the Enquiry Officer would in no way vitiate the order of penalty.
I again do not agree with the submission of the learned counsel-for the respondents and find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the plaintiff.
The purpose of the show cause notice is to show to the authority that the employee was not guilty of the charges levelled against him.
In this case, the plaintiff had been completely exonerated of the charges and he could not in reply to show cause notice meet the reasoning which may be weighing in the mind of the Punishing Authority for his disagreement.
If the reasons of disagreement had been recorded and communicated to the plaintiff, he would have effectively demonstrated by way of reply to the show cause notice that those reasons were either bad or against the record.
In the absence of such reasons having been reduced to writing and conveyed to the plaintiff, he could not make an effective representation and thus in my view the order of penalty is vitiated.
In terms of sub-rule 4 of rule 9 of the Rules, it was incumbent on the Punishing Authority to record the reasons of disagreement, communicate them to the plaintiff and then pass a final order either exonerating the plaintiff or imposing a penalty.
The plaintiff having been exonerated and in the absence of any material brought to his notice by the Disciplinary Authority holding him guilty of the charges, it would be very difficult neigh impossible for the employee to demonstrate that he was innocenent and not guilty of the charges.
Before imposing a penalty, not only the rules of natural justice but also sub-rule 4 of rule 9 of the Rules required that he should have been informed of the precise reasons on the basis of which action was still required to be taken after he was exonerated by the Enquiry Officer.
6.
I am conscious that in a suit, the validity of the departmental proceedings cannot be challenged by treating it as an appeal from the findings recorded in such proceedings, but in the present case, in my view, by not following the procedure as laid down in rule 9 of the Rules, the plaintiff was deprived of making an effective representation against the proposed penalty in the absence of reasons therefor and this goes to the very root of the departmental proceedings and the ultimate punishment awarded.
If the procedure as contemplated by the rules is not followed, the proceedings would be illegal and vitiated.
It is not a mere challenge to the order of dismissal but violation of the rules of natural justice.
It seems apparent to me that it amounts to violation of the service rules and thus, vitiates the result of enquiry .
In the case of Kulwant Singh Gill (supra) the Apex Court while allowing the appeal observered as under :-  "A report of enquiry in that behalf to be placed before the Disciplinary Authority who then to consider the same in the manner prescribed and to pass an appropriate order as per the procedure in vogue under the rules.
The gamut of this procedure was not gone through.
Therefore, the issuance of the notice and consideration of the explanation is not a procedure in accordance with the rules 8 and 9."
Once the order of penalty is held to be bad and not sustainable in law, it is not necessary to into the other contention of the learned counsel for the plaintiff that he order was otherwise had being a composite order awarding penalty as also depriving the plaintiff of pay and allowances for the suspension period.
Once the order of penalty is set aside, the plaintiff would automatically become entitled to pay and allowances for suspension period.
In view of the observations made above, the appeal is allowed; the judgment and decree under appeal set aside and the suit of the plaintiff decreed with costs.
Appeal allowed.