Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Manager with the Punjab State Coop.
Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 'the Markfed') is aggrieved by the order dated February 23, 1987 (Annexure P-6) by which he has been dismissed from service.
His grievance, in a nut shell, is that the Enquiry Officer had exonerated him of other charges and yet without being given any opportunity, the Administrator of the Markfed chose to differ with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge No. 1 and ordered his dismissal.
He claims that the action is violative of the principles of natural justice.
2.
Shorn of all unnecessary details, the case of the petitioner is that he was working as a Manager with the Markfed.
On June 11, 1982, a case was registered against the petitioner along with certain other officers/officials vide FIR No. 217.
It was alleged that offences under sections 379, 408 and 411 of the IPC had been committed by the persons.
After investigation, the challan was presented in the court.
The Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Moga vide his orders dated April 29, 1983 (Annexure P-1) found that no charge can be framed against the accused for the offences alleged against them.
As a result, the accused are discharged.
In the meantime, vide letter dated November 22, 1982 (Annexure P-2) a charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner.
The following three charges were levelled against him :-  (i) 510 bags of rice were despatched from the factory on 9682 but entry of only 380 bags of rice was made in store outward register.
These 110 bags were allegedly sold by you to Guru Nanak Rice Mills, Baghapurana which were recovered by the police authorities.
You are thus guilty of misappropriation of aforesaid 130 bags of rice of the value of Rs. 28,22625 in connivance with Shri Harnar Singh, Store Keeper and Shri Karnail Singh, Senior Supervisor, Security.
(ii) You reportedly left on 11682 without any intimation and subsequently remained absent from duty upto 18682 without permission of the competent authority and thus avoided the investigation by the authorities with mala fide intentions.
(iii) It was observed that average yield of 633% in respect of PR-106 variety paddy in MRM Baghapurana was on the lower side.
The yield obtained by Markfed from the private shellers was 67% as against 633% shown by you.
Apparently, you have shown less yield with the intention to misappropriate the rice so saved by showing lower yield.
After the petitioner had denied the charges, the Enquiry Officer was appointed.
A copy of the Enquiry Report was not supplied to the petitioner.
However, vide orders dated February 23, 1987 (Annexure P-6), the petitioner was ordered to be dismissed.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, the Administrator had observed as under :-  "I have gone through the report of the Inquiry Officer and the connected records thereto.
My findings in each case are as under :-  XX XX XX XX  ii) As regards charges against Sh. AK Bhatia, Manager, are concerned, I agree with the findings of the Inquiry Officer in respect of Charge Nos. 2 and 3.
But I disagree with the findings of the Inquiry Officer in respect of Charge No. 1 regarding embezzlement of 130 bags of rice which were subsequently recovered from Guru Nanak Rice Mill, Baghapurana.
Sh. Paramjit Singh, Labour Contractor and Shri MRS Sandhu, the then District Manager, Faridkot has given an unrebutted evidence before the Inquiry Officer to the effect that out of 630 bags taken out for delivery to FCI on 961982, 130 bags were given to M/s. Guru Nanak Rice Mill, Baghapurana.
When the godowns of the Mills were checked with the help of FSO and police in one godown 60/65 bags were lying.
There was no marks of the mill.
The police authorities obtained 65 bags more out of rice stock lying in dara in the shelter.
After recovering, FIR was lodged.
Shri MRS Sandhu, the then District Manager corroborated the statement of Labour Contractor.
This witness further stated that the police raided the mill and the stock bearing Markfed brand were recovered from the Guru Nanak Rice Mill.
He also stated that at the time of raid, TO Markfed, Faridkot and the representative of Food & Suppliers Deptt.
were also present.
He confirmed in cross-examination that he visited Baghapurana before FIR was lodged.
He had confirmed that the stocks were found from the premises of the Mill, police started investigation.
I, therefore, hold Sh. AK Bhatia and Sh. Harnar Singh, responsible for the misappropriation of 130 bags of rice and for causing loss of Rs. 28,22625 to Markfed.
(iii) xx xx xx xx (iv) xx xx xx xx (v) xx xx box xx In view of my observations, it is, therefore, resolved that the following punishments are hereby imposed upon the respondents :-  i) Sh. AK Bhatia, Manager and Sh. Harnar Singh Store Keeper are hereby, dismissed from service."
3.
The petitioner has challenged the above order.
His grievance is two- fold.
Firstly, he submits that no copy of the enquiry report was ever supplied to him.
If a copy of the enquiry report had been supplied, the petitioner could have shown that in the circumstances of the case no punishment could be imposed on him.
Secondly, the petitioner submits that the Enquiry Officer had apparently exonerated the petitioner of the most serious charge which had been levelled against him.
The punishing authority had chosen to differ with him.
The petitioner submits that it was incumbent on punishing authority to have given the petitioner an opportunity to show cause before it could differ with the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
The action in not affording any opportunity to the petitioner was violative of the principles of natural justice.
It may also be mentioned here that the petitioner's claim in the writ petition as made out in paragraphs 13 and 14(iv) is that he had been "completely exonerated" of all the charges by the Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner further claims that in fact the punishing authority had made out an entirely new case which was totally different from the charges originally levelled against the petitioner.
An order of punishment could not have been passed on the basis of a charge which was not even a subject matter of the enquiry.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
Besides a preliminary objection that an alternative remedy by way of appeal was available to the petitioner, it has been stated that the charge Nos. 2 and 3 "were proved by the Inquiry Officer and regarding charge No. 1, the Punishing Authority differed with the Inquiry Officer and passed a reasoned/detailed order as 130 bags of rice were found in the premises of M/s Guru Nanak Rice Mills."
The other averments made in the petition have also been controverted.
5.
I have heard Mr. VP Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Pawan Mutneja, for the respondents.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the respondents is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Mr. Pawan Mutneja on the other hand has contended that the two charges had been held to be proved even by the Enquiry Officer.
In view thereof even if the finding of the punishing authority in respect of charge No. 1 is ignored, the order of punishment can be sustained on the basis of the proved charges.
6.
Before proceeding to consider the respective contentions it is appropriate to dispose of the preliminary objection raised in the written statement.
It has been suggested that the petitioner has an alternative remedy by way of appeal before the Board of Directors.
I do not think that this objection has any merit.
It has been admitted in para 9 of the written statement that Shri Bhagat Singh, IAS, Registrar, Cooperative Societies was appointed as Administrator on the expiry of the term of the Board of Directors.
There was thus no Board of Directors.
The Administrator had been appointed to discharge the functions of the Board of Directors.
As such, the forum before which the appeal could be filed was non-existent.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner had an alternative remedy.
In any case, I am not inclined to relegate the petitioner to the alternative remedy at this stage.
7.
A perusal of the charge-sheet indicates that the petitioner was alleged to be guilty of misappropriation of the 130 bags of rice on the ground that out of 510 bags of rice despatched from factory on 9-6-1982, an entry of only 380 bags of rice was made in the register.
The respondent No. 2 in the impugned order while disagreeing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge No. 1 has held that "out of 630 bags taken out for delivery to FCI on 9682, 130 bags were given to M/s. Guru Nanak Rice Mill, Baghapurana".
This was never the charge against the petitioner.
He had no chance to meet this allegation.
The impugned order is based on a charge different from the one which had been actually, levelled against the petitioner.
No order of punishment can be passed on the basis of a charge which was not included in the charge-sheet.
On this short ground alone, the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
8.
Further, the grievance of the petitioner that the action is violative of principles of natural justice inasmuch as he was never given a copy of the enquiry report or even informed of the intention of the punishing authority to differ from the conclusion of the Enquiry Officer is also well founded.
Admittedly, the Enquiry Officer had exonerated the petitioner of the most serious charge of misappropriation.
Respondent No. 2 has differed with the conclusion arrived at by the Enquiry Officer.
In my view, it was incumbent on the respondents to furnish a copy of the enquiry report along with the reasons for differing with the conclusion of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge No. 1.
The petitioner would have been entitled to show that the conclusion arrived at the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge No. 1 was correct and tenable.
He could have further shown that the conclusions of the Enquiry Officer in respect of the remaining two charges were contrary to the evidence and thus untenable.
This would have been a fair course to adopt.
Respondent No. 2 did not adopt any such course.
In my view, he acted in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The position in this behalf has been settled by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
111.
While examining the case of a civil servant governed by the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, their Lordships were pleased to, inter alia, observe as under :-  "Deletion of the second opportunity under (??)
scheme of Art. 311(2) of the Constitution has nothing to do with providing of a copy of report to the delinquent in the matter regarding his representation.
Even though the second stage of the inquiry in Art. 311(2) has been abolished by amendment, the delinquent is still entitled to represent against the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer holding that the charge or some of the charges are established and holding the delinquent guilty of such charges.
For doing away with the effect of the enquiry report or to meet the recommendations of the Inquiry Officer in the matter of imposition of punishment, furnishing a copy of the report becomes necessary and to have the proceeding completed by using some material behind the back of the delinquent is a position not countenanced by fair procedure.
While by law application of natural justice could be totally ruled out or truncated, nothing has been done here which could be keeping natural justice out of the proceedings and the series of pronouncements of this Court making rules of natural justice applicable to such an inquiry are not affected by the 42nd amendment.
We, therefore, come to the conclusion that supply of a copy of the inquiry report along with recommendations, if any, in the matter of proposed punishment to be inflicted would be within the rules of natural justice and the delinquent would, therefore, be entitled to the supply of a copy thereof.
The Forty-Second Amendment has not brought about any change in this position."
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court have conclusively held that furnishing a copy of the report is necessary and the action of the disciplinary authority in not doing so, violates the principles of natural justice.
9.
Following the above dictum of law, I hold that the action of the respondents in dismissing the petitioner without furnishing to him a copy of the.
enquiry report and the reasons/grounds on which it was proposed to differ with the conclusion of the Enquiry Officer violated the principles of natural justice.
It denied the petitioner a fair opportunity.
The action is consequently vitiated.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Admittedly, the conditions of service governing the petitioner are laid down in the rules called the Punjab State Supply and Marketing Co-operatives Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1967.
Rule 214 provides as under :-  "214.
No penalty shall be imposed on any employee unless the charge or charges on which it is proposed to take disciplinary action against him have been communicated to him in writing and he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
The authority competed to impose the penalty may, if circumstances permit, hold an enquiry into the charge or charges or cause such an enquiry to be held by an officer superior to the person against whom the action is proposed to be taken for the purpose of ascertaining the truth or otherwise of the charge or charges.
If it is decided to hold an enquiry, employee concerned shall be permitted to cite witness on his behalf and examine the relevant documents, but shall not be permitted to engage a lawyer at the enquiry."
As I read this rule, the employee has not only to be informed of the charges on which it is proposed to take disciplinary action against him, but he has also to be given a reasonable opportunity of "showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him."
This necessitates the giving of an opportunity to show cause against the proposed punishment.
Such 'opportunity' was admittedly not afforded to the petitioner.
On this ground also, the impugned order is vitiated.
11.
Mr. Mutneja, however, contends that the order can be sustained even on the basis of charges which had been held to be proved by the Enquiry Officer.
This argument loses sight of the fact that the copy of the enquiry report was never supplied to the petitioner.
Had the copy been supplied, the petitioner could have shown that the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer in respect of the two charges were not tenable.
The failure to supply the copy of the enquiry report as already observed violates the principles of natural justice.
Consequently, the contention cannot be sustained.
12.
The petitioner has also averred in the petition that respondents have not released the five increments which had fallen due during the pendency of the proceedings.
As a result, the petitioner claims that he has been deprived of more than Rs. 56,000/-.
This averment has been specifically made in paragraph 14(ix).
In reply, it has been merely stated that the para is wrong and denied.
There is no order for withholding of increments.
Even the punishing authority has not passed any order in this respect.
In the absence of a specific order passed in accordance with law, the respondents have no authority to withhold the increments which had fallen due to the petitioner.
The said increments, if not already released, shall be released.
13.
In view of the above, the order at Annexure P-6 in so far as it relates to the petitioner is quashed.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service and will be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of fixation of his pay release of increments and the arrears of salary etc.
The petitioner is also held entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/  Order accordingly.