Ashok Bhan, J - This is a writ petition filed by 187 persons who joined the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred as the Board) on different posts as work-charged Fitters, Clearner-cum-Messengers, Work Mistry and Work Inspectors etc.
It is averred in the Writ Petition that the petitioners joined the operation and maintenance department between 1970 to 1979.
Petitioner Nos. 1 to 69 were regularised in the year 1986 and at present are working as Helper Grade-I in the scale of Rs. 350-600.
Petitioner Nos. 70 to 187 have, however, not been regularised on their posts in spite of the fact that they have put in 7 to 16 years service as work-charged employees.
Petitioners in their writ petition have impugned the revised recruitment and promotion policy for employees working in the Thermal Power Project in the Board as framed vide office order No. 2845/Cadre dated 2751985 (Annexure P/4).
Case of the petitioners is that Board had issued a policy regarding recruitment and promotion on 29101980 (Annexure P/1) which was superseded by subsequent policy of 6.11.1981 (Annexure P3).
These two policies were later on superseded by a new policy of 751985 (Annexure P4).
Petitioners claimed that the policy Annexure P/4 is detrimental to their interest and the posts which had come into existence under 6.11.1981's policy Annexure P/3, could only be filled up either by way of direct recruitment or by way of promotion under the policy Annexure, P/3 only.
The petitioners' case further is that as per the letter issued by the Board dated 14101981 P/2 the Board decided to convert 70% of the work-charged posts continuing for the last five years or more into regular posts; that the petitioners who had put in more than five years service in such posts were eligible and entitled to be regularised immediately thereafter but for the reasons best known to the respondents these 70% work-charged posts were not converted into regular posts till November, 1986.
2.
In the written statement filed by the Board, a preliminary objection has been taken that the present writ petition was not maintainable as the petitioners did not have any common cause of action in the present petition because the petitioners belong to different categories of posts and have come into service at different stages and as such are not entitled to file the joint writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution.
I am inclined to sustain this objection of the respondent-Board.
From the perusal of the writ petition as it is not clear as to which of the petitioners are working as Helpers, Work Mistry and Work Inspector etc., I asked the counsel appearing for the petitioners into different categories but he was unable to do so.
Counsel for the petitioners was further unable to tell the court as to which of the petitioners joined their posts in which years and as to what is their seniority vis-a-vis each other and the direct recruits.
A joint writ petition can be filed only if there is common cause of action against the respondent jointly and severally which is lacking in this petition.
But, since the petition is pending in this Court for the last four years, I shall deal with the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners on merits as well although I have sustained the objection of the respondents-Board regarding the maintainability of the joint writ petition.
3.
A bare reading of the petition would show that clear cut facts did not merge from the petition and, therefore, I asked the learned counsel for the petitioners to state his submissions in his own words and the petitioners' counsel stated the following three propositions :-  i) That the petitioners are entitled to be regularised because they had been working as work-charged employees since 1970 onwards; ii) That the petitioners were entitled to be regularised as per policy Annexures P/2 with effect from 1981 whereas they have been regularised at a belated stage in November, 1986.
If the services of the petitioners were regularised as per Annexure P/2, then by this time all the petitioners would have been regularised and the action of the respondent-Board in not regularising the petitioners with effect from 1981 is arbitrary and is thus liable to be set aside; and (iii) That admittedly there are no rules governing the service conditions and in the absence of the rules, the policy issued by the Board has the force of rules.
Vacancies which were in existence prior to 1985 policy (Annexure P/4) should have been filled up according to 1981 policy Annexure P/3 whereas the Board has filled up these vacancies under the 1985 policy which is bad in law.
4.
I have heard counsel for the parties at length.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioners had not joined the services in the operation and maintenance department from the year 1970 to 1979 as Operation and Maintenance Department came into existence for the first time in the year 1978-79.
Thermal organization was not in existence in the year 1970; it was further argued that the policies of 1980 and 1981 had not been acted upon and ultimately in the year 1985 a comprehensive policy was prepared; that the Board is fully competent to mark recruitment and promotion policies after taking into consideration the various aspects of the matter; that the respondent-Board framed the staffing pattern vide its policy of 1985 (Annexure P/4) which laid down the revised recruitment and promotion policy for employees working in the Thermal Plant of the Board.
According to this new staffing pattern, the services of more than 200 work-charged employees including petitioner Nos. 1 to 69 were regularised as Helper Grade-I in the scale of Rs. 350-600 and that the rest of the employees were not entitled to be regularised.
Besides this, some work-charged employees were also regularised alongwith petitioner Nos. 1 to 69; that the petitioners cannot claim regularisation keeping in view the policy of 6.11.1981 (Annexure P/3) as this policy had not been acted upon.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the averments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners and do not find any substance in any of the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners as per the averments made in the written statement.
Thermal organization was not in existence in the year 1970.
Operation and Maintenance Department came into existence for the first time in the year 1978-79.
Petitioners were working against a particular work and not against regular posts and were not thus entitled to be regularised as a matter of course.
Services of some of the petitioners have been regularised in terms of letter Annexure P/2 i.e. 70% of the work-charged posts continuing for the last five years or more were converted into regular posts and the employees working against those posts were regularised.
The claim of the petitioners that they should be regularised with effect from 1982 and not from 1986 is not substantiated.
Learned counsel for the petitioners was unable to show that any of the petitioners was entitled to be regularised on the basis of letter Annexure P/2 wherein it was stated that 70% of the work-charged posts continuing for the last five years or more be converted into regular posts.
No foundation of facts has been laid down in the writ petition showing that any of the petitioners was working against a post of the last more than five years which could be converted into regular posts.
6.
Board had introduced a staffing pattern and regularisation could only be done in accordance with the policy which came into existence in the year 1985.
Respondent-Board has already framed a policy for regularisation of the services of its employees and the Board is proceeding in accordance with the policy framed.
In view of this, no interference is called for the instance of this Court at this stage in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
7.
I do not find any substance in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioners that vacancies which came into existence under 1981 policy (Annexure P/2) but prior to the coming into existing of 1985 policy (Annexure P/4) should be filled up under the 1981 policy.
Learned Counsel of the petitioners relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in VV Rangaiah and others v. J Srinivasa Rao and others, (1983)3 S.C.C.
284, wherein it has been held that vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It was contended that since the vacancies in the present case came into existence after coming into force of 1981 policy (Annexure P/2) but before the promulgation of 1985 policy (Annexure P/4), the same should be filled up under the 1981 policy.
There is no parallel between the said authority and the facts of the present case.
It has been stated by the respondent-Board that 274 posts came into existence after 1985 and they could only be filled up by the ITI trained persons for Thermal Plant.
The posts which are claimed by the petitioners were not in existence prior to 1985.
In my view even if these posts were in existence prior to 1985, even then the petitioners could not claim as a matter of right that they be filled up under the 1981 policy because the policy made by the respondent-Board was not in the nature of either executive instructions or the rules which would be of a binding force.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition fails and is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.