Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The action of the Government in restoring the seniority of respondent, Ashok Kumar, vide orders dated October 17, 1990 (Annexure P5) above the petitioner has led to the filing of this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties brings out the following factual position regarding the petitioner and respondent No. 3 :-  Radio Mech.
Tech.
Asstt.
Training Technician (TV) Asstt.
Tech.
Officer (TV) Petitioner 5.8.61 1.7.75 1972 5.4.78 8.5.85 Respondent No. 3 3861 28.4.72 1983 5.3.84 6.11.90 w.e.f.
8585 3.
A perusal of the above position would show that respondent No. 3 had been appointed as Radio Mechanic on August 3, 1961 while the petitioner had been appointed after him on August 5, 1991.
It is also the admitted position between that parties that this appointment had been made as a result of selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and that in the merit list prepared by the Board the name of respondent No. 3 appeared above that of the petitioner.
It is further evident that respondent No. 3 was promoted to the next higher post of Technical Assistant more than three years prior to the petitioner.
However, as the averments of the parties show, in the year 1971- 72, the department deputed certain persons for training in the handling of the television sets.
The petitioner is said to have been sent for the training during the year 1971-72.
The respondent No. 3 avers that no notice regarding this training was given to any of the persons senior to the petitioner.
Be that as it may, a perusal of the written statement shows that certain persons were deputed for training primarily on the basis of their place of posting and without prejudice to the rights of their seniors.
As a result of the completion of the training, the petitioner was appointed as Technical (Television) on April 5, 1978.
At that time.
respondent No. 3 was not promoted.
He came to be actually promoted on March 5, 1984 after he had completed the training privately.
The petitioner was thereafter promoted as Assistant Technical Officer (TV) on May 8, 1985.
Respondent No. 3 was actually promoted to this post vide orders dated November 6, 1990.
4.
A perusal of the pleadings further shows that the conditions of service governing the parties were originally laid down in the Punjab Public Relations Department (Class-II Non-Gazetted) Service Rules, 1958, In these rules the post of Radio Mechanic and Technical Assistant etc. are mentioned.
However, the post of Technician (Television) does not find any mention.
This was presumably on account of the fact that 'television' had not been introduced in the country at any appreciable scale to deserve the creation of posts.
5.
After his promotion as Technician (Television) in March, 1984, respondent No. 3 appears to have submitted a representation in January, 1985 for promotion to the post of Technical Assistant w.e.f.
April 5, 1978 when a person junior to him viz. the petitioner had been promoted.
This representation is said to have been filed by the Government.
Respondent No. 3 again represented on August 14, 1987 and in February 1988.
On this occasion, the Government appears to have come to a conclusion that the grievance of the said respondent was justified.
Accordingly vide orders dated July 11, 1989, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P2, it was decided that Sh. Ashok Kumar be promoted and be given seniority w.e.f.
the date, his junior had been promoted.
By this order it was also provided that "before doing so, the department should issue a show cause notice in this regard to all the junior employees..." Accordingly, a show cause notice dated August 14, 1989 was issued by the Director, Public Relations Department, Haryana and a copy thereof has been placed at Annexure P.3.
The petitioner submitted his reply vide his letter dated August 29, 1989 a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P4.
The matter was decided by the Government in the year 1990 and vide orders dated October 17, 1990, a direction was issued to the Director Public Relations Department to grant promotion to respondent No. 3 as Technician (Television) w.e.f.
April 5, 1978.
The order issued by the Director on November 6, 1990 in this behalf has been produced as Annexure R. 3/1.
By this order, respondent No. 3 was further promoted as Astt.
Tech.
Officer (TV) w.e.f.
8.5.1985.
The action of the Government in accepting the representation of respondent No., 3 has been impugned in this petition.
6.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petition has contended that the petitioner was promoted as Technician (Television) on April 5, 1978 after the consideration of the claim of respondent No. 3.
At that time the respondent was not qualified.
According to the learned counsel the respondent No. 3 had taken no steps to challenge the appointment of the petitioner for a period of more than six years.
The learned counsel contends that in the circumstances of the case, the Government had no jurisdiction to grant retrospective promotion to respondent No. 3.
It has also been contended that no effective hearing was given to the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel, the decision has been taken by the Government vide its order of July 11, 1989 and the hearing given to the petitioner was a total farce.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been argued by Mr Ranbir Partap Bali, learned counsel for respondent No. 3 and by Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned Assistant Advocate General for the respondent-State that the action of the Government in sending the petitioner for training was wholly illegal.
It was without any prejudice to the rights of the seniors.
Accordingly, the learned counsel contends that the rights to respondent, who was admittedly senior to the petitioner as Radio Mechanic as also in the post of Technical Assistant could not be adversely affected by the wholly fortuitous circumstance of his having undergone the training.
It has been further contended that by the impugned order the Government has only rectified a mistake committed by the department.
Learned Counsel have also argued that under the 1958 Rules, a post of Technician (Television) or that of Assistant Technical Officer (TV) did not exist.
The 1958 Rules were later on superseded by the rules called 'The Haryana Public Relations Department Technical Wing (Group-C) Rules, 1985', In these rules, the post of Technician (Television had been recognised for the first time.
There was no requirement of any training under these rules.
Accordingly, the action of the Government in refixing restoring the seniority of respondent No. 3 above the petitioner was wholly justified.
7.
A perusal of the factual position shows that respondent No. 3 was senior to the petitioner in the service, he was admittedly higher than him in order of merit and was accordingly appointed as a Radio Mechanic on August 3, 1961 while the petitioner had been appointed on August 5, 1961.
On the basis of seniority respondent No. 3 had been promoted to the next higher post of Technical Assistant on April 28, 1972 while the petitioner had been so promoted on July 1, 1975.
In this situation, respondent No. 3 was again senior to the petitioner even in the post of Technical Assistant.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner had been deputed for training in the year 1971-72, when respondent No. 3 had not been so deputed.
This, however, was of no consequence as various persons had been deputed for training without prejudice to the claims of their seniors.
This has been specifically stated in the written statement and has not been controverted by the petitioner even by filing a replication.
In this situation, the promotion of the petitioner as Technician (Television) on April 5, 1978 could not be used to prejudice the interest of respondent No. 3.
Since this the post was not originally mentioned in the rules, the seniority in the service as constituted under the 1958 Rules was not adversely affected.
However, on the promulgation of the rules in the year 1985, the posts of Technician (Television) as also of Assistant Technical Officer (TV) were included in the Group 'C' service.
Immediately before the promulgation of the rules, respondent No. 3 staked his claim and submitted three representations.
The Government initially did not accept the claim of Ashok Kumar.
However, at a later stage, it found merit in his stand and considered it to be worthy of acceptance.
Accordingly, vide orders dated July 11, 1989 (Annexure P2), it gave directions to the Director, Public Relations Department to issue show cause notices to the persons, who were likely to be affected.
Such notices were actually issued and after consideration of the matter, the view which was originally taken by the Government was considered to be appropriate.
It was, therefore, confirmed.
In this process the Government did not violate any of the statutory rules governing the petitioner and respondent No. 3.
It was a possible view.
The Court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the Government only because a decision of the Government had been taken after a long lapse of time.
In my view a wrong can be rectified any time.
The remedies before a Court may be barred by delay.
However, the Government's jurisdiction to undo injustice at any stage cannot be doubted.
The Government had the discretion to reject the claim on account of delay.
In the circumstances of the case, it has chosen not to do so.
It was in all likelihood influenced by the fact that juniors had been deputed for training without prejudice to the rights of the seniors.
In such a situation, the Government may have thought that it would not be fair to prejudicially affect the rights of the seniors.
It has accordingly taken the impugned decision.
I do not find the action of the Government to be either lacking in jurisdiction or in propriety.
8.
Mr. Surya Kant contends that no proper hearing had been afforded.
A post decisional hearing, according to the learned counsel, does not amount to a valid & proper opportunity.
In the circumstances of the case, I do not think that the petitioner had been afforded a post-decisional hearing.
The sequence of events shows that the contention of respondent No. 3 was prima facie found worthy of acceptance by the Government.
However, no relief was granted to respondent No. 3.
He was neither promoted retrospectively nor was his original seniority restored.
The order dated July 11, 1989 categorically said that show cause notice should be issued.
Accordingly, show cause notices were issued.
The position would have been different if the notice had been issued after the relief had in fact been granted to respondent No. 3.
This was not so.
It is only after the consideration of the representations that the final decision was taken.
In the circumstances of the case, I am not satisfied that the petitioner was given a post-decisional hearing.
9.
Mr. Surya Kant raised an ancillary submission.
He contended that the Government had assigned no reasons while passing the order dated October 17, 1990.
He contends that the order should be quashed on this short ground alone.
I am unable to accept even this contention.
The factual position is not in dispute.
The circumstances of the case have been disclosed in the written statement.
In this situation, even if the matter was remanded to the Government for passing a speaking order, no useful purpose would be served.
It is also worthy of notice that while deciding disputes regarding seniority or considering representations, the Government is not requires to record a judgment.
10.
In view of the above, I find no merit in this petition, which is accordingly dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, I pass no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.