Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Gurgaon, was transferred to Municipal Committee, Ambala, vide order dated September 7, 1990.
In the writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the petitioner has sought for quashing the aforesaid transfer order.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that within the span of 3 years, he was transferred 16 times, the details of which have been given in para 4 of the writ petition.
According to the petitioner, the reason for his frequent transfers is that he is related to one Colonel Ram Singh who had contested the election on Congress (I) ticket from Mohindegarh Constituency against Rao Birender Singh, a Janata Dal nominee, who was declared elected.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned order of transfer was passed at the behest of Rao Birender Singh, who commands influence in the State of Haryana.
The other contention is that the impugned order of transfer has been issued during mid-term session, which is against the transfer policy of the Government.
3.
The State has filed a detailed written statement wherein it has categorically stated that the transfers of the petitioner were made either on administrative grounds or on his personal requests, though some of the transfer orders were cancelled.
The other contention raised by the State is that the petitioner is interested to stay at Gurgaon.
As such, in the past, he has been manipulating in getting the transfer order cancelled.
4.
I have considered the respective submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
5.
It has been highlighted in para No.4 of the written statement that the transfer order dated 271987 mentioned at Sr. No. 1 of the writ petition was made on petitioner's request.
Transfer order dated 28-10-1987 referred to at Sr. No. 2, was cancelled vide order dated November 3, 1987.
Transfer order dated 15-2-1988, mentioned at Sr. No. 4, was made on administrative grounds.
While under transfer, the petitioner was re-transferred to Sonepat as per order dated March 14, 1988.
The petitioner was again transferred to Panipat on administrative grounds vide order dated April 12, 1988.
During suspension, the petitioner was posted at Headquarters, Jind vide order dated 2841988.
It was done so with the object that he may not interfere with the pending inquiry against him at Panipat.
From the order dated May 30, 1988, it will be observed that it was not a transfer order, rather it was an order of reinstatement of the petitioner.
On reinstatement, the petitioner was posted at Ambala City from where he was transferred to Gurgaon on administrative grounds vide order dated 14-7-1988.
Transfer order dated 3041989, mentioned at Sr. No. 11 was cancelled.
Subsequent transfer order was made on the basis of a complaint.
Transfer orders, mentioned at Sr. Nos. 14 and 16 were made on administrative grounds.
Transfer order at Sr. No. 15 was manipulated by the petitioner himself.
6.
On a consideration of the matter especially in view of the above narration of facts, I am of the view that there is no ambiguity in the impugned order, copy Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
Earlier, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1400 of 1990 in this Court in which he had challenged the transfer order dated January 11, 1990 (Annexure P-1) with a limited prayer that his transfer order be kept in abeyance in view of his wife's illness.
This Court, while disposing of the writ petition, on March 19, 1990 directed the State that transfer order of the petitioner shall be effective from June 1, 1990.
In fact, that order became effective only when the petitioner was asked on June 15, 1990 to join at Ambala City instead of Hansi.
7.
Under these circumstances, I am of the considered view that the transfer orders in the past were made either on administrative grounds or on the personal requests made by the petitioner in this regard, though some of the transfer orders were cancelled.
The plea of the petitioner that his transfer is against the policy of the Government is without any substance and as such I am not inclined to accept it.
The transfer policy merely depicts guidelines which are not binding on the Government.
Moreso, the transfer is an incidence of service and no legitimate grouse can be made against it.
Otherwise also, in my view, normally the transfer is not amenable to challenge and only the frequent transfers, if made on mala fide consideration, can be made the subject-matter of challenge in the Court of law.
However, the Courts may only interfere in the transfer if these are made on mala fide consideration.
Mere assertion of mala fide is not sufficient unless it is substantiated by a particular instance(s).
The authority/officer against whom mala fide is attributed, must be impleaded as a party.
The allegation of mala fide should not only be general, but it should be specific.
In the instant case the petitioner has not given any specific instance of mala fide against any particular authority/officer.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is dismissed being devoid of merit.
However, it is directed that the petitioner shall relinquish the charge of his present post by 15th July, 1991 positively to enable him to settle his family affairs.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.