GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the order dated June 23, 1989, of respondent No. 1 whereby the seniority of respondent No. 2 was fixed above the petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The facts as enfolded in the petition briefly are that the petitioner on the recommendation of the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission') was appointed as Assistant Engineer on regular basis in the Punjab P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch vide order dated December 5, 1964.
He joined as such on December 31, 1964, that he was appointed to the senior scale of Punjab Services of Engineers Class I P.W.D.
B and R Branch with effect from December 4, 1972 in accordance with rule 8(12) read with rule 2 of the Punjab Services of Engineers Class I P.W.D.
(B and R) Rules, 1960 (for short 'the Rules'); that he successfully completed one-year probation period in Class I service on December 3, 1973; that he was promoted on regular basis as Superintending Engineer vide order dated May 25, 1989.
Respondent No. 2 was selected as an Assistant Engineer in the P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch in the year 1964 on the recommendation of the Commission.
However, he did not join B and R Branch in pursuance to the selection; that respondent No. 2 again re-appeared for interview for the post of Assistant Engineer in Public Health Branch and was selected and appointed vide order dated November 13, 1964; that the petitioner was also selected as Assistant Engineer along with respondent No. 2 on November 13, 1962 and was placed at serial No. 6 in the order of merit while respondent No. 2 was placed at serial No. 7; that appointment order of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Engineer Public Health Branch contained the following conditions :  "You will be liable to serve in the Defence Service or post connected with Defence of India for a period of not less than four years including period spent on training if any, provided that :  a) you shall not be required to serve as aforesaid the expiry of 10 years from the date of appointment; and  b) you shall not ordinarily be required to serve as aforesaid after attaining the age of 40 years."
In terms of these conditions, respondent No. 2 was bound to serve in defence service or posts connected with Defence of India for a period not less than four years; that respondent No. 2 was deputed to the army on September 26, 1966 under the Compulsory Liability Scheme and remained there upto September 25, 1970; that before joining defence services, respondent No. 2 applied to respondent No. 1 for change of his cadre from Public Health Branch to B and R Branch; that an undertaking was given in writing that in case he was absorbed in B and R Branch, he will not claim benefit of his past service.
The request was accepted by respondent No. 1 vide order dated November 14, 1966 and respondent No. 2 was appointed as Assistant Engineer in P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch with effect from November 14, 1966; that during the period the petitioner and respondent No. 2 were serving in Punjab Service of Engineers Class II, their service conditions were being governed by the appointment order of respondent No. 2 specifically provided that the petitioner has to render military service for not less than four years; it was also alleged that the benefit of military service rendered by an Ex-army personnel during the period of Emergency only can be granted and not of the entire military service.
Respondent No. 2 served the army from September 26, 1966 to January 10, 1968.
Therefore, he was entitled to the benefit of military service from September 26, 1966 to January 10, 1968 and not of his military service from September 26, 1966 to September 25, 1970.
3.
Separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
4.
Respondent No. 1 admitted that respondent No. 2 applied for change of his cadre from Public Health Branch to B and R Branch and to absorb him as Assistant Engineer in P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch.
Respondent No. 2 has stated that there is no such undertaking as alleged by the petitioner; that respondent No. 2 will not claim the benefit of the service towards seniority on his absorption in the P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch, on the record of the Government.
It was further stated that the appointment order of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Engineer in B and R Branch did not contain any condition regarding the fixation of seniority as alleged by the petitioner.
It was admitted that respondent No. 2 was placed junior to the officers appointed directly or by promotion as Assistant Engineers in a particular year.
It was submitted that respondent No. 2 has been assigned seniority under rule 8 of the Emergency Concession Rules, 1965.
The rejection of the representation filed by respondent No. 2 against the fixation of his seniority in the Punjab P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch was denied for want of knowledge.
It was, however, admitted that respondent No. 2 filed a fresh representation to respondent No. 1 for giving him the benefit of his past service in the Public Health Branch and in the army.
On receipt of the representation, concerned officers have been given opportunity to file objections and they were given personal hearing.
After affording an opportunity of hearing, the order under challenge was passed in accordance with the statutory rules.
5.
Respondent No. 2, in his separate written statement, has justified the impugned order.
He, however, admitted that his earlier representation against fixation of his seniority in the P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch was rejected.
He maintained that the filing of the representation did not debar him from filing a fresh representation.
He maintained that he remained in the military service from September 26, 1966 to September 25, 1970 and as such, was entitled to the benefit of military service.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner raised two submissions at the time of hearing of the petition, namely (i) that respondent No. 2 was not entitled to the benefit of military service under the Emergency Concession Rules since the appointment order of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Engineer in P.W.D.
specifically provided that he has to serve the army for a minimum period of four years.
Even if the Concession has to be allowed, it can only be granted for the period during which the emergency lasted and not for the entire military service during which respondent No. 2 served the military; (ii) The representation of respondent No. 2 against the fixation of seniority in P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch was rejected vide order dated February 7, 1973.
It attained finality and the order cannot be reopened.
7.
In order to appreciate the contentions raised, it will be useful reproduce rule 8 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 and rule 5 of the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968.
Rule 8 of the Emergency Concession Rules reads thus :  "A temporary Government employee, who after return from military service is appointed to the service or post from which he proceeded on military service or is appointed to a service or post with equivalent or similar grades, shall be treated in the same manner as a permanent Government employee in respect of pay, seniority and pension, irrespective of whether or not the post on which he was working at the time of his joining military service continue to exist during the period of his military service.
A temporary Government employee who does not return to the same post or to post with an equivalent or similar grade shall be treated as if he did not hold any post under the Government prior to his joining military service."
Rule 5 of the Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968, reads thus :  "(1) Seniority and pay of the candidates who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 3 and who -  (i) in the case of Emergency Commissioned Officers, are released according to a programme; or (ii) in the case of Short Service Commissioned Officers, are released on the expiry of the tenure of their service; or (iii) are invalidated owing to a disability attributable to or aggravated by military service.
shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the service or the post, as the case may be,  under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to the commission."
(2) Seniority inter se of candidates who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 3 and allotted to a particular year shall be determined on the basis of their dates of birth : the candidate older in age to be placed senior to the one younger in age :  Provided that in the case of candidates having the same date of birth, seniority shall be determined according to the merit list prepared by the recruiting authority on the basis of the result of the test or examination.
(3) All candidates appointed against the reserved vacancies under rule 3 shall rank below the candidates appointed by direct recruitment in the year to which the former candidates are allotted."
The import of these rules is that if a temporary Government employee joins military service, then on his return from that service, he will be treated at par with the permanent Government servant and the service of such a person in the civil department along with military service will be taken into account for determining his seniority in his old service.
Rule 8 covers the case of respondent No. 2.
He was entitled to the benefit of military service for determining his seniority in Class II + I service.
However, the impugned order suffers from a patent defect.
Under the Emergency Concession Rules, as amended in 1976, the service for which credit could be given to an Ex-army personnel was the service during the period of emergency only and not any period of service subsequent to the lifting of the emergency on January 10, 1968.
The proclamation of emergency was made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on October 26, 1962.
Respondent No. 2 could have only been allowed the benefit of military service towards seniority during the period of emergency.
In Ex-Capt.
AS Parmar v. State of Haryana, 1986(Supp.)
Supreme Court Cases 283, the apex Court relying upon Randhir Singh Dhull v. SD Bhambri, (1981) 2 SCC 338 held thus :  "It is, therefore, clear that military service rendered subsequent to the lifting of emergency cannot be taken into account for the purpose of reckoning the seniority in the civil post.
We, therefore, review our order dated July 29, 1985 and direct that credit will be for the military service rendered up to the date of the lifting of emergency only and not the entire military service."
The apex Court while referring to rule 2 of the Emergency Concession Rules had observed that concession in regard to the seniority was admissible in respect of military service rendered during the operation of emergency and not of any military service rendered after the emergency.
The claim of respondent No. 2 for giving him the benefit of military service for determining his seniority ought to have been decided in the light of the decision rendered in AS Parmar and RS Dhull's cases (supra).
8.
Indisputably, respondent No. 2 was selected as Assistant Engineer in Public Health Branch on November 13, 1962.
On his request, he was absorbed as Assistant Engineer P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch with effect from November 14, 1966.
The petitioner joined as Assistant Engineer on regular basis in the P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch on December 31, 1964.
On acceptance of the request of respondent No. 2 for absorption in Punjab P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch, the inter se seniority of the members of the service has to be regulated in accordance with rules 6, 8, 9 and 12(5) of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch Rules, 1965.
The impugned order does not indicate that the provisions of these rules were taken note of while giving respondent No. 2 the benefit of his service in the P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch.
Respondent No. 2 had earlier represented against his fixation of seniority in the P.W.D.
(B and R) Branch which was rejected by order dated February 7, 1973.
Admittedly, this order was not challenged by respondent No. 2.
Undeniably, the Government cannot review its earlier order but there must be justifiable reasons for reviewing the order after 14 years.
The order under challenge does not indicate that this aspect of the matter was taken note of by respondent No. 1 while fixing the inter se seniority of respondent No. 2 in Class II service and thereafter in Class I service.
9.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed; order dated June 23, 1989 is quashed.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to dispose of the representation dated August 19, 1989 afresh in the light of the observations made supra.
Respondent No. 1 is further disected to deal with the representation in accordance with law and after affording opportunity of hearing to all the affected persons.
Their objections to the change of their seniority should be dealt with while determining the representation.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.