RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Constable in the Haryana Armed Police (In short HAP) on 5th August, 1985, and was sent to the 5th Battalion of the HAP stationed at Madhuban (Karnal).
Therefore, on 1st October, 1986, the petitioner was transferred to 1st Battalion of HAP and posted at Police Lines Ambala City.
The petitioner was selected for special Commando training course and was deputed for undergoing the same at the Training Centre, CID Haryana at Panchkula on 26th September, 1987.
2.
It has been alleged in the petition that while undergoing the Commando training course at Panchkula, the petitioner fell down from a hillock and sustained multiple injuries and fracture of the leg on 6th October, 1987.
In spite of those multiple injuries, according to the petitioner, the Incharge training course, i.e. Sub-Inspector Ram Kumar treated the petitioner callously and did not even provide first-aid to him.
On the night of 9th October, 1987, the petitioner was sent to the Battalion Headquarters, Police Lines, Ambala and on 10th October, 1987 in the morning he got himself medically examined from the Chief Medical Officer, of Civil Hospital, Ambala City, as the doctor in the battalion was not available.
Further, according to the petitioner, the Chief Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Ambala City, who had examined him, had advised complete rest for one week, which was extended latter on.
It has also been averred in the petition that petitioner remained confined in his barrack at Police Lines with effect from 10th October, 1987 to 24th October, 1987 and during this period he was being continuously marked present in the meals register maintained by the Battalion Mess.
Whale, according to the petitioner, he was still under medical beg rest, respondent No. 4, i.e. Commandant of 1st Battalion, H.A.P.
passed the order of discharge of the petitioner on 20th October, 1987, under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
A copy of the order has been attached as Annexure P-1.
The mercy appeal of the petitioner against the order of discharge was dismissed by the Inspector General of Police, on 4th March, 1988 (Annexure P-2).
These two orders have been impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement, the allegations of the petitioner have been denied and it has been averred that in fact the petitioner had abandoned the job and had absented himself without any leave.
He had no right to the post being a probationer.
4.
It has been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that he was undergoing medical treatment at Civil Hospital, which is evident from Annexure P4, which is a letter dated 12th October, 1987 from the Commandant 1st Battalion, HAP, Ambala City to the Chief Medical Officer, Ambala City where the subject has been given as "Medical Check-up" and it has been mentioned therein that Constable Om Parkash i.e. the petitioner was serving with the lst Battalion and was drawing Rs. 990/- per month as his salary and further vide Annexure P-3 the Medical Officer had written to the Commandant on the same day with reference to the former's letter that the petitioner had presented himself for medical check-up and he had been advised medical rest with effect from 10th October, 1987.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has further submitted that in fact Annexure P-1 is not a simpliciter order of discharge under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, but in fact is an order of punishment, which is based on the alleged misconduct that the petitioner had absented himself unauthorisedly without any leave etc. and since no enquiry was held prior to the passing of the impugned order, the same was liable to be set aside.
In support of his contentions, he relied upon two judgments is of the Supreme Court in Smt. Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State and another, 1986(3) SLR 78 (SC) and Hardeep Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1987(4) SLR 576 (SC).
Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules may be noticed here :-  "Rule 1221 : A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police Officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule."
In Rajinder Kaur's case (supra) the facts were that the petitioner in that case had been appointed as a lady constable.
After completion of training, she was posted in the Police Lines.
The Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, discharged the petitioner from service by an order under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, which read as under :-  "Lady Constable Rajinder Kaur No. 732 is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
She is, therefore, hereby discharged from the police force under P.P.R.
12.21 with effect from today (9-91980)."
It was held by the Supreme Court that this order was in fact by way of punishment as the inefficiency of the lady Constable was based on an enquiry into alleged misconduct of staying nights with male constables, but no charge-sheet had been served on the petitioner nor any opportunity to explain had been afforded to her.
Similar was the view expressed in the other case of the Supreme Court referred to above.
5.
Without going into the merits of the fact whether the petitioner had absented himself unauthorisedly or was in fact under medical treatment and what is the evidentiary value of letters like Annexures P-3 and P-4, I am of the view that the impugned order though couched in simple language is in fact by way of punishment as the whole basis is the misconduct of the petitioner of having absented unauthorisedly during the training course.
Admittedly no enquiry was held prior to passing the order of discharge.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, I allow the writ petition and quash the order of discharge dated 20th October, 1987 (Annexure P.1) as also the order of dismissal of petitioner's mercy appeal dated 4th March, 1988 (Annexure P-2), being violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India as well as Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules, and direct that the petitioner would be reinstated forthwith.
No costs.
7.
The petitioner who present in Court, has sated that if he is reinstated back into service, he would not claim back wages.
Consequently, I hold that the petitioner would not be entitled to any back wages but would be entitled to continuity in service.
I make it clear that it will be open to the respondents to hold a departmental enquiry against the alleged misconduct of the petitioner.
Petition allowed.