Ashok Bhan, J - Haryana Agro Industries Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) is a State Government Undertaking.
Petitioner-Union, a registered body, has filed the present writ petition on behalf of its workers challenging the reduction in House Rent Allowance of certain employees who were working at Nilokheri.
2.
The Corporation in the year 1974 decided that its employees would be entitled to the same House Rent Allowance as is admissible to Haryana Government employees - State of Haryana divided various cities in the State into two categories i.e. 'A' Class Cities and 'B' Class Cities.
Employees who were posted in 'A' Class Cities were paid the HRA at the rate of 12-1/2 of their pay and at the rate of 7-1/2 of their pay to the 'B' Class City employees.
Haryana Government employees who were posted at Nilokheri, Ladwa, Gohana, Pehowa and Shahbad were not entitled to any HRA in the year 1974 as these cities did not fall in either of the categories i.e. 'A' and 'B' Class cities.
However, the Corporation in the year 1974 decided that though employees of the Corporation in the aforementioned cities were not entitled to House Rent Allowance in accordance with the instructions of the Haryana Government yet they may be granted the HRA at the rate of 7-1/2 of the salary being paid to the employees.
On 1471980, State of Haryana revised the rates of HRA and accordingly the Corporation revised the HRA paid to its employees.
On 121988, State of Haryana again revised the HRA and created three categories i.e. 'A' 'B' and unclassified cities/towns and villages.
HRA payable was as per the schedule given in the notification which is reproduced below :-  RATES OF HOUSE RENT ALLOWANCE  W.E.F.
121988  (As per FD Hr.
No. 52-2FICW-88 Dated 12288)  Sr. No. Pay Range 'A' Class Cities 'B' Class Cities Unclassified Cities, Towns/Villages, 1.
Upto Rs. 1300/- 50 50 50 2.
Rs. 1301-1600 100 50 50 3.
Rs. 1601-2000 150 75 50 4.
Rs. 2001-2700 250 125 100 5.
Rs. 2701-3250 350 175 150 6.
Rs. 3250-4500 400 200 175 7.
Rs. 4501 and Above.
500 250 200."
Nilokheri falls in the last category i.e. in the unclassified cities, towns and villages.
The Corporation as mentioned above, had decided to pay the same HRA which was being paid by the State of Haryana to its employees.
Accordingly, the Corporation revised the rate of HRA in accordance with the revision of the HRA by the State of Haryana vide its notification No. Acctts.
89/7590-7613 dated 1271989 (Annexure P/2).
Petitioner-Union on behalf of its employees posted at Nilokheri filed the present writ petition challenging the action of respondent No. 2 as unjust and arbitrary.
It has been averred that HRA is not a mere concession but is statutory in nature and cannot be withdrawn without affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
3.
As against this, the stand taken by the Corporation is that it had decided to follow the same pattern of HRA which was being adopted by the State of Haryana from time to time and that the action taken by it is neither unjust nor arbitrary as alleged.
It is further averred that HRA was not statutory but mere concession.
HRA was being paid under executive instructions and not under any statute as such and, therefore, any change made therein by the State Government or by the Corporation could not be challenged in writ jurisdiction as there was no vested right in the petitioner which could be said to have been violated by the impugned order Annexure P-1.
Learned counsel appearing for the Corporation has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Nand Lal and others v. Punjab State and others, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 131, wherein under somewhat similar circumstances, this court has taken the view that HRA is not statutory but a mere concession.
Relevant paragraphs 14 and 15 of this judgment are reproduced below :-  "14.
This court in Gurmeet Singh Gill's case (supra) has held that the payment of city compensatory allowance by the State Government was by way of concession.
It was open to the government to withdraw the said concession.
Nobody could urge that the Government before deciding to withdraw the concession should have heard any such Government employee.
The position is different when a right is given by the statutory provisions or by executive instructions.
The same could be amended or withdrawn in a manner as to do away with the right created by the earlier statutory provisions or the executive instructions.
Similarly in the State of Punjab and others v. Harnek Singh and others, L.P.A. No. 106 of 1977, reliance has been placed on Jit Singh's case (supra) in which it was held as under :- No support, therefore, can be sought from these decisions for the proposition that the concerned authorities having once allowed the payment of the house rent allowance on the basis of Annexure P-1 were not competent to stop its payment in view of the letter circular (Annexure P-3) whereby the conditions requisite for the payment of the house rent allowance had been clarified and in a way modified or that same could not be done without affording an opportunity of being heard to the petitioners.
The grant of the house rent allowance was only a concession given by the State to its employees upon certain conditions and that concession having never been incorporated in any statutory rule could be withdrawn or the conditions for its payment modified at any time unilaterally by the State.
The concerned authorities in stopping the payment of the house rent allowance to the petitioners only gave effect to the latter circular (Annexure P-3) and this, in our view, did not involve the reversal of any prior decision conferring any benefit on the petitioners which could give rise to a right to the petitioners of being heard prior to the stopping of payment of the house rent allowance.
15.
In view of these three Division Bench judgments, we do not find any force in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that House Rent Allowance was statutory and not mere concession.
The House Rent Allowance was being paid under executive instructions and not under any statute as such and, therefore, any change made therein by the State Government could not be challenged in writ jurisdiction as there was no vested right in the petitioners which could be said to have been violated by the impugned orders Annexures P/3 and P/4."
In view of the authoritative pronouncements by this Court, referred to above, I find no force in this writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.