VK Jhanji, J - The petitioner who belongs to the Scheduled Caste Community, is working as Assistant Grade 'A' with the Punjab Finance Treasuries and Accounts) Department.
As per Rule 8(1) of the Punjab Finance (Treasuries and Accounts Department (State Services Class III) Rules, 1979, a person after completion of 8 years of service as Assistant Grade 'A' becomes eligible to be promoted to the post of Superintendent, Grade III, i.e. next higher post.
2.
As per the seniority list of Assistant Grade 'A' in the department as on 3111985, the petitioner had completed more than 12 years, on the post of Assistant Grade 'A' and was placed at Sr. No. 6 in the seniority list.
A perusal of the rostor maintained by the Department shows that as many as six persons have been promoted as Superintendent Grade-III, w.e.f.
1966, but none from the Scheduled Caste Category.
As per 100 point Model Roster, 1st, 6th, 11th, 16th, and so on vacancy in the case of promotion of Class III and IV service in the State of Punjab are to be filled from the Scheduled Caste employees.
3.
In the year 1983, the 6th vacancy for promotion as Superintendent Grade-III accrued in the department and as per Rostor, it was to go to the Scheduled Caste employee and was so reserved, but due to non-availability of the eligible Scheduled Caste employee, it was dereserved vide letter No. 2/83 dated 1181983.
It was stated in the said letter that this reserved vacancy of Superintendent Grade-III is permitted to dereserve with the direction that this vacancy will be carried forward in the members of Scheduled Caste as per government instructions.
Since no Scheduled Caste employee was available against this vacancy, it was carried forward and one Jaswant Singh a non- scheduled caste employee, was promoted as Superintendent Grade-III, w.e.f.
2071983.
4.
The petitioner vide letter dated 531987, made a representation for consideration of his case for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-III as he had completed more than 8 years' of service by then, as Assistant Grade 'A'.
His representation was considered and the Department vide letter dated 24th March, 1987, informed the petitioner that no vacant post of Superintendent Grade-III was vacant at the moment and his case will be considered on availability of the post.
Jaswant Singh who was promoted against the 6th vacancy, retired on 19.8.1988 and thus, vacancy of Superintendent Grade-III became available w.e.f.
1101988.
The petitioner made his claim against this very post.
The petitioner also made a written representation dated 4.10.1988 for consideration of his claim, but no action was taken on his representation.
The petitioner apprehending that he may be ignored, filed the present writ petition.
5.
At the time of motion hearing, this Court stayed the promotion from the general category.
On 16101989, the writ petition was dismissed in default, and on the same very date, one Jatinder Singh belonging to general category (respondent No. 2), was promoted as Superintendent Grade-III.
6.
On an application made by the petitioner, the writ petition was restored and the petitioner amended his writ petition whereby he also challenged the Order, Annexure P-15 vide which, Jatinder Singh was promoted as Superintendent Grade-III.
The respondent No. 1 filed the written statement to the said writ petition.
In the written statement, the order promoting Jatinder Singh, respondent No. 2 as Superintendent Grade-III has been defended on the ground that not only respondent No. 2, but respondents No. 3 and 4 are also senior to the petitioner, and the petitioner had no claim against the post which had fallen vacant on the retirement of Jaswant Singh.
It has also been stated that as per government instructions, reservation of vacancy in a cadre in a particular year could not exceed 50% of that number and that the only vacancy in the post of Superintendent Grade-III could otherwise not be treated as reserved because the total number of posts in the cadre was only two and the share of the scheduled caste employees at 20% of this cadre strength of the same comes to 040 only i.e. less than one.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the action of the respondents in promoting Jatinder Singh as Superintendent Grade-III and not the petitioner on the ground that the said action is arbitrary and contrary to the statutory instructions issued by the State Government from time to time to give effect to implementation of the reservation policy.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents has defended the action referred to above, on the ground that as per government instructions, reservation of vacancy in a cadre in a particular year could not exceed 50% of that number and that the only vacancy in the post of Superintendent Grade-III could not otherwise be treated as reserved because the total number of posts in the cadre was only two and the share of the Scheduled Caste employees at 20% of this cadre strength of the same comes to 040 only, i.e. less than one.
8.
The Constitution contains special provisions vide the Articles 15(4) and 335 in regard to services and posts for members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes.
In pursuance of these provisions, the Punjab Government has made reservations for these communities in the services and posts under their control and from time to time issued instructions on the subject.
9.
As per government instructions, Annexure P-12 in the event of dereservation of post, the same has to be carried forward to the subsequent apointments/promotions until the same is filled by amongst the Scheduled Caste.
The said instructions read as under  "CHAPTER VI CARRYING FORWARD OF RESERVATIONS :  1.
According to 100-point running roster system (previously known as appointments on formula of rotation-block system) vacancies specified as reserved (Chapter-III should be filled by the members of Scheduled Caste/Backward Classes irrespective of their positions in the general merit/seniority, inter se the other category persons.
If required number of members of the reserved category are not available for appointments/promotions against reserved vacancies, such vacancies can be dereserved after following the prescribed procedure of dereservation as in Chapter IV and, thereafter, those can be filled by candidates/officials of other category (OC) but the reservations shall be carried forward to subsequent appointments/ promotions.
2.
The reservation should be carried forward from vacancy to vacancy in the same block until a Scheduled Caste or a Backward Class person, as the case may be, is appointed/promoted in the same block.
3.
If, all the vacancies in any block determined on the basis of prescribed rosters are filled by other category persons due to non-availability of Scheduled Castes, or Backward Classes persons, the reservation should be carried forward to the subsequent blocks.
Thus, the reservation should be carried forward from vacancy to vacancy in each block and from block to block until the carried forward vacancies are filled by the members of the Scheduled Castes or the Backward Classes.
4.
Only one reserved vacancy out of the carried forward vacancies should be filled in a block of appropriate roster in addition to the normal reserved point of that block.
In this manner all such carried forward vacancies should be adjusted subject to the above conditions.
Note-1 : Appropriate rosters means rosters prescribed for direct recruitment in Class I, II, III and IV services, promotions in Class I and II services and promotions in Class III and IV services.
Separate 100 point running rosters have been described as per Annexure VI, VII and VIII.
A block constitutes of vacancies point immediately before the next reserved point with relation to the appropriate rosters prescribed.
Note-2 : The carry forward rule given above is applicable in direct appointments as well as in promotions."
10.
On October 11, 1974, the Punjab Government issued instructions regarding reservation for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
The material portion of the said instructions reads as under -  "According to these instructions, in a cadre of less than five posts, if there be only one vacancy, it should be treated as 'UNRESERVED', but if on this account a reserved point is treated as unreserved, the reservation is to be carried forward to the subsequent two recruitment years.
In view, however, of the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Arti Ray Choudhary v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 532, it has now been decided that the reservation with respect to the solitary vacancy so unreserved and the carried forward must be given effect on the occasion next arising when a solitary vacancy occurs in the same cadre.
11.
As per Punjab Government's instructions dated October 11, 1974, the solitary vacancy so unreserved and carried forward has to be given effect on the occasion next arising when a solitary vacancy occurs in the same cadre.
12.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the only vacancy in the post of Superintendent Grade-III cannot be treated as reserved because the total number of posts in the cadre was only two and the share of the Scheduled Caste employee at 20% of this cadre strength of two comes to less than one, is devoid of any merit.
It is not disputed that the reservation policy does not apply to single post cadres and where the reservation exceeds 50%.
However, in all other cases, reservation has to be granted in accordance with the Roster as the vacancies have to be filled in point-wise.
In a situation where only one vacancy occurs in a particular year against reservation quota as per 100-point Model Roster, then the said vacancy is to be treated as unreserved and to be carried forward to the subsequent recruitment year and has to be filled from the Scheduled Caste category irrespective of the fact whether there is only one vacancy in the subsequent year.
13.
In the present case, there are two posts in the cadre of Superintendent Grade-III.
As per the Roster maintained by the department, as many as six Assistant Grade 'A' employees have so far been promoted, but none from Scheduled Caste category.
According to the Roster, the 6th vacancy for promotion was to go to Scheduled Caste employee and the same was so reserved, but at that time, no candidate from the Scheduled Caste community was eligible and hence, due to non-availability of the eligible Scheduled Caste employees, this post was dereserved with the direction that this will be carried forward for the members of the Scheduled Caste community as per government instructions.
Jaswant Singh was promoted as Superintendent Grade-III on 2071983, and this vacancy became available w.e.f.
1st of October, 1988 when he retired on 3091988.
As per instructions governing the reservation policy, this vacancy has go to Scheduled Caste employee and, therefore, the petitioner has a lawful claim in preference to the respondents No. 2 to 4 who are though senior to him but belong to general category.
For this proposition, I find support from the judgment of Supreme Court in AR Chaudhary v. Union of India, A.LR.
1974 S.C 534, wherein it was held that if the carry forward rule has to be given any meaning, the vacancy is to be carried forward for the benefit of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
14.
The judgment of this Court in Joginder Singh Sethi v. The State of Punjab, 1982(2) SLR 307, relied upon by the counsel for the respondents, has no application to the facts of the present case.
In Joginder Singh Sethi's case (supra) the only point decided by the Division Bench was that the Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes people can take advantage of the reservation made in their favour as per instructions dated July 30, 1970, till their representation reaches the prescribed limit and not beyond that.
And for working out that percentage, the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes who had been appointed either by selection as direct recruits or by promotion on the basis of merit-cum-suitability and not against the reserved posts have to be taken into account.
The issues raised in this writ petition were not the subject matter of the decision in that case.
In case, no vacancy in the cadre of less than five is held by Scheduled Castes and no such post was ever filled in from amongst them, then there is no excess in their representation and as such, by giving one post in the less than five posts cadre, the rule of law laid down in Joginder Singh Sethi's case (supra) is not attracted.
Persons belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Backward Class community, can take advantage of the reservation made in their favour and entitled to be promoted on the basis of Roster till their respective percentage is reached for each category separately.
15.
Thus, I find that the action of the respondents in view of the instructions Annexure P-12 and instructions dated October 11, 1974, in not promoting the petitioner to the post of Superintendent Grade-III who otherwise was eligible to be promoted, is contrary to the instructions issued by the Punjab Government governing certain policies in favour of members of the Scheduled Caste community and thus, the promotion of respondent No. 2 Jatinder Singh vide Order Annexures P-15 cannot be sustained.
16.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the order dated 16101989, Annexure P-15, is quashed.
The respondent department is directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion as Superintendent Grade III w.e.f.
1st of October, 1988 when this post had become available to the members of Scheduled Caste community.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Writ petition allowed.