NK Sodhi, J.- The primary relief claimed by the petitioners in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is that after quashing their order of demotion, their pay as Assistant Engineers Class-II be directed to be released from the date they completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsman.
2.
Both the petitioners joined the erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board, sometime in October, 1961 as Draftsman and after being promoted as Divisional Head Draftsman, they were further promoted to the post of Circle Head Draftsman on 28121976 and 131978 respectively.
The service consideration of these petitioners are governed by the statutory regulations known as Punjab Electricity Board Service Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter called the Regulations) which have been framed under Section 79 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948.
On the reorganisation of the State of Punjab in the year 1966, the composite Punjab State Electricity Board was bifurcated into three Boards including the present Punjab State Electricity Board (for short the Board) -respondent and the petitioners were allocated to this Board.
The next post to which the petitioners could be promoted was the post of Assistant Engineer Class-II and according to Regulation 9(4), a Circle Head Draftsman with not less than 10 years experience as Divisional Head Draftsman and on higher posts was eligible for appointment to the service as an Assistant Engineer Class-II subject to the condition that their number does not exceed 3% of the total number of cadre posts of Assistant Engineers Class-II.
It was also the requirement of this regulation that after selection as Assistant Engineer Class-II, the Circle Head Draftsman was to be given practical training for six months and during this period of training, he was to continue to draw pay in his previous scale of pay.
This regulation was amended in the year 1972 and the original regulation 9(4) was recast as under :-  "Sub-regulation (4) of Regulation 9 shall be substituted with the following :- (4)(a) The Chief Draftsman/Circle Head Draftsman under the Board of outstanding merit possessing Diploma in Electrical/Mechanical Engineering or Diploma/Certificate of a duration of two years either for combined course of Draftsmanship granted by the Punjab Government School of Engineering or in Electrical/Mechanical Draftsmanship of some recognised Institute, with not less than 10 years experience as Divisional Head Draftsman and on higher posts shall be eligible for appointment to the service as Assistant Engineers Class II subject to the condition that their number does not exceed 3% of the total number of cadre posts of Assistant Engineers Class II.
(b) In addition to the 3% posts reserved as per (a) above, 3% of the total number of cadre posts of Assistant Engineer Class II shall further be reserved for all the remaining categories of Drawing Establishment holding the rank of Chief Draftsman/Circle Head Draftsman viz. ITI Certificate holders, Departmentally qualified and those having no technical qualifications but having already been promoted as Circle Head Draftsmen.
They shall be considered for promotion as Asstt.
Engineers Class-II on the basis of their seniority provided they had put in as Divisional Head Draftsmen or on higher posts, before their becoming eligible for promotion, at least twelve years of service.
(c) After selection for promotion every eligible Chief Draftsman/Circle Head Draftsman from categories (a) and (b) above would be required to serve as Line Superintendent for six months in his own scale of pay and would be eligible for promotion after having completed satisfactorily this training period."
(This amendment was to take effect from 1951972).
The effect of the amendment was that in addition to the quota of 3% reserved for Chief Draftsmen/Circle Head Draftsmen, another 3% of the total number of cadre posts of Assistant Engineers Class-II were further reserved for the remaining categories of Drawing establishment holding the rank of Chief Draftsmen/Circle Head Draftsmen.
The other conditions enumerated in the unamended Regulation 9(4) continued to remain the same.
These Regulations were further amended on 31.12.1980 and a minimum service of 5 years as Circle Head Draftsman became an essential requirement before such a Draftsman could become eligible for appointment to the service as Assistant Engineer Class-II.
On 23101962, the Board took a decision whereby the promotion quota in the case of the Drawing Establishment was fixed at 3% and the distinction between the two sets of drawing establishments as in Regulation 9(4)(a) and (b) of the Regulations ceased to exist.
This decision was taken by the Board on 17111981, but due to some stay order granted by some court, the Board could not implement the same and it was implemented on 23101982 though with effect from 17111981.
3.
The petitioners were selected for undergoing training for six months on the successful completion of which their cases for appointment as Assistant Engineers were to be considered and they were posted as Trainee Circle Head Draftsmen inn their own scale of pay as per order dated 15.12.79.
They successfully completed the training period and were posted as Circle Head Draftsmen against the post of Assistant Engineer/S.D.O.
(Both these posts are equivalent and in the same rank) as per order dated 171990.
The Board while promoting/transferring/posting the petitioners on 171980 appended the following note to the office order :  "The adjustment of officers at Sr. No. 2 to 4 has been made on provisional basis and their cases for regular appointment as AE will be considered after the completion of 5 years service as C.D."
The officers mentioned at Sr. No. 2 and 4 of this office order are the petitioners and since they had by this time not completed five years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen they were being adjusted against the post of Assistant Engineer on provisional basis.
Since the promotion quota in the case of the Drawing establishment had been reduced to 3% and the distinction between the two sets of Drawing establishments as contemplated in Regulation 9(4)(a) and (b) had been done away with, the Board sought to demote the petitioners from the post of Assistant Engineers to that of Circle Head Draftsmen.
The petitioner apprehending their demotion filed the present writ petition impugning the order dated 23.10.82 whereby the quota had been reduced.
While the petition was still at the motion stage, the Board actually demoted the petitioners from the post of Assistant Engineer Class-II to that Circle Head Draftsmen and this decision was taken by the Secretary of the Board on 271182 though the same was communicated to the petitioners as per memo.
dated 11282.
This order was placed on the record alongwith the replication and is challenged in the present writ petition.
The reversion of the petitioners was stayed by this Court with the result that the petitioners continue to work as Assistant Engineers till date, though in the pay scale of Circle Head Draftsmen.
It is this order which is now challenged in the writ petition.
4.
As already stated earlier, the grievance made by the petitioners is that they underwent training for a period of six months and continued drawing salary in their own scale of pay as Circle Head Draftsmen.
After successfully completing the training period, they were promoted/adjusted as Assistant Engineers on provisional basis and it was clearly stipulated in the office order dated 171980 that their case for regular appointment as Assistant Engineers would be considered after they completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
It is true that when the petitioners were promoted/adjusted as Assistant Engineers provisionally on 171980, they had not completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen which was an essential requirement for regular promotion.
Petitioner No. 1 completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsman in December, 1981 whereas petitioner No. 2 completed the same in March, 1983 and their claim now is that their pay in the scale of Assistant Engineers be released with effect from those dates when they completed five years of service as was done in the case of S Shri Updesh Singh Grewal and Baldev Singh Gosal.
It was strenuously contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that S Shri Updesh Singh Grewal and Baldev Singh Gosal were also promoted as Assistant Engineers on provisional basis as they had not completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen and immediately on completion of 5 years service, they were allowed the regular scale of pay of Assistant Engineers and reliance in this regard is placed on the office order dated 681982.
The grouse of the petitioners is that when they completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen in December, 1981 and March, 1983, they were not given the regular pay scale of Assistant Engineers and on the contrary, they have been demoted as Circle Head Draftsmen.
5.
The Board in its written statement has denied that the petitioners were ever promoted as Assistant Engineers on provisional basis and the stand taken is that they alongwith some others were posted as Circle Head Draftsmen against the posts of Assistant Engineers in their own scale of pay pending acquisition of qualifications for consideration of promotion, namely completion of five years service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
The Board also relies upon Note No. 4 below the office order dated 1780 as quoted above.
In nutshell, the stand taken by the Board is that the petitioners remained in their own cadre of Circle Head Draftsmen and are not entitled to the pay scale of Assistant Engineers.
6.
Having given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions of the parties, I find force in the stand taken by the petitioners.
It is not disputed that they were appointed Trainee Circle Head Draftsmen for undergoing training for a period of 6 months, whereafter by an office order dated 1780 they were adjusted on provisional basis as Assistant Engineers and the note appended to the office order clearly mentions that their case for regular appointment as Assistant Engineers was to be considered after they had completed five years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
The word 'adjustment' as used in this office order in a misnomer and in my opinion, it was an order promoting the petitioners provisionally to the post of Assistant Engineers as they were yet to complete 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
It is not in dispute that the petitioners have by now completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen and, therefore, as in the case of others, the regular pay scale of Assistant Engineers should have been released to the petitioners as well.
As per the practice of the Board, the officials were promoted as Assistant Engineers on provisional basis in their own scale of pay and as soon as they completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen, the regular pay scale of Assistant Engineer was being released.
This was done inn the case of Sarvshri Updesh Singh Grewal and Baldev Singh Gosal as is clear from the order dated 681982.
There is, thus, no justification whatsoever to deny this scale to the petitioners with effect from the dates they completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
The stand of the Board that the petitioners were not promoted cannot be accepted for the reason that when the office order dated 171980 adjusted them provisionally against the higher posts of Assistant Engineers, it was nothing else but a promotion though provisional.
Again, if the petitioners had not been promoted, where was then the question of demoting them to the post of Circle Head Draftsmen as has been done by the Board as per order dated 27.11.1982.
7. the petitioners who stood promoted as Assistant Engineers on provisional basis on 171980 have not been reverted by the Board in pursuance of its decision dated 23101982 whereby the promotion quota of the Drawing establishment had been reduced to 3% and the distinction between the two sets of the Drawing establishment which existed earlier had been done away with.
The learned counsel for the petitioners urged that since the petitioners already stood promoted in July, 1980, they could not be reverted on the basis of the order dated 23101982 whereunder the promotion quota had been reduced.
The contention is that an executive order dated 23101982 could only operate prospectively and it could not be given a retrospective effect and the same could not affect the promotion of the petitioners which had already taken effect.
I find force in this contention as well.
It is well settled that an executive order like the one issued by the Board on 23101982 can only operate prospectively, with the result that the promotion quota could be reduced in regard to the promotions made after the date of the issue of the order.
It cannot reduce the quota retrospectively so as to revert the petitioners.
8.
Before parting, I may mention that one Shri Kewal Singh Mann had also been promoted/adjusted as an Assistant Engineer on provisional basis alongwith the petitioners on 171980 and he was sought to be reverted alongwith the petitioners on the basis of the order dated 23101982 whereunder the quota of the Drawing establishment was reduced to 3%.
Apprehending his reversion, he filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the office order reducing the quota did not apply to him and that he was entitled to be promoted on regular basis with effect from the date when he completed 5 years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
The suit was decreed by the learned Senior Sub Judge, Patiala as per judgment and decree dated 2031986.
An appeal filed by the Board against the said decree was also dismissed on 29.10.1988 by the Additional District Judge, Patiala and the judgment and decree of the trial Court was upheld by this Court in Regular Second Appeal No. 196 of 1989 when the R.S.A.
filed by the Board was dismissed in limine on 1891989.
9.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the order of reversion dated 27.11.1982 quashed and the Board is directed to release to the petitioners the regular pay scale of Assistant Engineers with effect from the dates they completed five years of service as Circle Head Draftsmen.
The petitioners shall have their costs which are assessed at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.