AS Nehra, J - Plaintiff-appellant has filed this appeal against the judgment and decree dated 27th July, 1987 passed by the Addl.
District Judge, Patiala.
2.
The plaintiff filed the suit for declaration and injunction stating that he was working as Sub Divisional Officer in Punjab Government, Department of Rural Development and Panchayats, that the promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer is ordered according to seniority; that there are no service rules prescribing passing of AMIE certificate for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer; that plaintiff was promoted as Executive Engineer on 31st July 1981; that there was no condition in the order of promotion that if the plaintiff does not pass AMIE certificate, he will be reverted; that the work and conduct of the plaintiff was satisfactory since his promotion as Executive Engineer; that the Government took an executive decision that for earning promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer, it is necessary to pass the AMIE certificate; that on the basis of the aforesaid decision the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Rural Development and Panchayat Department, Chandigarh vide order dated 25th November, 1982 passed order of reversion of the plaintiff from the post of Executive Engineer to the rank of Sub-Divisional Officer; that the order of reversion had not been implemented so far and the plaintiff was continuing as Executive Engineer with all benefits of the post of Executive Engineer and that the order dated 25th November, 1982 reverting the plaintiff from the post of Executive Engineer to that of Sub-Divisional Officer is illegal, ultra vires, null and void.
3.
In the written statement, it was submitted that the promotion to the post of Executive Engineer is made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, that only those Sub-Divisional Officers can be considered for promotion who have seven years experience as Sub-Divisional Officer and have a degree of CE or AMIE certificates.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties the following issues were trained :  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 25th November, 1982 reverting the plaintiff from the post of XEN to that of Sub Divisional Officer, is illegal null and void as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is premature as alleged ?
OPD 3.
Whether this court has no jurisdiction to try this case ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
5.
The trial Court decided issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff and as issue Nos. 2 and 3 were not taken up at the time of arguments by the parties, the same were given up.
The suit of the plaintiff was consequently decreed by the Sub Judge 1st Class, Patiala by his judgment dated 2941985.
6.
State of Punjab aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 29th April, 1985, passed by the trial Court, filed an appeal before the learned Addl.
District Judge, Patiala which was allowed on 27th July, 1987 and the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant was dismissed.
7.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant argued that no rules have been enacted under Article 309 of the Constitution of India for recruitment to the service of Executive Engineer in the Rural Development and Panchayat Department; that no Executive instructions have been issued in the name of Governor in the passing of the rules; that in fact there are no Rules or instructions governing the services.
He further pointed out that the draft rules on the basis of which the defendant respondents have been acting are illegal because the draft rules have no force in the eye of law.
The mere fact that the draft rules have been approved by the Chief Secretary, Punjab, does not add to its value.
These draft rules cannot be pressed into service to regulate the promotions of the Sub Divisional Officers to the rank of Executive Engineer and, therefore, no condition can be made in the absence of the rules and instructions approved by the competent authority that the Sub Divisional Officer, should have degree in Civil Engineering or the AMIE certificate besides experience of seven years as S.D.O.
for earning the promotion.
He therefore, submitted that the order passed by the Government vide Ex.P2 reverting the plaintiff-appellant to the post of Sub-Divisional Officer is illegal and, therefore, it should be struck down.
On the other hand, it is submitted that as per policy being followed by the department, the S.D.Os who have got seven years experience and have passed a degree in Civil Engineering and AMIE certificates, are only promoted to the post of Executive Engineer.
It is further submitted that this policy is being followed on the basis of draft rules under preparation, but such a policy has not been circulated amongst the affected persons.
It is contained only on the noting portion of the file.
8.
It is well settled law that Governor of a State or such person as he may authorise in the case of service and post in connection with the affairs of the State is competent to make rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of the service of the persons appointed to such service and posts until provision in their behalf is made by an order under the Act of the appropriate Legislature under Article 309 and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of such Act.
It is also well settled that where no statutory rules are made regulating recruitment of conditions of service, the Government can always in exercise of its Executive powers issue administrative or executive instructions providing for recruitment and laying down conditions of service.
The administrative instructions serve as a guiding value for appropriate authority to decide the department cases according to guidelines laid down therein and not to execute as such as practicable any possible element of arbitrariness or caprice in passing the orders.
But the executive instructions cannot amend or override the statutory rules.
In the instant case, there are neither any service rules made by the Governor under Article 309 of the Constitution of India nor any executive instructions have been issued laying clown conditions of service for the post of Executive Engineer which may require an S.D.O.
to pass a degree in Civil Engineering in addition to seven years of experience on the post of S.D.O.
Such conditions made without the authority of law is, therefore, invalid and illegal.
Sub Divisional Officer with seven years of experience who has also passed the departmental examination gets sufficient maturity and experience to handle the post of Executive Engineer.
The department cannot press into service the draft rules to regulate the service conditions unless these rules are enacted in accordance with law.
I, therefore, hold that the condition made by the department for passing degree of Civil Engineering or AMIE certificate for earning promotion as Executive Engineer by the plaintiff in the absence of any rules or executive instructions is illegal and consequently the reversion made by the defendants-respondents vide order Exhibit P2 dated 25th November, 1982 is null and void being illegal.
9.
The plaintiff-appellant, therefore, continues to be Executive Engineer on the basis of his promotion made vide order Exhibit P1 dated 31st July, 1981 and he is entitled to all benefits of pay on the basis of his promotion.
The suit of the plaintiff is, therefore, decreed.
Judgment and decree, passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Patiala dated 27th July, 1987, are set aside and judgment and decree passed by the trial Court are restored.
Order accordingly.