TS Doabia, J - On the basis of decision of the Supreme Court of India reported as Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and ors., AIR 1981 SC 487 and some other decisions, petitioner submits that the procedure adopted by the respondent-State Bank of India in making appointment by promotion from the clerical cadre which cadre consists of clerks/cashiers/Typist etc. to the cadre of Trainee Officers is liable to be quashed.
2.
Facts in brief be noticed.
3.
Petitioner was borne on clerical cadre being member of Award Staff.
He was entitled to promotion from the above clerical cadre to the cadre of Trainee officers.
For this eligible candidates were to pass a written test.
This test was to be held as per norms indicated in memorandum No. PER/22 of 1988.
A written test was supposed to be held.
After the written test they were to appear in interview.
In case in these interviews they happened to come within zone of eligibility then they were to be promoted from the clerical cadre to the Trainee officers' cadre.
4.
Petitioner submits that he appeared twice in the written test.
He passed in these tests but was not selected.
As per the petitioner, he was not so selected as he failed to come high up in the interview conducted by the Board of selection.
The fact that no consideration and weightage was given to the performance of written test and the fact was that the ultimate selection was made only on the basis of interview was said to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
As per the petitioner :  (i) weightage should have been given to written test.
(ii) the percentage of marks given for viva voce is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and also the law laid down by the Supreme Court of India.
Respondents have filed objections.
5.
Stand taken by them is that in all there were 250 marks.
150 marks were meant for written test and 100 marks were meant for interview.
Out of 150 marks meant for written test 100 marks were meant for paper on General Banking and 50 marks were meant for general knowledge.
Candidates who cleared the written test were to appear in interview.
Marks given in interview were 100.
It is submitted that only those who passed in written test could appear in interview.
This was made known to all candidates much before the exercise for selection was initiated.
So far as allocation of 100 marks is concerned, stand taken is that this is not in any way violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
With a view to see as to how these 100 marks have been allocated, Respondent-Bank was directed to produce the record indicating this aspect of the matter.
Records have been produced.
Perusal of rating sheet indicates that 100 marks were sub-divided.
Th is break up is as under :  Marks meant for power of expression - 20  Marks given for organisational awareness - 20  Marks for social awareness and task involvement - 20  Marks for mental alterness and clarity of thought -20  Marks for general poise and demeanour - 20  This above is the overall distribution of 100 marks.
6.
Does this criteria come in conflict with equality clause as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
This be examined.
7.
Petitioner as indicated above has placed reliance on decisions reported as Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others, AIR 1981 SC 487, Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 454 and Krishan Yadav and another v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1994 SC 2166 : 1994(3) SCT 581 (SC).
It is contended that 100 marks for interview is on the higher side and are not in accordance with the law laid down of the Supreme Court of India.
8.
Respondent-Bank, on the other hand contends that as the petitioner has taken part in the process of selection, he is debarred from challenging the criteria adopted by the Bank.
It is urged that he was aware of the fact that only those candidates who clear the written test would be permitted to take part in the interview and that ultimate selection would be made on the result of viva-vice.
Petitioner as per the respondent-Bank cannot make any grievance on this score.
Reliance is placed on the view expressed by Supreme Court of India in cases reported as State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur and others v. Prabhu Dayal Grover, AIR 1966 SC 320 : 1995(4) S.C.T.
672, the State of Punjab and others v. Kamal Dev and others, 1996(5) SLR 375 : 1996(2) SCT 668(DB) (P&H).
9.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that once the petitioner takes part in the process of selection then he is estopped from challenging the criteria adopted for selection.
This aspect was noticed by this Court in Unemployed Union of Kalkote v. State of J&K, 1998(2) SCT 685 : 1998(2) SCT 682 (J&K).
In para 19, it was observed :-  "All the petitioners took part in the selection process.
They competed along with others; they were not high up in the merit list.
If this be the position they cannot turn around and contend that the process of selection is bad.
Where a candidate takes part in the process of selection i.e. takes a chance of favourable decision in his favour, he cannot turn around and challenge the process of selection (See G Sarana v. Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428).
Justice MM Punchhi (Now Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India) in Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983(1) SLR 109, observed that competing candidates who remain unsuccessful are estopped from challenging the process of selection.
Another Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Rajeshwar Singh v. State, 1991(I) SLR 680 reached the same conclusion.
For this reason also the petitioners must fail."
10.
The view expressed in a recent decision reported as Union of India and another v. N Chandrasekharan and others, (1998) 3 SCC 694 : 1998(1) S.C.T.
631, in this regard is categoric and is being noticed.
In para 13, it was said:  "It is not in dispute that all the candidates were made aware of the procedure for promotion before they sat for the written test and before they appeared before the Departmental Promotion Committee.
Therefore, they cannot turn around and contend later when they found they were not selected by challenging that procedure and contending that the marks prescribed for interview and confidential reports are disproportionately high and the authorities cannot fix a minimum to be secured either at interview or in the assessment on confidential report."
11.
Similar view was expressed in case reported as University of Cochin, by its Registrar v. NS Kanjoonjamma and others, AIR 1977 SC 2083.
Thus the petitioner who had taken part in the process of selection is estopped from challenging the criteria adopted by the respondent Bank.
12.
The question as to whether 100 marks fixed in the interview is in breach of constitutional mandate be examined.
The decision given in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777 and several other decisions dealing with the subject were considered in the case reported as Anzar Ahmad v. State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1994 SC 141 : 1994(1) SCT 483 (SC).
Selection to educational institutions and selection for employment in service were placed in two different categories.
Decisions dealing with a first category i.e. R Chitralekha v. State of Mysore, AIR 1964 SC 1823, A Periakruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1971 SC 2303, Nishi Maghu v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, AIR 1980 SC 1975, Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487 were noticed and opinion expressed in Ajay Hasia's case was quoted.
This is being quoted again :  "We would, however, like to point out that in the matter of admission to college or even in the matter of public employment, the oral interview test as presently held should not be relied upon as an exclusive test, but it may be resorted to only as an additional or supplementary test and moreover, great care must be taken to see that persons who are appointed to conduct the oral interview test are men of high integrity, calibre and qualification."
13.
Dealing with selection for appointment to public service, the Supreme Court of India in Anzar Ahmad's case referred to view expressed in Lila Dhar case (supra).
In Lila Dhar's case (supra) 25% marks marks were allocated for viva voce examination.
This allocation was upheld.
The observations which are relevant are being quoted :  "If both written examination and interview test are to be essential features of proper selection, the question may arise as to the weight to be attached respectively to them.
In the case of admission to a college, for instance where the candidate's personality is yet to develop and it is too early to identify the personal qualities for which greater importance may have to be attached in later life greater weight has per force to be given to performance in the written examination.
The importance to be attached to the interview test must be minimum.
That was decided by this Court in A Periakaruppan v. State of Tamilnadu, AIR 1971 SC 2303, Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487 (supra) and other cases.
On the other hand, in the case of services to which recruitment has necessarily to be made from persons of mature personality, interview test may be the only way, subject to basic and essential academic and professional requirement being satisfied.
To subject such persons to a written examination may yield unfruitful and negative results, apart from its being an act of cruelty to those persons."
14.
Some other decisions which were noticed in Anzar Ahmad may again be noticed.
In Munindra Kumar v. Rajiv Govil, (1991) 3 SCC 368 : 1991(2) SCT 304 (SC) it was held that allocation of marks for interview and group discussion should not exceed 10% and 5% respectively.
In State of UP v. Rafiqudin, AIR (sic) SC 162 allocation of 35% of marks as minimum marks for qualifying in the viva voce test was upheld.
After noticing the above judicial precedents the Supreme Court of India in Anzar Ahmad's case (supra) upheld the allocation of 50% marks for written test and 50% marks for interview.
It was observed that method adopted by the respondent-commission did not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
The above decisions were noticed by a Division Bench of this Court in Letters Patent Appeal SWP No. 85/1997 decided on 29th May, 1998.
It was observed:-  "If above be the position then it cannot be said that prescription of 25% marks for interview in the present case was not in consonance for judicial precedents.
As a matter of fact, Ashok Kumar Yadav's case (supra) on which reliance was placed by the learned single Judge was also noticed by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Anzar Ahmed.
If two members bench of the Supreme Court of India after taking note of decision given in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case has upheld allocation of 50% marks for interview and when the Supreme Court itself has commented upon the view expressed in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case it would not be apt for this court to express a view to the contrary.
It is accordingly held that prescription of 25% of marks for the viva voce did not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness."
Somewhat similar position arose in a case reported as Siya Ram v. Union of India, (1998) 2 SCC 566 : 1998(1) SCT 319 (SC).
Distribution of marks in the interview were as under :-  (a) Professional ability 50 marks.
(b) Personality, leadership, technical and educational qualifications 20 marks.
(c) Record of Service 15 marks.
(d) Seniority 15 marks.
This criteria was found to be good.
In para 12, it was observed as under :-  "In the present case, the appointment was to the post of Chief Personnel Inspector in the Railways.
It is a selection post.
The selection Board consisted of High Ranking officials well versed with the requirements of the post to which promotion was to be made.
Norms had been laid for the Selection Board to follow.
No fault can be found with the same.
Apart from the objection that excessive marks had been allocated for viva-voce, the appellant has been unable to point out any illegality or irregularity in the selection process."
Again in Union of India v. N Chandrasekharan, 1988(3) SCC 694 allocation of 50, 30, 20 marks respectively for written test, interview and confidential record was held to be not contrary to law.
In Mehmood Alam Tariq v. State of Rajasthan, (1998) 3 SCC 241, view expressed is similar.
In para 20 it was said :  "(20) On a careful consideration of the matter we are persuaded to the view that the prescription of minimum qualifying marks of 60 (33 per cent) out of the maximum marks of 180 set apart for the viva vice examination does not, by itself, incur any constitutional infirmity.
The principles laid down in the cases of Ajay Hasia, Lila Dhar, Ashok Kumar Yadav do not militate against or render impermissible such a prescription.
There is nothing unreasonable or arbitrary in the stipulation that officers to be selected for higher services and who are, with the passage of time, (expected) to man increasingly responsible positions in the core services such as the Administrative Services and the Police Service should be men endowed with personality traits conducive to the levels of performance expected in such services.
There are features that distinguish for instance, Accounts Service from the Police Service - a distinction that draws upon and is accentuated by the personal qualities of the officer.
Academic excellence is one thing.
Ability to deal with the public with tact and imagination is another.
Both are necessary for an officer.
The dose that is damanded may vary according to the nature of the service.
Administrative and police services constitute the cutting edge of the administrative machinery and the requirement of higher traits of personality is not an unreasonable expectation."
15.
In the face of above judicial pronouncement and more so in the case of Siya Ram and N Chandrasekharan case, it can safely be concluded that the course adopted by the respondent-Bank, was not in any way violative of Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution of India.
I am accordingly of the view that there is no merit in this petition because :  (i) Petitioner knew that the written test is not the final word on the subject.
It is a step towards selection and final selection would depend upon the sole performance in the interview.
(ii) In interview 100 marks were divided into five categories.
For each of the five categories a 20 marks were allocated.
Parameters thus fixed are not contrary to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Selection process was made by the Committee.
Only bias which is suggested against the committee is that more representation was given to the candidates who belong to Haryana Region.
This aspect of the matter is denied.
The number of candidates who have been selected from Haryana Region is not disproportionate.
In any case they came high up in the merit.
As criteria adopted by the Bank is not contrary, I do not find any justification for interference.
This petition is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.