KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner is working as Tehsildar.
He is an ex- emergency commissioned officer.
He was selected as Tehsildar against the posts reserved for Ex-Servicemen by the Haryana Public Service Commission as a result of competitive examination held in the year 1974.
He has filed the present writ petition challenging the adverse confidential report for the year 1976-77, Annexure P 1.
He submitted representation against the adverse report.
The said representation was rejected by the Government vide order Annexure P.3 Again for the year 1978-79, the petitioner was conveyed adverse report vide letter dated 5121979.
The petitioner submitted representation against the adverse report but the same was rejected by the Government vide order Annexure P5.
He was again conveyed adverse report vide letter dated 2191983.
He submitted representation against the same.
The said representation was dismissed vide Annexure P.9.
For the year 1982-83, again he was given adverse report, vide letter dated 8.11.1983.
The petitioner submitted representation dated 1311984 against the adverse entry which was rejected vide order dated 581986, Annexure P12.
The petitioner was again conveyed adverse remarks in the ACR for the year 1984-85, vide letter dated 2181985.
He submitted representation against the same.
The said representation was rejected vide order dated 581986, Annexure P.15.
In short, the petitioner is aggrieved against the orders conveying adverse confidential remarks and also the dismissal of the representations against the same.
The stand of the petitioner in the writ petition is that the Report for the year 1976-77 is not fortified by reasons.
It is further averred that the facts which form the basis of the adverse remarks should have been conveyed to the petitioner as required vide Government Instructions No. 9026-G51/65144 dated 4121959.
It is further averred that respondent No. 2 has not seen the work of the petitioner while recording the report against the petitioner.
According to the government instructions dated 16.12.1959, the work and conduct of the officer should be reported by two Senior Officers who have actually seen the work and conduct of the officer concerned.
It is farther averred that the report should have been written within six weeks after the close of the financial year but in the present case the report was written after 11 months on 221978.
It is thus averred that the ACR for the year 1976-77 was recorded in violation of the Government instructions.
2.
As regards the adverse entry, Annexure P4, dated 5 5121979, it is averred that the same has been recorded on extraneous consideration.
The petitioner has been pursuing his remedy in a Court of law against the respondents and the Chief Secretary for claiming the benefit of emergency military service.
Even the petitioner moved a contempt petition against respondent No. 2.
It is averred that adverse report for the year 1977-78 has been recorded because the petitioner moved a contempt petition.
It is further averred that according to the Government's instructions, the report should have been written within six weeks after the close of the financial year but the report has been recorded after 9 months.
It is further averred that respondent No. 2. has not seen the work of the petitioner but according to the Government instructions, the opinion should be given by the officer who had actually seen the work of the concerned officer.
The petitioner submitted his representation against the said report but the same was rejected by a non- speaking order.
The petitioner again challenged the Confidential Report for the year 1981-82.
This report was written after 18 months of the close of the financial year but as per the instructions of the Government, the report should have been written within six weeks of the close of the financial year.
It is further averred that the report is given for the extraneous reasons.
The representation against the same was made but the same has been rejected.
Adverse entry for year 1982-83 is challenged because the same was recorded after six months of the close of the financial year.
This is clearly in violation of the Government instructions.
The representation against the same was made by the petitioner but the same was dismissed by a non-speaking order.
The petitioner has also challenged the adverse report for the year 1984-85, on the ground that the same is based on mala fide.
It is alleged in the petition that the adverse entries were recorded because respondent No. 2 bore grudge against the petitioner in view of the fact that he moved the contempt petition.
The petitioner made a representation against the same but the same was rejected by a non-speaking order.
3.
It is further averred that respondent No. 2 recorded the adverse report and considered his representation against the same.
The representation has been dismissed by him.
This was not permissible under the law.
According to the Government instructions the representation should have been decided by the next higher authority.
The respondents have filed written statement through Shri SP Bhatia, Joint Secretary to Government, Haryana, Revenue Department.
They have contested the claim of the petitioner.
4.
It has been vehemently contended by the counsel for the petitioner that according to the Government instructions, the adverse remarks should be fortified by reasons.
It is further submitted that the adverse remarks were not recorded within the prescribed period stipulated by the Government instructions.
For this reason also adverse entries are liable to be expunged.
He further submitted that the adverse entries have been made due to mala fide of respondent No. 2, against whom the petitioner moved contempt of Court proceedings.
He further contended that the representations against the adverse reports were decided by the Financial Commissioner by a non-speaking order and, therefore, the orders passed on the said representations are liable to be set aside.
It is further contended that the case of the petitioner for further promotion was not considered.
He has been denied the valuable right of promotion due to this illegal adverse report.
5.
It is quite evident that the adverse reports for the aforesaid period are not fortified by reasons.
Instructions cast a mandatory duty on the Reporting Officer that art adverse report should be fortified by reasons.
In the absence of the reasons in the adverse report, the officer concerned is deprived of the opportunity of representing against it.
According to the instructions, the report should have been written within the prescribed period.
It is also the requirement of instructions that the report should be written by the officer who has actually seen the work and conduct of the officer concerned.
A perusal of the adverse confidential reports clearly shows that the Government instructions in the matter of recording of confidential reports were clearly violated in this case and as such the said reports have no legal value as the same have been recorded in complete contravention of the mandatory provisions in the instructions as also the principles of natural justice.
So the aforesaid reports are liable to be expunged.
While considering the question of recording the confidential report in VD Gaur v. State of Haryana, 1991(3) S.C.T.
148 (C.W.P.
No. 5976 of 1986 decided on 2641990), I observed as follows :-  "Moreover, in the Government instructions, vide para 4, it is clearly mentioned that if an officer is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt, this opinion should generally be fortified by reasons which should be in the possession of the reporting officer.
No such reasons have been indicated in the report nor have these been disclosed to the petitioner.
So, the report was recorded by the officer in clear contravention of mandatory provisions of para 4 of the Consolidated Instructions.
It is laid down in the instructions that the purpose of writing the annual report is to give guidance to the officers so that they may remove their defects.
No such attempt was made in the present case to give any advice to the petitioner in this behalf during the year in question.
So, in my opinion, the report which has been recorded in this case was clearly in contravention of mandatory provisions of the rules.
According to the scheme of the rules, when an adverse confidential report is recorded it should be conveyed and the officer given an opportunity to represent against the same.
When the reasons are not disclosed in the report, details of the complaint have not been given, the particulars and names of persons who made any complaint against the petitioner have not been disclosed, the petitioner has been completely denied an opportunity to represent against such a report.
In order to give proper opportunity of representation against the adverse report, it is necessary that the report should be written in accordance with Government instructions and particularly in case of reports against integrity the same should be fortified by reasons and the material on the basis of which they have been recorded should be disclosed to the employee concerned so that he may have the right to represent.
By not writing the report in accordance with the Government instructions and not disclosing the material on the basis of which the adverse report was formed, the Government servant is denied the opportunity of representation against the same and, therefore, such reports have got no value as the same have been recorded in complete contravention of the mandatory provisions of the instructions, as also the principles of natural justice.
It is very unjust, unfair and arbitrary to condemn the Government servant and doubt his integrity without giving the reasons and the material as required by the instructions.
So adverse report for the year 1984-85 is liable to be expunged."
6.
In the light of the above legal position, adverse reports in the present case are also liable to be expunged.
In the present case, the adverse reports were conveyed by the Financial Commissioner.
The representations against the said adverse reports have also been considered by the Financial Commissioner himself and the same have been dismissed by a nonspeaking order.
According to the instructions of the Haryana Government, the representation against the adverse reports recorded by Financial Commissioner should have been considered by the next higher officer.
In the present case it should have been considered by the Minister.
I examined this legal position in VD Gaur's case (supra) and observed as under :-  "According to the above instructions it was obligatory on the part of the respondents that the representation should have been placed before the Revenue Minister for disposal.
This representation could not be decided by the Financial Commissioner.
In this view of the matter, the decision of the Financial Commissioner disposing of the representation has got no validity.
According to the aforesaid instructions, it was obligatory for the respondents that the representation should have been disposed of by the highest administrative authority which in the present case was the Minister in charge, because in the present case the adverse remarks were recorded and conveyed by the Financial Commissioner.
So, for all legal purposes until the representation made by the petitioner was finally disposed of by the Minister in charge it shall be deemed to be pending and will acquire final only after necessary orders have been passed by the Minister in charge.
It has been laid down by the Supreme Court that if representation against adverse remarks is pending, adverse report should not be taken note of while retiring the government servant.
Should this be done, the order of compulsory retirement is liable to be set aside as held in Mohinder (Mrs.) Librarian v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(4) SLR 92 and Baidyanath Mahapatra v. State of Orissa, 1989(4) SLR 220.
Recently, the Supreme Court has gone to the extent of holding that if the time for submission of the representation against adverse remarks has not expired, even then such a report cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of compulsory retirement (See S. Maheswar Rao v. State of Orissa & another, 1989(4) S.L.R.
226).
In this view of the matter, I am of the firm opinion that in the present case when the officers committee took the decision regarding the impugned retirement of the petitioner, at that time the representation filed by the petitioner against the adverse entry for the year 1984-85 was pending and therefore, the said adverse report could not be taken note of for the purpose of his retirement.
In addition to this, the representation against adverse report, according to the State Government instructions, can only be disposed of by the highest authority which in this case is the Minister in charge who has passed no orders on the representation till the moment.
Consequently the representation made in this case will be deemed to be pending.
Thus, taking an overall view of the case, I am of the opinion, that the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner is wholly illegal, ultra vires and null and void."
7.
I have also held in VD Gaur's case (supra) that a representation against adverse confidential report should be disposed of by a speaking order.
As in the present case, the representation was disposed of by a non-speaking order, for this reason also the impugned orders are quashed.
8.
In view of the aforesaid discussion the adverse confidential entries Annexures P.1 dated 221978, P-4 dated 5121979, P7 dated 2191983, P10 dated 8.11.1983 and P.13 dated 2181985 are ordered to be expunged and the orders rejecting the representations Annexures P.3 dated 21101978, P6 dated 1821980, P.9 dated 581986, P12 dated 581986 and P.15 dated 581986 are quashed.
The petitioner has been deprived of his promotion due to these adverse reports.
9.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition is allowed, a writ of certiorari is issued thereby declaring the impugned adverse confidential entries in the service record of the petitioner as expunged and further the orders passed on the representations filed by the petitioner are set aside.
The respondents are directed to allow the petitioner all consequential benefits including promotion, seniority etc. expeditiously.