Gokal Chand Mital, J (Oral) - There was an NCC Officer in Industrial Training Institute (for short 'ITI') Gurgaon.
On his becoming over-age the charge of NCC Officer was given to Ramesh Chander Khandewal, who was working in ITI Gurgaon as Mechanical Instructor.
He was admittedly not an officer of NCC.
All the same, he was allowed to take the charge of NCC Officer as a stop-gap arrangement.
2.
Sardari Lal was working as a NCC Officer in ITI Faridabad and was transferred to Gurgaon.
The Deputy Director General of Haryana NCC passed order on 23.11.1989 directing that Sardari Lal will take charge as officer of NCC from Ramesh Chander Khandewal, as the letter was holding the same as a stop-gap arrangement.
On this order being passed, Ramesh Chander Khandelwal filed a civil suit and also filed an application for ad interim injunction to restrain Sardari Lal from taking charge from him.
3.
While the trial Court dismissed the application the lower appellate court granted the same in view of rule 26(4aa) of the National Cadet Corps Rules, 1948 framed under the National Cadet Corps Act, 1948 (for short 'the Rules'), on the reasoning that Sardari Lal got transferred from Faridabad to Gurgaon on his own request and such an officer cannot displace a junior NCC Officer from the charge of the post.
This is revision by the Deputy Director General of Haryana NCC and the Commanding Officer of the 5th Haryana Bn.
N.C.C.
against the same order.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and on consideration of the matter, I am of the view that rule 26(4aa) of the Rules would not be applicable to the case because admittedly Ramesh Chand Khandelwal is not an officer and the aforesaid rule and proviso to it will come into play only between two officers.
As the facts stand Sardari Lal is the only officer who can hold the post of N.C.C.
Officer in the ITI Gurgaon.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, the revision is allowed, the order of the appellate court is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored but for the reasons recorded herein leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.