RS Mongia, J - This is a Letters Patent Appeal on behalf of the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the HSEB), against the judgment of learned Single Judge, in C.W.P.
No. 1091 of 1984, decided on 10th March, 1989, by which the writ petition of AK Jain (now respondent) was allowed and the order of the HSEB dated 19th August, 1983 (Annexure P-6 to the writ petition), declining to confirm the petitioner as Line Superintendent with effect from 31st October, 1956, had been quashed.
It was further directed by the learned Single Judge to confirm the petitioner with effect from 31st October, 1956 and grant him all consequential service benefits.
2.
The facts giving rise to the present appeal are that on 9th January, 1956, the petitioner joined the erstwhile State of Pepsu as Electricity Overseer.
A permanent post fell vacant in that rank on 31st October, 1956 in the erstwhile State of Pepsu.
With effect from 1st November, 1956, Pepsu emerged with Punjab and the petitioner was integrated as Line Superintendent Grade II in the State of Punjab.
He worked there upto 1st February, 1959, when his services were transferred on permanent basis to the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the PSEB).
Subsequently, in 1962, he was absorbed in the PSEB with effect from 1st May, 1959.
As per the terms and conditions of the absorption, the PSEB was to give all service benefits which he would have derived while in the service of the State of Punjab.
These terms and conditions are contained in the letter dated 1st November, 1962 (Annexure P-1 to the writ petition).
3.
According to the writ petitioner, although the petitioner was working against a permanent post of Electrical Overseer, which admittedly was there on 31st October, 1956, he was not confirmed.
The order of the Chief Engineer, Punjab dated 13th June, 1958 (Annexure P-2 to the writ petition) shows that the petitioner was working against a permanent post and he was treated on probation.
The petitioner has given further history about his service career in the writ petition that he worked with the PSEB upto 1st May, 1967, when the said Board was bifurcated.
His services were transferred to the HSEB.
After about six months he was promoted as Line Superintendent Grade 1 and thereafter as Junior Engineer.
On 28th July, 1982, he was promoted as Assistant Engineer.
Since the petitioner was not confirmed as Electrical Overseer with effect from 31st October, 1956, although a permanent post was available, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3965 of 1974 in this Court, claiming the said relief.
The said writ petition came up for hearing before the Division Bench of this Court on 16th September, 1974, when the counsel for the HSEB made a statement that the petitioner would be considered for confirmation retrospectively.
The order of the Division Bench dated 16th September, 1974 reads as under :-  "Mr. Dahya states that the respondents shall conclude all the Enquiry proceeding pending against the petitioner within 6 months from today and shall within a fortnight thereafter consider his case for confirmation retrospectivly.
In view of the undertaking Mr. Agnihotri withdraws the petition".
Dismissed as withdrawn."
4.
In pursuance of the above order, it is alleged that the petitioner was confirmed as Line Superintendent, Grade II with effect from 1st March, 1961, vide order dated 3rd April, 1975.
Since according to the petitioner the abovesaid order of confirmation dated 3rd April, 1975 was not in accordance with the undertaking given in this Court in the writ petition referred to above, the petitioner filed another petition - C.W.P.
No. 2555 of 1975 challenging order dated 3rd April, 1975.
This writ petition was disposed of on 10th November, 1982, vide order Annexure P-5, with a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for confirmation with effect from 31st October, 1956 and to dispose it of by passing a speaking order after affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
In obedience to the above mentioned direction, the impugned order Annexure P-6 dated 19th August, 1983 was passed in which it was mentioned that the post of Electrical Overseer which the petitioner was holding in erstwhile State of Pepsu had been equated with Line Superintendent Grade II in the State of Punjab and in the seniority list circulated he was shown at Serial No. 270 and the confirmation of an employee was ordered on the basis of seniority and availability of permanent post subject to good record and is since the permanent post was available in accordance with the seniority with effect from 1st March, 1961, the petitioner could not be confirmed as Line Superintendent grade II with effect from 31st October, 1956, as claimed by the petitioner.
It was further mentioned that the record of the petitioner from 9th January, 1956 onwards was unsatisfactory.
5.
The learned counsel for the HSEB had tried to uphold the impugned order dated 19th August, 1983 (Annexure P-6) for the reasons stated therein, which have been mentioned above.
The learned Single Judge repelling the reasons, quashed the said order (Annexure P-6) and gave the directions as stated in the opening paragraph of this judgment.
6.
The learned counsel for the HSEB has reiterated the same submissions as were made before the leaned Single Judge.
It may be stated here that in the written statement of the HSEB, the authenticity of the letter issued by the Chief Engineer of the Pb.
P.W.D.
Electricity dated 13th June, 1958 (Annexure P-2) had not been denied in which it is stated that the petitioner and some other Electrical Overseers working in the erstwhile State of Pepsu integrated as Line Superintendent, Grade II in the State of Punjab were working on permanent vacant posts available from 31st October 1956 and their confirmation had not been made because their Confidential Reports had either not been received in most cases or some other essential formalities had not been complied with.
It was stated in the written statement that letter Annexure P-2 was neither admitted nor denied as the said letter was not traceable.
It will be worthwhile to mention here that apart from the letter, Annexure P-2 referred to above, there is a note in the service book of the petitioner with respect to the existence of permanent post and that the petitioner had to be treated on probation in view of the order of the Chief Engineer, dated 13th June, 1958.
It is, therefore, clear that there is a reference of the Chief Engineer's letter dated 13th June, 1958 in the service book of the petitioner.
The learned Single Judge rightly held that the writ petitioner cannot be made to suffer if the respondents are unable to trace the original letter of the Chief Engineer.
Since as per letter, Annexure P-2 and as per the entries in the service book of the petitioner there was a permanent post existing on 31st October, 1956, and the petitioner was working against that post, he could be confirmed on the said post from the said date.
It may, however, be mentioned that it is not the case of any of the parties that there was any prescribed period of probation which had been fixed before an officer could be confirmed.
Apart from what has been stated above, in the earlier two writ petitions of the writ petitioner, it was never the stand of the HSEB that there was no permanent post of the rank of Electrical Overseer (equivalent to Line Superintendent Grade II) existing on 31st October, 1956.
That being the position, the HSEB cannot now turn around and say that there was no permanent post of Electrical Overseers on 31st October, 1956.
7.
The other reason which is mentioned in the impugned order, Annexure P-6,which has been highlighted by the learned counsel for the HSEB is that the petitioner could not be confirmed with effect from 31st October, 1956, as his service record from 9th January, 1956 onwards was found unsatisfactory.
The HSEB has put on record the A.C.Rs of the petitioner for the period 1957-58 (Annexure R 4/1 with the written statement) and 1958-59 (Annexure R5/1 with the written statement) to contend that the petitioner's record was not good.
For confirmation, the petitioner's record had to be seen upto 31st October, 1956 and there is nothing on the record to show that the petitioner's record upto 31st October, 1956, was not good.
The learned counsel has not been able to show as to what was the basis for the HSEB to say in the impugned order (Annexure P-6) that service record of the petitioner from 9th January, 1956 onwards was not good.
For confirmation with effect from 31st October, 1956, the service record of the petitioner after that date could not be taken into consideration.
8.
The learned counsel for the HSEB further submitted that since the petitioner had not challenged the seniority in which he was shown at S. No. 270, no relief could be granted to him.
Apart from the fact that in the earlier two writ petitions, this plea was not raised and rather it was said that the petitioner's case would be considered for confirmation with effect from 31st October, 1956.
This plea cannot be allowed to be raised on behalf of the HSEB.
Otherwise also since it is held that the petitioner was entitled to be confirmed with effect from 31st October, 1956 in the rank of Electrical Overseer as a permanent post was available, the seniority shall automatically change.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and is dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
10.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be mentioned that the admitting Bench had stayed the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
The learned counsel for the respondent (writ petitioner) had stated that the petitioner is to retire shortly and if while giving effect to the directions of this Court to confirm the petitioner as Electrical Overseer with effect from 31st October, 1956 and while granting him the consequential benefits the petitioner is found eligible for the higher post, he would proceed on leave so as not to disturb any other officer who might have to make room for the petitioner.
In fact, the writ petitioner has given an undertaking in writing to that effect.
That being so, it is directed that the directions of the learned Single Judge be carried out within a period of one month from the receipt this order.
Appeal dismissed.