GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has challenged the order of respondent No. 3 whereby his request for joining as Assistant Sales Inspector with respondent No. 3 was declined.
2.
The facts :-  The petitioner was offered a temporary post of Assistant Sales Inspector on June 2, 1982 by the Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh (a public sector undertaking).
He accepted of offer.
After training, he was posted at Milk Plant, Bathinda.
The Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh was replaced by the Punjab State Co-operative Milk Producers Federations Ltd (respondent No. 2), which is an instrumentality of the State of Punjab having been founded by the State Government and as such it is in the nature of another authority in terms of the provisions of Article 12 of the Constitution.
The petitioner came to be marked by anti-social elements at Bathinda.
So, he made a request to respondent No. 2 on May 30, 1989 for his transfer to the Milk Plant at Ludhiana under the control of Ludhiana District Co-op.
Milk Producers Union Ltd, Milkfed Plant, Ludhiana (respondent No. 3).
in the year 1988, respondent No. 1 issued general policy instructions about the security of the members of minority community.
These instructions were applicable to respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
Under these instructions any reasonable request from such an employee was to be considered sympathetically.
The request of the petitioner was accepted by respondent No. 2 vide letter dated June 2, 1989 with an express condition that he should submit his resignation from the post of Assistant Sales Inspector in Milk Union, Bathinda and accept his seniority as Assistant Sales Inspector on the cadre of Milk Union, Ludhiana from the date of his joining the service in that Milk Union.
The petitioner submitted his resignation on June 15, 1989.
His resignation was accepted by the Managing Director.
The Guru Cooperative Milk Producers Union Ltd Milk Plant, Bathinda, vide order dated July 20, 1989, on the advice of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner approached respondent No. 3 for absorption but was informed on August 9, 1989 that he could not be absorbed in the Milk Plant at Ludhiana.
The petitioner maintains that he tendered his resignation with specific undertaking that he could be absorbed by respondent No. 3.
3.
Separate written statements have been filed by respondents 2 and 3.
Respondent No. 2 took a preliminary objection that it was not an immediate employer.
The petitioner was initially the employee of Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh and was posted at Milk Plant, Mohali.
Milk Plant, Mohali and other plants were also taken over and the staff working there was absorbed into the service of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner also stood absorbed in the service of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was transferred to Milk Plant, Ludhiana in January, 1984 by respondent No. 2.
He was suspended and charge-sheeted in January, 1986 and was subsequently punished by respondent No. 2.
On his reinstatement, he was posted at Milk Plant, Bathinda.
Milk Plant, Bathinda belonging to respondent No. 2 was permanently transferred to the Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union, Bathinda in January, 1988.
He was initially retained on notional deputation at Milk Plant, Bathinda, but later on vide order dated June 30, 1988, passed by respondent No. 2, was permanently transferred to the service of the Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union, Bathinda and since then the petitioner is the employee of the Milk Union, Bathinda for all intents and purposes.
On merits, it was admitted that a request was received from the petitioner for transfer from Bathinda Milk Plant to Ludhiana Milk Plant.
Respondent No. 2 had no objection to the transfer of the services of the petitioner on cadre strength of respondent No. 3 on permanent basis.
Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union, Bathinda, and Ludhiana District Co-operative Milk Products Union, Ludhiana are different and distinct legal entities having their independent cadres.
Respondent No. 2 could not issue any direction to respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 maintained that it is not a instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and no writ is maintainable against it and that the necessary party has not been impleaded in the writ petition.
Guru Co-operative Milk Producers' Union, Bathinda was a necessary part to the writ petition which had accepted the resignation of the petitioner.
In all other respects, respondent No. 3 reiterated the pleas taken by respondent No. 2 in the written statement.
4.
This Court in RS Goyal v. State of Punjab and others, 1989(3) S.L.R.
258, held that respondent No. 2 is an instrumentality of the State.
Although this finding was recorded on the concession given by the counsel for the Milkfed in that case, but no exception can be taken to it.
A judgement by consent or default is as effective and estoppel between the parties as a judgment whereby a Court exercises its mind on a contested case.
(See Sailendra Narayan Bhanja Deo v. The State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 346).
It is not open to challenge to respondent No. 2 that Milkfed is not an instrumentality of the State.
5.
The petitioner was offered a temporary post of Assistant Sales Inspector by Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd on June 2, 1982.
He accepted the offer and joined against the post offered and was posted at Bathinda with the Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union.
Respondent No. 2 stepped into the shoes of Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd Petitioner's request to respondent No. 2 for transfer on compassionate ground was accepted and the following order was passed on June 2, 1989 :-  "Shri Ajay Batta, Asstt.
Sales Inspector in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 posted with the Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union Ltd, Bathinda has vide his application dated 30589, requested for his transfer as such to Ludhiana on compassionate grounds.
Considering his request sympathetically, it has been decided that Milkfed Punjab does not have any objection to the transfer of his service on the cadre strength of District Cooperative Milk Producers Union Ltd Ludhiana on permanent basis, subject to the following terms and conditions :- (i) That he shall have to resign from the post of Asstt.
Sales Inspector in Milk Union, Bathinda.
(ii) That his transfer on the cadre strength of Milk Union, Ludhiana on permanent basis shall come into force from the date he reports for duty at the Milk Union consequent upon the acceptance of his resignation by the Management of the Milk Union, Bathinda.
(iii) That his existing basic pay shall be protected by Milk Union, Ludhiana.
(iv) That his seniority as Asstt.
Sales Inspector on the cadre of Milk Union, Ludhiana shall be determined from the date of his joining the service in that Milk Union.
(v) That he is entitled for the benefits gratuity/P.
Leave etc from Milk Union, Bathinda as per rules for the period of service as rendered by him in that Union.
The service rendered in Milk Union, Bhatinda shall not in any case be carried forward to the Milk Union, Ludhiana for the purposes of such benefits.
(vi) If any disciplinary case/departmental enquiry/court case/any action for loss or recovery is pending against him in Milk Union, Bathinda, the management of Milk Union, Ludhiana shall be competent to take further necessary action in such matters.
(vii) That in the matter of other terms and conditions he shall be governed by the Rules and Regulations of the Ludhiana Distt.
Co-op.
Milk Producers' Union Ltd., Ludhiana.
Dated, Chandigarh the 2nd June, 1989.
Sd/-  Onkar Singh, Managing Director."
6.
On July 6, 1989, respondent No. 3 informed the petitioner that his case had been referred to the Managing Director of respondent No. 2.
On July 13, 1989, respondent No. 2 directed the Managing Director, Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union Ltd, Bathinda to accept his resignation.
On July 20, 1989, the Managing Director of the Guru Co-operative Milk Producers Union Ltd, Milk Plant, Bathinda accepted the resignation of the petitioner.
This sequence of events leaves no manner of doubt that the petitioner tendered his resignation from the post of Assistant Sales Inspector in Milk Plant, Bathinda on the assurance given by respondent No. 2, which was duly incorporated in its order dated June 2, 1989, reproduced above.
Respondent No. 3 informed the petitioner that his case had been referred to respondent No. 2.
The resignation of the petitioner was accepted on certain specific understanding which is duly incorporated in the letter dated June 2, 1989.
Respondent No. 3 is not justified in refusing to absorb the petitioner in its service.
The defence taken by respondent No. 2 that the petitioner was not in their service and of respondent No. 3 that it is not obligatory for it to absorb the petitioner cannot be accepted.
Admittedly, the petitioner was offered the post of Assistant Sales Inspector on temporary basis by the Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd and respondent No. 2 has stepped into its shoes.
Assuming the respondent No. 3 is not bound to accept the advice of respondent No. 2, it is not justified for respondent No. 2 not to absorb the petitioner in its service.
7.
Respondent No. 2 is an instrumentality of the State and is another authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and is amenable to jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
It is not expected of it to treat its employees in an arbitrary manner.
It had accepted the resignation of the petitioner on certain terms and conditions.
Respondent No. 3 may or may not be bound by the advice of respondent No. 2.
I would not like to express any opinion on this aspect of the case.
I think it will meet the ends of justice if a direction is issued to respondent No. 2 to offer to the petitioner the post of Assistant Sales Inspector on the same terms and conditions which were applicable to him on the date on which he had tendered his resignation, within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
8.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition is allowed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.