GR Majithia, J - The petitioner, an Ex-Constable, has challenged the order of discharge from Police Force issued under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 Vol. II (for short, the Rules) in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The facts :-  The petitioner retired from the Army on January 31, 1985.
After being enrolled in Punjab Police Service, he was directed to report himself to Senior Superintendent of Police, Ropar, on March 29, 1985.
He was sent for training to Jahan Khelan on April 25, 1985.
He being an Ex-Serviceman was posted on guard duty at the residence of Shri SK Beer, Superintendent of Police.
On July 2, 1985, while he was posted on guard duty at the residence of Shri KS Beer, Superintendent of Police, one woman posing herself to be a main-servant of the Superintendent of Police tried to seek entry into the residence of the Superintendent of Police.
The petitioner stopped her for identification.
She put enraged and abused the petitioner.
She was allowed to go in after the Guard-In-Charger identified her as private employee of the Superintendent of Police.
After the incident, the petitioner was directed to report to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ropar for orders.
He was served with an order of discharge.
Against the order of discharge, the petitioner filed a representation to the Director General of Police on the ground that the same was passed without affording him an opportunity of hearing.
The petitioner's representation was not disposed of.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No. 6257 of 1988 in this Court and the Motion Bench passed the following order on July 27, 1988 :-  "Present : Mr. SS Rathor, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Raj Mohan Singh, Advocate.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the representation (Annexure P-2) against the discharge order dated 5th July, 1985 (Annexure P-1) has not so far been disposed of.
In the circumstances, we direct that the same be disposed of within three months from today.
However, if the same has already been decided, the petitioner be intimated the result thereof.
Sd/- JV Gupta Sd/- M.R.
Agnihotri Judges.
July 27, 1988.
Thereafter the petitioner was informed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range, Patiala that his representation had been rejected.
The order of discharge is impugned on the ground that it is not envisaged by Rule 1221 of the Rules.
If the attending circumstances resulting in the passing of the order are taken into consideration, it will manifest that it was a camouflage for an order dismissal for misconduct.
4.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ropar.
It is admitted therein that on July 1, 1985, the petitioner made obscene remarks to Smt. Nirmala Devi, wife of Ram Lubhaya of PRTC, Jahan Khelam when she was returning from the residence of Superintendent of Police.
Smt. Nirmala Devi made a complaint to this effect to the authorities and after secret equity, the petitioner was sent back to the parent District.
However, it was maintained that the order of discharge was not passed by way of punishment.
5.
It cannot be disputed that the form of the order is not decisive as to whether the order is a simple order of discharge under Rule 1221 of the Rules.
It is always open to the Court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and ascertain the true character of the order.
If the Court holds that the order though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality a cloak for an order of punishment, the Court would not be debarred, merely because of the form of the order, in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the employee.
(See in this connection Anoon Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, A.I.R. 1984 SC 636).
Rule 1221 of the Rules reads as under :-  "A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrollment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule."
It gives an absolute power to the Superintendent of Police to discharge a constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
This rules applies where the constable is found not upto the mark in discharging his official duties.
It relates to his functioning as a police constable.
If on objective data available, the Superintendent of Police opines within three years of the enrolment of the Constable that he is not likely to prove an efficient police officer, the Constable can be discharged from service under the Rules.
If he is accused of misconduct, then he is to be dealt with under Rule 1624 of the Rules.
Rule 1624 lays down the procedure to be followed in departmental enquires.
If a Police Officer is accused of misconduct, the superior officer may direct an enquiry to be conducted against him unless the allegations are such that it can form the basis of a criminal charge, the superior officer shall decide at that stage whether the officer accused of misconduct shall be tried departmentally first and judicially thereafter.
6.
In the instant case, on July 1, 1985 as stated in the written statement, the petitioner made obscene remarks to Smt. Nirmala Devi.
The secret enquiry was held by CBI, PRTC, Jahan Kelan and the imputations made against the petitioner were found to be correct and the impugned order of discharge was passed on July 6, 1985.
The respondents had not disclosed the material on the Government file on the basis of which the impugned order of discharge was passed.
The only conclusion deducible is that the foundation of the order of discharge was the misconduct of the petitioner when he made obscene remarks to Smt. Nirmala Devi on July 1, 1985.
The pleas taken in the written statement are suggestive of the fact that the order of discharge has got a direct link with the incident dated July 1, 1985.
The shortcircuit method was adopted to avoid the enquiry envisaged by Rule 1624 of the Rules.
If the petitioner has misconducted himself as is enfolded in the written statement, the proper course would have been to hold departmental enquiry against him under Rule 1624 of the Rules and thereafter the resultant action would follow.
The purpose of the impugned order of discharge is punitive and it cannot be upheld and is liable to be quashed.
7.
For the reasons aforesaid, this writ petition succeeds and the order of discharge is quashed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.