KP Bhandari, J - This is an appeal against the judgment and decree dated 19.4.1989 passed by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, whereby he upheld the judgment passed by the Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Jalandhar, dismissing the suit of the plaintiff whereby he has challenged the order of termination of his services.
The facts of this case are not in dispute.
The appellant joined service of the Corporation as Accounts Clerk on 251974.
He successfully completed the period of probation.
Thereafter, the appellant was promoted to the post of Additional Manager, at Batala on 19.5.1977 by the Managing Director of the Corporation.
However, the appellant was removed from service by an order of the Managing Director dated 1471980.
The appellant preferred appeal against the said order of dismissal from service and the said appeal was dismissed.
2.
The appellant filed a civil suit in the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Jalandhar, for a declaration that the order dated 1471980 is illegal, ultra vires and null and void.
The Sub Judge Ist Class vide his judgment and decree dated 3111985, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant.
3.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid judgment and decree passed by the Subordinate Judge, Jalandhar, the appellant preferred an appeal to the Court of District Judge, Jalandhar.
The said appeal came up for hearing before the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar.
The Additional District Judge, Jalandhar dismissed the appeal.
Now the appellant has come up in Regular Second Appeal against the said judgment and decree dated 19.4.1989 passed by the Addl.
District Judge, Jalandhar.
Admittedly, the conditions of service of the appellant are governed by the statutory regulations framed by the Corporation.
Regulation 16 of the statutory regulations reads as under :-  "16.
Imposition of penalties : 1.
Any employee who commits a breach of any of these regulations or is guilty of negligence, inefficiency or indolence in performance of his duties or knowingly does anything detrimental to the interest of the Corporation or in conflict with its institutions or committing a breach of discipline or is guilty of any other act of misconduct, misdemeanour or is convicted of a criminal offence shall be liable to the following penalties : a Censure.
b Stoppage of increments.
c Reduction to a lower post in his permanent class or to a lower stage in his incremental scale.
d. Recovery from pay and allowances of the whole or part of the pecuniary loss caused to the Corporation by the employee.
e. Removal.
f Dismissal.
2.
The powers to impose a penalty under sub-regulation (1) shall be exercised : (i) by the executive committee in the case of Class I employees other than the Managing Director, in respect of all penalties except the penalty specified in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-regulation (1); (ii) by the Managing Director, in the case of class II, Class III, and Class IV employees, in respect of all penalties and in the case Class I employee in respect of penalties specified in clauses (a) and (b) of the Sub-regulation (1); and  (iii) by the Board of Directors in consultation and with previous approval of the Government and the Central Warehousing Corporation in the case of the Managing Director in respect of all penalties : Provided that no punishment shall be imposed on any employee without charge-sheeting him and without giving him an opportunity for tendering an explanation in writing and cross-examining the witnesses against him, if any, and of producing defence : Provided further that any punishment to an employee on deputation shall be imposed only in accordance with the procedure and rules laid down in this behalf in his parent service."
4.
During the year 1979 a departmental enquiry was initiated.
The counsel for the Corporation placed Inquiry file before the Court.
It is clear from the Inquiry file that the appellant was not even given a copy of the report of the Inquiry Officer.
It is also clear from the Inquiry file that the question as to whether the punishment proposed to be imposed was not disproportionate to the charge levelled against him, was not considered by the concerned authority.
The appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed on 26.2.1981 on the ground of limitation without giving him personal hearing.
It is now settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in Ram Chander v. Union of India, 1986 SC 1173 that the Appellate Authority while deciding a service appeal must afford personal hearing to the delinquent officer.
Admittedly, in the present case, personal hearing was not given to the appellant.
Moreover, there is also a provision for review/revision in rules.
No limitation has been prescribed for review/revision.
The respondents should not have taken a technical view of the matter in dealing with the employee of the Corporation as in the present case, the appellant was not given any personal hearing.
The authorities did not apply its mind to the question whether the appeal should be treated as review/revision ?
The question for adequacy of punishment was not considered.
The Appellate Authority is bound to satisfy with regard to the following matters :  (a) Whether the procedure laid down in these rules has been complied with, and if not, whether such non-compliance has resulted in the violation of any provision of the Constitution of India or in the failure of justice; (b) Whether the findings of the punishing authority are warranted by the evidence on the record; and  (c) Whether the penalty or the enhanced penalty imposed is adequate, inadequate or severe.
The appellate authority did not apply its mind to the above said essential matters.
In this view of the matter, I declare the appellate order passed in this case to be illegal, ultra vires, null and void and direct that the appellate authority should re-decide the appeal of the appellant, as there is no period of limitation for filing revision/review.
The scope of revision/review under the rules is very wide.
No restrictions have been placed on the power of authority to revise or review any order passed under the rules.
In this view of the matter, the appellate authority should not dismiss the appeal of the appellant on technical grounds.
In addition, the appellate authority should take into consideration the following matters :-  (a) Whether the procedure laid down in the rules has been complied with, and if not whether such non-compliance has resulted in the violation of any provision of the Constitution of India or in the failure of justice; (b) Whether the findings of the punishing authority are warranted by the evidence on record; and  (c) Whether the penalty or the enhanced penalty imposed is adequate, inadequate or severe.
5.
In this view of the matter, this appeal is partly allowed and the declaration as indicated above is granted in favour of the appellant leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
In view of the above, the parties through their counsel are directed to appear before the appellate authority on 26.11.1990.
The appeal should be disposed of by the appellate authority within two months in accordance with the directions given in the judgment.
Orders accordingly.