SB Sinha, J :- This petition is directed against an order dated the 26th March, 1984 passed by the respondent No. 2 as contained in Annexure-I to the writ application whereby and whereunder the services of the petitioner as Assistant Godown Manager was terminated with immediate effect.
2.
The facts of the case lie in a very norrow compass.
3.
The petitioner at the material time was working as an Assistant Godown Manger at Saharsa.
By an order dated the 7th May, 1983, the petitioner was placed under suspension.
Thereafter, on the 6th March, 1981, the petitioner was furnished with draft charge.
The said draft charge is contained in Annexure-2 to the writ application.
From a perusal of the said charge, it appears that the petitioner was charged with : (a) non-adjustment of certain advances, (b) shortage of foodgrains and (c) failure to hand over certains papers.
4.
The petitioner considered that the said purported draft charge to have been issued to him only for purpose of having an explanation from him.
The petitioner thereafter submitted a show cause dated the 26th April, 1981, before, Shri M.S.
Hodda who was appointed as the conducting officer.
In the said show cause, the petitioner, inter alia stated that a criminal case was also instituted against him wherein he obtained an order of anticipatory bail.
The petitioner, therefore, demanded that the departmental proceeding to kept in abeyance.
The petitioner however answered the charges by denying the same and by offering his explanations in that regard.
5.
According to the petitioner, the Corporation in the disciplinary matters follows the rules and procedures as applicable to the Bihar Government servants-including the rules as contained in the Bihar and Orissa Subordinate Services Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1935.
The petitioner has asserted that in the said enquiry proceeding, the provisions contained in rule 55 of the aforementioned Rules were not followed nor the instructions contained in Rules 165 to 170 of the Bihar and Orissa Boards Miscellaneous Rules 1939 were followed.
The petitioner has further stated that even the guidelines issued by the State of Bihar in ouch matters (Annexure 4) were not followed in the case of the petitioner.
The said guideline is contained in Annexure 4 to the right application.
The petitioner has asserted that, in view of the fact that the charge-sheet furnished to him was a draft one, he did not ask the department to supply him copies of the documents.
6.
The petitioner has further asserted that the enquiry initiated against him was merely a fact finding enquiry.
The Enquiring Officer Shri M.S.
Hodda retired in May 1982 and thereafter one Shri Sant Saran Prasad Sinha directed the petitioner to appear before him.
The petitioner has asserted that no formal order was even issued by the Managing director of respondent No. 1 Corporation appointing the said Shri Sinha as the Enquiring Officer nor any information with regards thereto was sent to the petitioner.
The petitioner has further asserted that by an order dated the 18th October 1982 the order of suspension passed against the petitioner was revoked and the petitioner was allowed to join as an Assistant Godown Manager, Saharsa, on the 16th November, 1982.
The petitioner has stated that the District Manager of the Corporation informed the respondent No. 1 that all the vouchers which the petitioner had submitted earlier in respect of the advance taken by him were found to be genuine and regular and that the entire amount of the advance had been adjusted by the District Manager and no amount was outstanding against the petitioner.
A Copy of the said letter dated the 13th June, 1983 is Annexure-6 to the writ application.
Thereafter the impugned order dated the 29th March, 1984, terminating the service of the petitioner was passed.
7.
The petitioner has stated that no full fledged enquiry was made as against the petitioner.
It has further been stated that in the departmental enquiry before Shri Hodda, only Shri Chandrika Prasad Singh was asked certain question and the petitioner was also asked certain questions as were asked from Shri Chandrika Prassad Singh.
The petitioner has further submitted that as Shri Sant Saran Prasad Sinha was not appointed as the Enquiring Officer by the respondent no. 1 the impugned order passed upon the enquiry report of Sri Sinha is illegal.
The petitioner has further stated that no copy of any document on the basis whereof to the charges were to be proved, was ever supplied to him nor the petitioner was given any reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
8.
The petitioner has further stated that no second show cause notice was issued to the petitioner as was required under note 1below the explanation III of Rule 2 of the Bihar Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules read with Rule 166 (ii) of the Board's Miscellaneous Rules.
The petitioner has also filed a supplementary affidavit wherewith he has appended copies of orders dated 29-1-1986 and 24-4-1987 as contained in Annexures-7 and 8 thereto for the purpose of showing that in respect of shortage of foodgrains the disciplinary authorities passed orders directing the Assistant Godown Managers to pay the amount therefore and no disciplinary proceedings were initiated against them.
9.
In this case, a counter, affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the said counter affidavit it has been stated that although the charge-sheet was levelled as a draft charge-sheet but, in fact, the same was a charge-sheet for the purpose of initiating a disciplinary proceeding and the petitioner also treated it to be the same.
According to the respondents, the rules and the procedures applicable to government servants are not applicable to the employees of the respondent No. 1.
It has further been stated that although the departmental proceeding was initiated against the petitioner, he never expressed his desire to look into the documents or papers.
It has been accepted in the said counter affidavit that inview of the District Manager's letter dated the 13th June, 1986 the first charge against the petitioner was not proved.
It has however, been asserted that the petitioner was not entitled to the second show cause notice.
10.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder to the said counter affidavit wherewith he has annexed a copy of the resolution No. 65/1092 dated the 24th March 1983 (Annexure 7) whereby and whereunder the respondent Corporation purported to have adopted Rule 49 (a) of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1930 and Sub-clause 3-A of the Bihar and Orissa Subordinate Service (Discipline and Appeal) Rules 1935.
11.
Mr. S Mukherjee, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that the proceeding are of the employees of the corporation to be governed it terms of the provisions of Rule 55 and 55-A of the Bihar Civil Services (Classification Control and Appeal) Rules 1930, and as there has been a complete failure to observe the mandatory provisions of the said Rules and the same must be held to be wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
The learned counsel has further submitted that in terms of the guidelines issued by the State of Bihar as contained in Annexure-4 to the writ application, it is evident that all the documents were to be supplied along with the charge-sheet and as in the instant case admittedly, the said document were not supplied, the petitioner was seriously prejudiced thereby and, in fact, had reasons to believe that the purported draft charge-sheet was issued not for the purpose of holding a departmental proceeding but for the purpose of conducting a fact finding enquiry.
The learned counsel has further submitted that even a copy of the enquiry report was not served upon the petitioner.
The learned counsel has also submitted that the very fact that the charge-sheet served upon the petitioner was a draft one, there was a draft one, there was no reason for the petitioner to believe that full fledged departmental proceeding would follow the same.
According to the petitioner, he always consider it to be a fact finding enquiry and, as such, did not object to the nonfurnishing of copies of the documents and the manner in which the witnesses including the petitioner was examined i.e. by putting some questions to them.
12.
On the other hand, Mr. Tarkeshwar Dayal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that, the said chargte-sheet although purported to be a draft charge-sheet but the same in fact, was a charge sheet issued for initiating a departmental proceeding.
He has further submitted that in view of the fact that the rules applicable to Government servants are not applicable in the case of employees of the respondent No1 Corporation, only the principles of natural justice were to be followed.
According to him there has been a substantial compliance of the principles of natural justice.
13.
It appears to be somewhat curious that the respondent No. 1 corporation which is an undertaking of the State Government has neither framed its own disciplinary rules nor according to it follows rules applicable to the Government servants.
To me, it appears that the respondents have not come put with whole truth.
If it is true that the respondent No1 corporation does not follow the discipline and appeal rules prescribed for the government servants in such even I do not find any justification for the Board of Directors action in adopting Rule 49-A of the Bihar Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules and Rule 3-A of the Bihar and Orissa Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules which merely provide for an interim suspension.
14.
On the facts and in the circumstances of this case, I feel that the contention of the learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 Corporation that it does not follow the discipline and appeal rules meant for the Government servants is not correct.
However, even assuming that the respondent No1 has neither framed disciplinary rules for its employees nor follows such rules meant for the Government servants, in such an event also it was obligatory on the part of the respondent No. 1 to follow the minimal requirement of the principles of natural justice.
It is now well known that department proceeding are quasi-judicial proceedings and in such proceedings, fair play in action is mandatorily required to be followed.
15.
The respondents have not denied that the fact as stated in the writ application the supplementary affidavit as also the rejoinder to the counter affidavit to the effect that the witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution were merely put some question by the Conduction Officer and the petitioner was permitted to put some question to him and further even the petitioner was also put some question by the conducting officer which clearly shows that there has been a complete violation of the principles of natural justice.
16.
It is true that by Annexure 2 the petitioner was directed to submit his explanation before Shri MS Hoda who was appointed as the Conducting Officer for showing as to why he should not be held guilty of the charges levelled against him but the very fact at the top of it was mentioned as a draft charge and furhter in the manner in which the enquiry proceeding admittedly proceeded could have left an impression in the mind of the petitioner that the same was merely a fact finding enquiry and not a full fledged departmental proceedings.
Further the petitioner admittedly was not furnished with the documents on the basis whereof the charges were sought to be proved.
17.
In order to comply with the minimum requirement of the natural justice the respondents ought to have either furnished copies of the relevant documents to the petitioner on the basis whereof the charges against the petitioner were levelled or the petitioner, at least should have been informed that he would be at liberty to inspect the document in question and take notes thereform.
Neither of this was done by the respondents.
Admittedly even a copy of the enquiry report was not furnished to the petitioner.
18.
In absence of a copy of the enquiry report, it was not possible for the petitioner to know as to which charges were proved by the department against him nor is cause it possible for this Court to find out as to whether the said enquiry was conducted in compliance with the principles of natural justice and fair play.
19.
It further appears strange that there was no charge of misappropriation as against the petitioner and further in view of the admission made in the counter affidavit itself the first charge was not proved as against him but from the perusal of the impugned order as contained Annexure 1 to the writ application, it appears that the order of dismissal was passed against him, as allegedly the charges of (a) misappropriation (b) indiscipline (c) insubordination and (d) failure to discharge his duties were allegedly proved against the petitioner.
From a perusal of the said order, it, therefore, does not appear that the disciplinary authority has even applied its mind.
20.
It further appears to be curious that the deponent of the counter affidavit is a law clerk of the respondent No 1 corporation.
The said deponent does not say in the counter affidavit that he was associated with the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner on behalf of the corporation or othewise.
The contents of the counter affidavit have been verified as being true to the deponent's knowledge as derived from the records of the case.
It is clear that even the counter-affidavit was not properly verified nor the records of the enquiry proceeding have been a produced in this Court.
I am therefore, of opinion that there has been complete violation of the rule of audi alteram prtem and as such the impugned order as contained in Annexure 1 cannot be sustained.
21.
In view of the finding aforementioned, I do not intend to deal with the question raised at the bar as to whether a second show cause notice was necessary to be issued before the impugned order as contained in Annexure 1 was passed.
However, before parting with the case one of the submissions made by Mr. Mukherjeed may be noticed.
22.
Mr. Mukherjee, with reference to Annexures 7 and 8 to the writ application argued that in case of other Assistant Godown Managers, there was a charge of shortage of foodgrains and the respondent No1 only directed recovery of money from the concerned officers but no disciplinary action was taken against them much less the punishment of termination of service which was awarded to the petitioner Mr. Mukherjee submitted that in that view of the matter as the petitioner was similarly situated to the other employees there was a clear violation of equality before law and equal protection of law as enshrined under article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel has placed strong reliance upon a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Singara Singh reported in 1983 (3) SCC 225.
However, it is not possible for this Court to come to the conclusion that the petitioner has been subjecated to a hostile discrimiation, inasmuch as the employer may take different action against different employees in a similar charge upon consideration of the facts and circumstances of each case.
It is however true that disproportionate punishment itself attracts Article 14 of the constitution but in view of my finding aforementioned this question need not be dwelt upon any further.
23.
In view of the finding aforementioned it is directed that the order dated the 26th March 1984 as contained in Annexure 1 to the writ application be quashed and the respondents may proceed as against the petitioner in accordance with law and after complying with the principles of natural justice.
It is also made clear that in the even the discipline and appeal rules applicable to the Government servants also apply to the case of the petitioner the respondents must follow the same.
24.
In the result, this application is allowed and the order as contained in Annexure-1 to the writ application is quashed, subject to the above observation and directions.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Writ application allowed.