TS Doabia, J - Can this court direct the authorities to grant admission for a course in the discipline of MBBS beginning in the year 1998 even if the writ petitioner was found to be wrongly deprived of the admission in the session which began in the year 1996.
The above and some other questions have arisen in these appeals preferred against the view expressed by a learned Single Judge of this court who found merit in the submissions of the writ petitioner, who figures as one of the respondents in these appeals.
The circumstances under which these appeals have come to be filed, be noticed :  An advertisement notice was issued on 6th of July 1995.
Applications were invited from eligible candidates so that they may appear in MBBS/BDS Entrance Examination.
This Examination was to be held on 23rd of September 1995.
The dispute so far as this litigation is concerned is vis-a-vis a reserved category.
The reserved category pertains to the candidates belonging to the Line of Actual Control Area.
The requisite stipulation vis-a-vis this condition appears at Serial No. 3 in Annexure "P/1."
For facility of reference, this condition is reproduced below:  "Candidates appearing in the Open Merit (OM) Categories and for the seats earmarked for non-permanent residents must have secured not less than 50% marks in the aggregate in the qualifying examination and those claiming consideration for selection on the basis of their belonging to any reserved category as specified in SRO 126 dated 26.6.1994 must have secured not less than 40% marks in the aggregate in the qualifying examination.
They must attach with their application forms the required category certificate in the prescribed format issued by the competent authority."
The respondent No. 6 Pankaj Soodan applied under this category.
His candidature was accepted.
In the merit list his name was at serial No. 3.
He was given admission.
The name of the writ petitioner was at serial No. 4.
It is grant of admission to Pankaj Soodan, which led the writ petitioner to file a writ petition in this court.
The basic submissions made by him were:  (i) That Pankaj Soodan did not possess the requisite certificate which cold indicate that he is resident of area falling under Line of Actual Control.
(ii) That in fact the petitioner possessed a valid certificate, therefore, the seat should have gone to him.
Objections were filed by the Competent Authority which held the Entrance Examination.
The stand taken by he competent authority was that the respondent No. 6 Pankaj Soodan, did produce a valid certificate indicating that he is resident of an area known as area falling under Actual Line of Control.
This certificate was issued by Tehsildar Haveli in the District of Poonch.
This is dated 881991.
This was countersignd by the Deputy commissioner, Poonch on 4th of October 1994.
It was this certificate which was taken to be a valid certificate in terms of condition No. (iii).
It was accordingly suggested that respondent No. 6 did possess the requisite certificate and he was rightly permitted to take part in the Entrance Examination.
As he was successful in the examination and as he ranked high in the merit meant for reserved category referred to above, he was granted the admission.
When the matter was considered by the learned Single Judge of this Court, he came to the conclusion that the certificate on which reliance was being placed by the Competent Authority was not issued in terms of the proforma prescribed in this regard.
The reasoning given was that this certificate should have been given in terms of J&K Reservation Rules of 1994.
These Rules were issued vide SRO 126 of 1994.
As the certificate in question was found to be not issued under the above rules, it was concluded that the application submitted by respondent No. 6 was incomplete and, therefore, the Competent authority wrongly made him eligible.
It was observed that the resultant admission granted to him was not in accordance with law.
It may, however, be seen that the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that as respondent No. 6 had almost completed more than two years of study in the discipline of MBBS, it would not be apt to disturb his admission.
Taking note of above factor, it was observed that respondent No. 6 be not disturbed but admission be given to the writ petitioner in the course which was to commence in the year 1998.
It is against this decision of the learned Single Judge, three appeals have been preferred.
One appeal has been preferred by the Competent Authority.
Second appeal has been preferred by one Pankaj Soodan.
An appeal has also been filed by one Amit Sawhney.
So far as the appeal filed by Pankaj Soodan is concerned his grievance is that by recording a finding that he was not in possession of a valid certificate his career is likely to be spoiled and he may be hit in some other avenues also.
This appeal is barred by limitation.
There is delay of four days.
It is stated that as the appellant was ill, therefore, the delay should be condoned.
So far as appeal preferred by Amit Sawhney is concerned, it be seen that he was not a party to the litigation before the learned Single Judge.
As a matter of fact he could not be there as he never competed for the course which began in the year 1996.
His grievance is that the seat which is now being offered to the writ petitioner Rayaz Jan for the year 1998, is at his cost.
He submits that by granting the seat to Rayaz Jan, he has been pushed out of the line.
The seat which would have gone to him has now gone to writ petitioner Rayaz Jan It is under these circumstances a separate appeal has been preferred by him.
This is barred by limitation.
It is stated that as he was not a party to the litigation the period of limitation should begin from the date of knowledge.
It is stated that after acquiring knowledge of the decision he applied for the copy.
In these circumstances delay is sought to be condoned.
Learned counsel for the parties including the counsel for the writ petitioner has been heard at length.
Delay in the matter of filing appeals on behalf of Pankaj Soodan and Amit Sawhney is condoned.
Pankaj Soodan has stated that he was ill. Amit Sawhney was not a party to the writ petition.
He became aware of the decision much later.
He has rightly stated that date of knowledge should guide in the matter of condoning the delay.
Delay is thus condoned.
Coming to the merits of the controversy, we are of the opinion that the direction given by the learned Single Judge of this Court to grant admission to the petitioner in the current year at the cost of candidates who competed for the course and the finding recorded that the certificate possessed by Pankaj Soodan was not in consonance with condition No. (iii) as mentioned in Notification Annexure P/1 cannot be sustained.
The two questions on which counsel on both the sides have argued at length are:  (i) Whether the writ petitioner who competed for the admission for the course which began in the year 1996 can be granted admission for the current year.
(ii) Whether the certificate which was relied upon by Pankaj Soodan is a good and valid certificate.
The question at serial No. (i) be examined.
The petitioner offered himself for the course which commenced in the year 1996.
Even if it be presumed that he was wrongly deprived of the admission even then by no known process can the clock be put back.
An academic course cannot be compressed to accommodate any particular candidate who comes late.
This is because no separate or "special arrangement" can be made for a late comer for imparting instructions to him.
Any other view would mean that such a candidate has to be not only examined periodically with respect to instructions imparted, the pre-requisite therefore, has also to be fulfilled by rendering instructions to him during the whole period of the course.
This is not practical.
In this regard it would be apt to refer to a decision given by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Dr. Ajay Pradhan v. State of Madhya Pradesh and others, AIR 1988 SC 1875 wherein similar view was expressed.
In this regard, reference may be made to another decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Arti Gupta v. State of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 481 wherein it was stated that the standard of medical profession should not be compromised in national interest.
The Court noticed that there has been perceptible fall in national standards and general efficiency in the professional institutions.
It was accordingly said that nothing should be done which may affect the high standards and efficiency in professional institutions.
Reference may also be made to the recent decision of the Supreme Court of India in the case of State of U.P v. Dr. Anupam Gupta, AIR 1991 SC 932 wherein the fact that vacant seats were available was noticed but the Court refused to grant admission on the ground that this would amount to compromising with eficiency.
It was observed in para 14 as under:  "Considering from this point of view to maintain excellence the courses have to be commenced on schedule and to be completed within the schedule, so that the students would have full opportunity to study full course to meet their excellence and come at par excellence.
Admission in the midstream would disturb the courses and also work hardship to the candidates themselves to achieve excellence.
Considering from this pragmatic point of view we are of the considered opinion that vacancies of the seats would not be taken as a ground to give admission and direction by the High Court to admit the candidates into those vacant seats cannot be sustained."
Thus, the trend is not to encourage disturbance in the professional colleges in the midstream.
Half baked cake is not an acceptable commodity.
The above aspect was taken note of by the learned Single Judge.
He was of the view that it is not possible to grant admission in the middle of session.
It was precisely for this reason direction was given to admit the petitioner in the current session.
This cannot be done because:  (i) The petitioner never competed along with candidate who sought admission for the current year.
(ii) With the grant of admission to the writ petitioner one Amit Sawhney is going to be displaced.
He was not a party to the lis before the learned Single Judge.
His rights cannot be put to jeopardy.
See Ishwar Singh v. Kuldip Singh, 1995 Supp.
(1) SCC 179.
Coming to the question at serial No. (ii), the writ petitioner submits:  (i) that the applications were to be submitted in pursuance of notice annexure P/1 should have been accompanied by a certificate as required by SRO 126.
(ii) The certificate issued on the proforma under the old rules is no certificate.
(iii) that certificate has to be signed by the Tehsildar.
This can be issued after holding enquiry in terms of Rule 27(c) of the Rules.
(iv) the endorsement made by the Deputy Commissioner is no substitute.
As per the counsel the enquiry could be held by the Tehsildar alone.
(v) The fact that Pankaj Soodan later on placed on record a certificate under SRO 126 is being highlighted.
It is contended that Pankaj Soodan was aware of the fact that a certificate under SRO 126 was a must.
This certificate was produced later on on 4th of August 1995.
This was described as revalidation certificate.
As per the writ petitioner revalidated certificate is no certificate in the eyes of law.
It be seen that the fact that a certificate was placed on record later on has also been highlighted.
It is submitted that certificate placed on record after the expiry of date meant for submitting of the applications is no certificate.
Before examining the above mentioned argument raised by the writ petitioner the statutory rule namely J&K Reservation Rule, 1994 i.e. SRO 126 be noticed.
These rules are:  "27 Officers authorised to issue certificate :  The following shall be Authorised officers to issue certificate under these rules : Category Authorised Officer to issue Certificate.
(a) Scheduled Castes, Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar.
(b) Scheduled Tribes, Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar.
(c) Socially and Educationally Backward Classes -do- (i) Weak and under-privileged Classes (Social Castes)  -do- (ii) Residents of the Area adjoining Actual Line of Control -do- (iii) Residents of Backward areas, -do- "29 Registration and verification : The Authorised officer shall, on receipt of the application:  (i) Immediately record it in a Register to be maintained by it and issue to the applicant a receipt to that effect.
(ii) Secutinise the application and conduct such enquiries as may be necessary for verification of the details of the application as also with regard to the eligibility of the applicant for the certificate claimed by him keeping in view the following guidelines: (a) x x x x x x x x (b) x x x x x x x x (c) a person claiming the benefit on the grounds that he/she belongs to an identified backward area or an area near the Line of Actual Control, must establish that he/she has resided in the area for a period of not less than 15 years prior to the date of application and is actually residing in the said area.
However, a person shall not be disentitled from claiming this benefit only on the ground that his/her father or the person on whom he/she is dependent is living in a place which is not identified as backward or area near the Line of Actual Control on account of his employment, business or other professional or vocational reasons.
"38.
Repeal and Savings : From the date these rules come into force, all rules, notifications and orders corresponding to the provisions of these rules shall stand repealed:  Provided that any action taken or orders issued under the rules, notification or orders so repealed shall be deemed to have been taken under these rules.
By order of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir."
Few dates which are relevant for this controversy may also be noticed.
These are: (i) SRO 126 came into force on 28th of June 1994.
(ii) Advertisement Notice was issued on 26th of July 1995.
(iii) Applications completed in all respects were to be submitted by 29th of July 1995.
(iv) Certificate on which reliance has been placed by respondent No. 6 Pankaj Soodan was issued by the Naib Tehsildar for District Poonch, on 8th of October 1991.
(v) Above certificate was countersigned by Deputy Commissioner, Poonch on 4th of October 1994.
A perusal of Rule 27(c) indicates that a certificate under the Rules could be issued by any Revenue officer not below the rank of Tehsildar.
Thus Deputy Commissioner who is also Collector of the District Poonch, in his capacity as Revenue Officer could issue the certificate.
The fact that the Collector is a Revenue officer is apparent from the provision of Jammu and Kashmir Land Revenue Act.
Section 6 of the Jammu and Kashmir Land Revenue Act lays down that the Collector is a Revenue Officer.
This provision reads as under:  "6.
Classes of Revenue Officers : (1) There shall be the following classes of Revenue Officers namely:  (a) the Financial Commissioner.
(b) the Divisional Commissioner.
(c) the Collector.
(d) the Assistant Collector of the First Class.
(e) the Assistant Collector of the Second Class."
As such certificate issued by the Tehsildar which was duly countersigned by Deputy Commissioner would be a certificate issued by authorised officer.
Again certificate in question was initially signed by the Tehsildar.
Fact that it came to be countersigned by Deputy Commissioner would indicate that whatever status Pankaj Soodan was enjoying on 8th of August 1991 continued to be enjoyed by him when certificate in question came to be countersigned by Deputy Commissioner on 4th of October 1994.
This countersignatures were put after the coming into force of SRO 126 (As indicated above this SRO 126 came into force on 28th of June 1994).
Thus the certificate which was countersigned by Deputy Commissioner after enforcement of the above Rules would be deemed to be certificate issued under SRO 126.
Apart from this it be seen that the saving clause contained in Rule 28, saves actions taken under the previous rules.
Words "provided that any action.......................... shall be deemed to be taken under this rule" would cover the act of issuance of certificate as well.
We are accordingly of the view that certificate which was originally issued by Tehsildar in August 1991 and which came to be countersigned by Deputy Commissioner on 4th of October 1994, was a valid certificate.
This was countersigned by Deputy Commissioner Poonch after the enforcement of SRO 126.
In this situation it cannot be said that the certificate possessed by Pankaj Soodan was not valid certificate.
Argument that Pankaj Soodan placed on record another certificate on later date ie 4th of August 1995, cannot put him to disadvantageous position.
This would not take away the validity or reduce the efficacy of certificate already placed on record.
Independently of what we have stated above, the view expressed by a Division bench of this Court in the case reported as Sonia Nayyar v. State of J&K and Ors, 1992 K.L.J.
558 be also noticed.
This is to the effect that in the matter of looking into the eligibility of a candidate, the procedural lapses should not be given much important.
What is required to be seen is the substance and not the form.
If the view expressed by the Division Bench is taken note of, then no fault can be found in the certificate which was possessed by Pankaj Soodan.
We are definitely of the view that the certificate possessed by Pankaj Soodan was a valid certificate.
He was rightly considered by the Competent authority.
The admission which was granted to him cannot be upset.
We are accordingly of the view:  (i) even if it is presumed that writ petitioner was wrongly deprived of the admission in 1996 even though he cannot be allowed admission in the current year.
This is because: (a) he never competed for the current course of the year 1998; (b) he is likely to displace person who stands high in the list of 1998; (c) person who is likely to be displaced is not a party to the litigation.
(ii) Certificate issued in favour of Pankaj Soodan is valid certificate.
This is because: (a) Original certificate issued by the Teshildar was countersigned by Deputy Commissioner on 4th of October 1994.
(b) Counter signing was done after coming into force of SRO 126.
(c) Deputy Commissioner in his capacity as a Revenue Officer was competent to issue the certificate in question.
(iii) Even on the reading of Rule 38, first certificate would be protected.
(iv) What is required to be taken note of is the substance and not the form.
Thus looking from any point of view, it cannot be said that the certificate issued by the Tehsildar which was countersigned by the Deputy Commissioner was not in accordance with law.
The admission was rightly granted to Pankaj Soodan.
If this be the situation writ petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
Before parting with the judgment another argument as to maintainability of the appeal at the instance of Competent Authority be examined.
This has been raised by the writ petitioner.
It is stated that the State Government has expressed an opinion that appeal should not be preferred and as such appeal filed by the Competent Authority should be rejected.
This argument cannot be accepted.
Existence of the competent authority is independent of the State Government.
Even otherwise two more appeals have been filed.
Appeal filed by Pankaj Soodan is also before us.
This appeal has to be decided one way or the other.
As such this objection is found to be without merit.
So far as appeal preferred by Amit Sawhney is concerned it be seen that he was not a party to the writ petition.
He could have filed a review and avail of the course as suggested by the Supreme Court in the case reported as Shiv Dev Singh v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1963 SC 1909.
In the above case it was held that "nothing precludes a High Court from exercising powers of review which inheres in every court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors."
The situation in the above case was same as in the present case.
Again a person who is not a party to the lis can be allowed to file an appeal if he is adversely affected.
This view was expressed in case reported as Smt. Jatan Kanwar Golcha v. M/s Golcha Properties Private Ltd, AIR 1971 Supreme Court 374.
To the same effect is the observations made in case reported as State of Punjab v. Amar Singh, AIR 1976 Supreme Court 994.
It was observed that a person who is not a party to decree or order may with the leave of the court be permitted to file an appeal if a decree or order prejudicially affects him.
In the present case Amit Sawhney is definitely adversely prejudiced.
Therefore, he is within his rights to prefer an appeal.
In any case in view of the fact that Competent authority as also Pankaj Soodan have invoked jurisdiction of this court under the provisions of Letters Patent this becomes an academic issue only.
The net result is that appeal No. 502/98 preferred by Competent Authority and Appeal No. CWP (LPA) 213/98 preferred by Pankaj Soodan are allowed.
Appeal preferred by Amit Sawhney No. CMP (LPA) 206/98 shall stand disposed of accordingly.
The learned counsel for the writ petitioner submits that his client has since been granted admission and therefore, he should not be disturbed at this stage.
He also made a prayer for staying the operation of this judgment.
This prayer is declined.
As a matter of fact the Supreme Court of India in case reported as Chandigarh Administration and Ors v. Manpreet Singh and Ors, 1992(1) Supreme Court Cases 380 : 1992(2) SCT 69 has expressed an opinion that whenever admission is ordered to be given by the courts then time should be allowed to the authority who is to grant admission so that the matter can be agitated in the appeal court.
It was observed in para 24:  "Before we part with this case we wish to make an observation.
In matters of this nature where the High Court directs students to be admitted in educational institutions, it would be advisable if the High Court stays the operation of its order for a period of about 3 to 4 weeks, if a request, therefore, is made by the educational institution or the State as the case may be."
This did not happen in this case.
In view of the above we do not find justification to grant the prayer of the petitioner.
The State Government of its own would be at liberty to take any step including creation of extra seat as per law but the writ petitioner cannot be accommodated at the cost of candidates who would have got the admission but for the direction contained in the order under appeal.
All the appeals are disposed of in the manner indicated above.
Appeals allowed.