M. Jagannadha Rao, C.J.
(Oral) - This is a rather unusual case in which the petitioner, who was getting on an average telephone bills of Rs. 5,000/- to Rs. 10,000/- has received two bills - one for Rs. 10,12,053 and Rs. 5,40,529.
At one state, it was mentioned to this Court on 24.5.1994 by the respondent's counsel that the petitioner's son was having some business and that another telephone connection had already been taken by the petitioner at his residence.
Subsequently when the date recorded electronically was filed in the Court, it was revealed that the telephone calls from the petitioner's telephone number were made to Hong Kong and United States of America to, what we may call, places of ill-repute.
The petitioner also submits that he is 75 years old and his son is about 18 years old.
he also submits that the data produced shows that the spells of each telephone call sometime run up to 1-1/2 or 2 hours and that too at odd hours, and therefore it was wholly unlikely that the petitioner or his son could have indulged in these telephone calls.
2.
The petitioner's counsel also contends that while at one time it was mentioned by the respondents that the petitioner's son was having business and perhaps the STD calls were related to that business,s it is now contended for the respondents that these calls are not business calls.
In the circumstances, the counsel has submitted that the petitioner is prepared to have an inquiry conducted by the Central Bureau of Investigation.
3.
A counter affidavit has been filed in this case and it is on record.
4.
Normally this Court would have referred such a dispute to arbitration under Section 7-B of the Indian Telegraphs Act.
It is only in very rare cases we consider it necessary to refer the matter for an inquiry by an investigating agency.
5.
In the peculiar circumstances of this case, we think that it is a fit case where we should entrust the investigation to the Central Bureau of Investigation.
A notice will, therefore, issue to the Director, Central Bureau of Investigation to have an inquiry conducted into these two bills which are the subject matter of this writ petition.
The petitioner will co- operate with the inquiry and the respondents will afford all assistance to the CBI, as required.
A report to be submitted within two months.
6.
The stay of disconnection of the petitioner's other telephone to continue.
To be listed for further orders on 6th February, 1995.