RC Gandhi, J - Petitioner has presented this petition seeking issuance of a writ of certiorari, quashing Order No. BTRO/53/92 dated 21.9.1992, whereby the petitioner's services as Safaiwala have been terminated by the Respondent No. 3.
2.
Petitioner is a matriculate and resident of backward area, came to be appointed as safaiwala by the respondent No. 3 under his Order No. BRTO/3/92 dated 1151992, which is evident from Annexure-P-2, annexed with the petition.
Persuant to his appointment, petitioner submitted his joining report on 1151992 F.N.
which has been accepted by the Respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 2 on 15.8.1992 posted a telegram to the District Education Officer, Doda to the effect that :-  "Given to understand Deputy Commissioner issuing orders of appointment of teachers and class-IV employees.
Deputy Commissioner not empowered to make appointments.
Any order issued by the Deputy Commissioner should not be honoured, otherwise you will be held responsible.
Report orders issued by Deputy Commissioner being illegal unauthorised not to be entertained."
The District Education Officer endorsed that telegram to the Respondent No. 3, which reads as :-  "HM, HS, Batroo.
For information and immediate compliance.
The list of Trs./Jr.
Asst/Lah/Lab.
Asstt./Class IV employees appointed by the Distt.
Dev.
Commissioner, Doda in the Stop-gap arrangement.
For a period of sixty/Eighty nine days be submitted to this effect along with attested copies of the appointment orders in the following performa within two days positively from the receipt of this letter.
Moreover no fresh/continuation orders of any candidate issued by the Distt.
Development Commissioner, Doda be honoured in future, failing which entire responsibility will be yours and such cases will be referred to the Secretary to Govt. Education Deptt.
for disciplinary action against the defaulters."
3.
The District Education Officer in reference to the telegram has terminated the services of the petitioner under the impugned order.
4.
The petition was admitted to hearing vide order dated 17111993 and the respondents were granted eight weeks time for filing the counter-affidavit.
Respondents have not filed counter-affidavit.
However, objections filed by them before the admission of the petition are on record, wherein the respondents have stated that petitioner was appointed under the orders of District Development Commissioner, Doda purely in stop-gap arrangement, who has no jurisdiction to appoint the petitioner, therefore, his services have been terminated.
It is also stated that Govt. has imposed general ban on ad hoc appointments w.e.f Dec 29, 1988, under Circular No. 6-GAD of 1990 dated 1421990 followed by SRO 291 dated 2871989.
Rule 14 of the CCA Rules 1956 provide the provision of ad hoc appointment to be made only in special circumstances and that too with the prior approval of the Chief Minister.
The appointment made by the Respondent No. 3, therefore, is not in consonance with the policy of the Government.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
Perusal of the appointment order dated 1151992 reveals that the appointment of the petitioner has not been made by the District Development Commissioner, Doda as stated in the objections filed by the respondents but has been made under the hand and seal of the Head Master, Govt. High School, Batroo exercising his power.
The argument of learned counsel for the respondents that the appointment has been made by the District Development Commissioner, Doda is not borne out from the record.
Though District Development Commissioner, Doda has, on the application of the petitioner endorsed to Respondent No. 3 to consider the petitioner for appointment as Safaiwala in case there is any vacancy available.
This endorsement cannot be termed as an appointment order.
After consideration of the application of the petitioner and his candidature, Respondent No. 3 has issued the appointment order under his hand and seal as Head Master, GHS, Batroo and permitted him to join.
The argument with regard to appointment of the petitioner allegedly made by the District Development Commissioner, Doda fails and is rejected.
6.
Another limb of his argument is that Respondent No. 3 has no power or jurisdiction to appoint the petitioner.
The power of appointment to the class-IV post of the respondent No. 3 being Class-IV officer is contained in Schedule I-B of the CSR-Vol. II stipulating that class IV officers can make appointment of all inferior servants working under Respondent No. 3, under Schedule I-A dealing with the classification of officers, has been classified as Class-IV Officer at Serial No. 7 of the list.
Even under Schedule I-D inserted under SRO 327 dated 771973 making provision with regard to the delegation of powers to the officers of the Education Department (School Wing), with reference to Article 53 of the J&K Civil Service Regulations, the Headmaster of the High School has been vested with the power to make regular appointment to Class-IV servants in the school.
Therefore, the appointment of the petitioner when tested on the touchstone of statutory power and jurisdiction of the Respondent No. 3, it does not suffer for that reason.
7.
It is admitted case of the parties that before issuance of impugned order of termination, the respondents have not provided any opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that the respondents have issued the impugned order in breach of the compliance of the Principles of natural justice.
Once a person is appointed, he becomes member of the service on joining against the post and thereafter all the safeguards and protections under the service rules become available to him as a Government servant.
A person appointed against a post has a vested right to hold the post under Article 16 of the Constitution of India, which cannot be taken away unless an opportunity of being heard is provided and denial thereof tantamounts to breach of his fundamental rights to hold the post.
It is cordinal and fundamental principle of law that no public servant should be deprived of an opportunity of being heard before passing of an order affecting his rights.
It is established from the pleadings that the respondents have not provided any opportunity of being heard to the petitioner before passing the impugned order and thus the action of the respondents being discriminatory and arbitrary in terms of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, cannot be maintained.
8.
For the aforesaid reasons the petitioner is found entitled to the relief prayed for and the petition deserves to be allowed.
The petition is allowed and the impugned order No. BRTO/53/92 dated 21.9.1992, issued by the Respondent No. 3 whereby the petitioner's services have been terminated is quashed and set aside.
No order as to cost.
Petition allowed.