Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as Masters in various Government Schools in the State of Haryana.
They complain that such amongst them as had "joined as Masters in the year 1963 have not been promoted as Head Masters whereas the Mistresses who joined the Education Department as late as in (the year) 1969 have been promoted as Head Mistresses".
According to the petitioners, "under the rules, seniority of male and female teachers has to be maintained jointly whereas the department is maintaining the seniority of male teachers separately and female teachers separately although they belong to the same cadre."
On these premises, the petitioners pray for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus "directing the respondents to prepare a joint seniority list in accordance with the Punjab Education Class III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955".
2.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 2, the claim made by the petitioners has been controverted.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the service comprises of the posts in Appendix 'A' to the rules "wherein the posts of Masters and Mistresses have been separately sanctioned 'in two different Branches viz. 'A' Men Branch and 'B' Women Branch".
On this basis, the respondents claim that a joint seniority list cannot be drawn up.
An affidavit dated July 27, 1992 had also been filed by Mrs. Manju Gupta, the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana wherein it was averred that under the rules, the posts of Masters and Mistresses were separately sanctioned in different branches and as such, a joint seniority list could not be prepared.
It was also averred that "the newly sanctioned posts of Heads of High Schools meant for promotion quota are distributed for filling up by promotion from masters/mistresses in the ratio of 2 :1 as the posts of masters/mistresses are also filled up almost in the same ratio from male and female candidates".
These are the pleadings.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short questions that arises for consideration is - Are the respondents bound to draw a joint seniority list of Masters and Mistresses under the provisions of Punjab Educational Service Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955 ?
4.
A brief reference to the provisions of the rules may be usefully made.
Rule 6 provides that "the service shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix 'A' but the Government reserves to itself full powers to revise the cadre (as shown in Appendix A) of the service at any time".
Rule 7 prescribes the method of recruitment.
Rule 8 lays down the period of probation.
Rule 9 provides for determination of seniority.
It is inter alia provided that "the seniority inter se of members of the service holding the same class of posts and in the same or identical grades of pay shall be determined by the dates of their confirmations in such posts.....".
A reference to Appendix 'A' further shows that posts have been separately sanctioned for Men's branch and Women's branch.
Still further, certain posts have been sanctioned for "men and women".
The position in so far as it relates to only the posts of Headmasters and Masters in the Men's branch and Headmistresses and Mistresses etc. in the women's branch may be briefly extracted.
It is as under :-  APPENDIX 'A'  Punjab Educational Service, Non-Gazetted (Class III) B (i) (ii) School Cadre  Sanctioned posts  + Permanent Temporary Scale of Pay Designation of posts (a) Men's Branch 72 1 (Rs. 250-10-350 Headmasters (Rs. 250-10-300 Masters, Science Masters Agriculture Masters, Clerical and Commercial Masters and Assistant District Inspector of Schools.
495 22 Rs. 110-8-190/10-250 (with a start of Rs. 126 to M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
(III), BT and to Rs. 150 to M.A./M.Sc./M.
Ed. (II), BT and Rs. 150 to M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
(II) BT Second Masters, Masters, Physical Training Masters, Assistant District Inspector of Schools, Agriculture Masters and Clerical and Commercial Masters and Science Masters.
(b)Women's Branch 52 2 (a) Rs. 250-10-350 Headmistresses  (b) Rs. 250-10-300 Mistresses District Inspectoresses of Schools Assistant Inspectresses of Schools for PT, Assistant Ispectresses of Schools for Domestic Science; 234 10 Rs. 110-8-190/10-250 Senior Mistresses; Assistant District Inspectresses of Schools, Science Mistresses.
(c) For men and Women 82 1 Rs. 47-1/2-2-67-1/-2-3-97-1/2/4-117-1/2 Basic Trained teachers.
A perusal of the above extract from the Appendix to the rules shows that posts have been sperately sanctioned for the Men's Branch and the Women's Branch.
Wherever the department wanted the posts to be held jointly, the rules have made a specific provision in that behalf.
In the year 1957, when the rules were actually published in the Government Gazette, 73 posts of Headmasters were sanctioned in the Men's Branch and 54 of Headmistresses in the Women's Branch.
Similarly, the number of posts of Masters and Mistresses was separately prescribed.
It is in the background to this factual position in that the provision of Rule 9 has to be considered.
The inter se seniority has to be determined of persons who are holding "the same class of posts".
If the provisions of Rules 6 and 9 of Appendix 'A' are harmoniously construed, it appears that the seniority of Masters who are members of service in the Men's branch has to be determined separately from that of the Mistresses working in the Women's branch.
This is precisely what the department claims to be doing.
Still further, the promotions to the posts of Headmasters are to be made form amongst the Masters in the Men's Branch and those to the posts of Headmistresses have to be made from amongst the Mistresses etc.  5.
Mr. Mittal points out that in the affidavit of Mrs. Manju Gupta, it has been mentioned that the posts are being filled up from amongst the Masters and Mistresses in the ratio of 2 :1.
Initially, there was confusion about this.
The Director, Public Instructions was asked to appear and explain the position.
She did.
It was pointed out that certain posts had been newly sanctioned.
In respect of those posts, it was provided that promotion shall be made from amongst the Masters and Mistresses in the ratio of 2 :1.
This does not appear to be violative of the rules.
The posts of Heads of High Schools have not been mentioned in the 1955 Rules.
However, broadly, the number of posts of Masters as initially sanctioned under the rules is more than double of the number of posts of Mistresses.
Consequently if the respondents have chosen to fill up the posts of Heads of High Schools in the ratio of 2 :1, their action cannot be said to be arbitrary or unfair.
6.
Mr. Mittal has also submitted that as a result of the action of the respondents, a Master who was recruited, in the service in the year 1963 had not been promoted as a Headmaster till the filing of the petition while a Mistresses in the Women's branch who had been recruited in the year 1969 had been promoted.
It may be so.
If vacancies of Headmistresses become available, the persons working in the lower rank bound to get promotion.
However, this does not mean that the rights of any of the petitioners have been violated.
The petitioners can have a grievance only when a person form their branch is promoted without considering their claims.
No such grievance has been made in the petition.
The mere fact that certain Mistresses had been made promoted earlier than the petitioner does not amount to violation of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Nor does it impinge upon the provisions of the rules.
7.
Mr. Mittal submits that some of the Headmistresses have been actually posted in the Boys' schools.
There is nothing on record to support this submission.
In any order has been passed in violation of the rules, the petitioners shall be entitled to have their remedy in accordance with law.
As at present, no justifiable cause for grievance is made out and as such, no interference is called for.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.