AP Shah, J - By this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner takes exception to the order of transfer dated 1961989 transferring the petitioner as a teacher to Borivli High School, Borivli.
The petitioner was appointed as an Asst.
Teacher with effect from 1161973 in GFS H.A.L.
High School of the 1st respondent society at Ozar.
The petitioner is a widow.
When she joined the school in 1973, her husband was posted at Nasik as a District Malaria Officer.
He died in 1974.
Since then the petitioner is staying alone at Ozar township.
By the impugned transfer order dated 1961989 issued by the Secretary of the 1st respondent, she is ordered to be transferred as a Teacher to 1st Respondent's Borivli High School, Borivli, with effect from 20.6.1989.
The petitioner is provided with a residential quarter at Ozar township.
In the said transfer order, it was also mentioned that she should had over the said quarter to the Principal before 30.6.1989.
The petitioner has contended that she had no place to stay in Borivli.
Though she was orally promises that she will be provided with a quarter, no such quarter was given.
Apart from the fact that even if the quarter is given, it is not possible for the petitioner to come and stay in Mumbai.
On account of health complications, she is unable to bear the wear and tear of travelling and hazardous life in Mumbai.
She has also contended that the transfer order is illegal inasmuch as it is issued in the midst of the term and the transfer is not on any administrative ground.
Further the said transfer is not issued at the instance of the School Committee or the Co- ordination Committee.
2.
The petitioner's transfer was stayed by the Division Bench vide order dated 281980.
During the pendency of the petition, the petitioner's services were transferred to the Junior College vide order dated 2861989 as a full-time teacher.
Thereafter, the petitioner was promoted as a Supervisor in Junior College vide letter dated 1121987.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner stated that Rule 41(5) of the M.F.P.S.
Rules prohibits transfer of an employee from Junior College to Secondary School without consent of the employee.
The rule further indicates that the teacher giving consent for transfer from Junior College to Secondary School as per Rule 41(5) will lose seniority and pay scale.
The learned counsel stated that the petitioner has not consented to the transfer from Junior College to Secondary School.
3.
The petitioner has been working at Ozar School for the last 27 years and since 1984 she has been working in the Junior College.
In view of the provisions of Rule 41(5) of the MEPS Rules, the management cannot transfer the petitioner from Junior College to a Secondary School.
Hence, we quash and set aside the impugned order of transfer dated 1961989.
The Rule is made absolute in terms of prayer clause (a).
No order as to costs.
4.
At this stage, Mr. Khambatta, learned counsel for the respondents No. 1 informs that the petitioner has retired from service and, therefore, the petition has become infructuous.
order accordingly.