RL Anand, J - Shri Prem Sagar Sharma has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents for the issuance of a writ of certiorari or any other suitable writ, order or directions and the petitioner has made a prayer that the orders vide which his prayer for disability pension has been rejected by the respondents authorities, be quashed and directions be given to the respondents to release the benefit of disability pension to him with effect from 11121975 onwards.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Indian Air Force on 811972.
At the time of the enrolment he was medically examined.
he was found medically fit in all respects and was placed in category "A" by the Medical Board and no deformity of any kind was noticed by the Medical Board at the time of his enrolment into Air Force service.
The petitioner further alleges that he was invalidated out of Air Force service on 10121975 and he was placed in medical category "CEE" with 40% disability.
The claim of the disability pension of the petitioner was rejected on 431976.
The petitioner filed an appeal on 461976.
The appeal was rejected on 3091976 by CCDA (Pension) Allahabad.
The petitioner issued a legal notice in July, 1979 to the Government of India but the respondents informed the petitioner on 30.8.1979 that this claim for disability pension was rejected.
However, the petitioner was paid in lumpsum an amount of Rs. 500/-.
The petitioner further allege that he again made a representation to the authorities for the release of the disability pension on 20.1.1983 but he was informed by the respondent- authorities that no useful purpose was going to be served as the appeal has already been rejected by the Government of India.
Consequently, the petitioner served a legal notice on 541995 and on 28.4.1995 he was informed by the respondent authorities that his case is under consideration.
Not satisfied with the impugned orders of 1976 and 1979, the present writ has been filed by the petitioner.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
4.
The respondents filed written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the disease suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the Air Force service.
Rather on merits, the respondents admitted that in fact the petitioner was placed in category "EEE" at the time of his invalidation from the Indian Air Force service.
5.
I have heard Shri B.S.
Sehgal, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri SK Sharma, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that it has been conceded by the respondents in the written-statement that the petitioner was medically examined at the time of his enrolment and he was placed in category "A".
The disease suffered by the petitioner is "Paroxymal Aterial Techycardia".
According to the respondents it is not aggravated or attributable to the army service.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner joined the Indian Air Force on 811972.
He served at high altitude and this type of disease can be suffered by the petitioner on account of lack of oxygen and also on account of stress and strain due to the Army service.
7.
We all know that when a person is enrolled into army service, many vigorous tests are conducted on him by the Medical Board and after conducting such types of tests, the petitioner was placed in medical category "A" and no such deformity,.
as noticed subsequently, was brought to the notice of the petitioner nor there is any entry in the service book of the petitioner in this behalf.
8.
In these circumstances, it can reasonably be inferred that the disease "Proximal Aterial Techycardia" is attributable to the army service and this disease is related to the heart problem and such type of disease can be easily suffered by a serving Jawan/officer in the high altitude.
Admittedly, the petitioner was placed in category "EEE".
Therefore, he is entitled to the disability pension as he was invalidated out from the service on account of medical unfitness.
9.
The other point which survives for determination is, "from which date the petitioner should be given the benefit of disability pension" ?
10.
Though the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of disability pension from the date of his invalidation from service i.e. 10121975 but I am of the opinion that the petitioner can only get the benefit of 38 months prior to the date of the filling of the present writ petition.
Of course, he will be entitled to the benefit of future disability pension.
11.
Resultantly, this petition is partly allowed; the impugned orders are set aside and directions are given to the respondent-authorities to release the benefit of disability pension to the petitioner for a period of 38 months prior to the date of the filing of the present writ petition and onwards according to the permissible rules.
The petitioner, of course, shall appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent- authorities.
There shall be no order as to costs.
The benefit of disability pension shall be released to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to get interest at the rate of 12%.
Petition partly allowed.