RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited in the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (in short ITBP) on 7th August, 1981.
He was, however, discharged from the ITBP on 15th June, 1988 on medical grounds.
The Office order dated 15th June, 1988 discharging the petitioner from the ITBP reads as under :-  "In terms of Chief Medical Officer, ITB Police, Memorandum No. 1-51011/6/88/MS-126 dated 1288, No. 818030282/NK/CM Balbir Chand of the Academy is hereby boarded out/invalidated from service w.e.f.
15688 (FN) as provision contained in rule 38(4) of CCS (Pension) Rules."
He is struck off the strength of the Academy w.e.f.
the same date i.e. 15688 (FN).
Sd/-  (RK Khanna) Commandant (Admn.)"
2.
In the report, dated 28th January, 1988 of the Medical Board, which conducted the medical examination of the petitioner, it has been observed as under :-  "15.
Opinion of the Board : A case of Grandmal Epilepsy placed mine CEE(T) w.e.f.
151186.
Considering his attack on 1541987, the concerned specialist has already recommended the case to be placed and observed in CAT CEE(P) as per his report on 1351987.
The board recommends this case to be observed in LMC CEE (P).
Periodic observations of the case are to be recorded by concerned unit RMO and next board to be held after two years period of sufficient observation on the case for deciding its finality alongwith specialists opinion.
16.
Was the disability contracted in service; Yes.
17.
It is strictly attributable to conditions of service.
18.
If not directly attributable to service, was it aggravated thereby, if so by what specify conditions - aggravated due to spun, span and altitude (NAA) conditions of the service.
19.
Any specific restrictions regarding employment; (1) Not to desire, swim, work near fire or firearm and not to go on the heights; (2) Not to be posted to HAA (3) Not to be deployed on fire duties like recess patrolling.
(4) Not to be left unattended and unobserved.
20.
REMARKS : (1) Continue treatment as advised and get it reviewed every 3rd month by specialist.
(2) To be observed by RMO every fortnightly and record be maintained."
The Approving Authority of medical examination observed on Ist February, 1988 that the petitioner was "Fit for duties less laborious in nature."
Rule 36(4) of the Central Civil Services Pension Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) reads as under :-  "Where the medical authority referred to in sub-rule (2) has declared a Government servant fit for further service of less laborious character than that which he had been doing, he should, provided he is willing to be so employed, be employed on lower post and if there be no means of employing him even on a lower post, he may be admitted to invalid pension."
3.
Vide order, dated 11th February, 1986 (Annexure P.2), the Commandant (Admn.)
HADS Academy ITBP, informed the petitioner that though he had been declared fit for less laborious character of duties by the Medical Board, but keeping in view that service conditions and places of posting at high altitude and hilly areas on the borders and at the location of the HADS Academy of the ITBP, there was no possibility of employing the petitioner for the duties of less laborious nature, and consequently, a decision had been taken to board out the petitioner on medical grounds under the provisions of Rule 38(4) of the Rules, quoted above.
The petitioner was given an opportunity to represent against the said order.
Accordingly, the petitioner made a representation that he should be given a posting where the duties are of less laborious nature.
However, the request of the petitioner was declined vide order dated 15th June, 1988, already referred to above.
It may be mentioned that in the representation, the petitioner stated that he was now fit enough and another Medical Board should be constituted to medically examine him again.
The petitioner further made representation on 16th November, 1988 that he should be given pension and vide order dated 22nd November, 1988 (Annexure P.7), Director, HADS Academy, BTC, Police, Ministry of Home, Government of India, Mussoorie, informed the petitioner that since he had only 6 years 10 months and 8 days' service to his credit, he was not entitled to service pension.
As far as the request that he should be given extraordinary disability pension under the Rules, the same was also declined on the ground that the disease from which the petitioner was suffering had not occurred due to conditions of service and, therefore, the petitioner was not entitled to extraordinary disability pension.
The petitioner challenges by way of the present writ petition, order dated 11th February, 1988 (Annexure P.20) by which it was held that he could not be employed at place where the duties are of less laborious character; order dated 15th June, 1988 (Annexure P.6) by which the petitioner was boarded out from service and order dated 22nd November, 1988 (Annexure P.7), by which the extraordinary disability pension was declined.
4.
The primary argument of the petitioner is that even the Medical Board in its recommendations had observed that periodic observations of the case are to be recorded by the concerned unit and the next Board be held after two years period of sufficient observation for deciding its finality alongwith specialist's opinion.
He argued that no final decision could be taken in the matter before the petitioner was re-examined by the Board after the first Medical Board.
He further submitted that even if the report of the Medical Board was to be taken as its face value, even then he had to be posted at a place where the duties were of less laborious nature and not necessarily in the high altitude or hilly areas.
He further submitted that under Item 18 of the report of the Medical Board, it had been specifically mentioned by the Board that the disability contracted was in service and it had been aggravated due to spun, span and altitude (NAA), Conditions of Service.
He drew my attention to Rule 3-A(1) of the Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, wherein it is provided that disablement shall be accepted as due to Government service provided that it is certified that it is due to wound, injury or disease which is attributable to Government service, or existed before or arose during the Govt. service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
I find force in the contentions of the learned counsel that the petitioner could not be boarded out till he was re-examined by the Board as per the recommendations of the first Medical Board dated 28th June, 1988.
Final decision in the matter could only be taken after the petitioner was re-examined by the Medical Board as per the first recommendations.
5.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed and the orders dated 15th June, 1988 (Annexure P.6) dated 22nd November, 1988 (Annexure P.7), as well as Show Cause Notice dated 11th February, 1988 (Annexure P.20) are hereby quashed.
I direct the respondent-Authorities to get the petitioner re-examined by the Medical Board and it is still found that he is not fit enough for regular duties and is to be posted at a place where the nature of duties is less laborious, then efforts should be made to post him at a place which is not at a high altitude and hilly area and the nature of duties is less laborious.
In case it is found that this is not possible, then in accordance with the Medical Board report dated 28th June, 1988 read with Rule 3-A(1)(a) of the Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, the petitioner would be considered for extraordinary disability pension.
The directions be complied with within two months of the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to cost.
Petition allowed.