Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order dated 2622003 (Annexure P.3) passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal'), whereby an Original Application filed by the petitioner challenging the order of forfeiture of past service i.e. from 3041966 to 6121980, was dismissed.
2.
The petitioner joined as Lower Division Clerk in the office of respondent No. 3 on 3041966.
He retired as Deputy Officer Superintendent on attaining the age of superannuation on 3131998 from the office of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was granted leave upto 6121980, but he joined duties on 9.2.1983.
It is a case of the petitioner that on account of Ulcer in the eyes, he could not join the duties.
In the disciplinary proceedings initiated against the petitioner on account of his absence from duties, an order of punishment was passed on 3071984 (Annexure A.2) holding that the petitioner had not applied for leave beyond 6121980 and that he was on unauthorised absence from 6121980 till 821983.
After returning such finding, following punishment has been imposed :-  "(i) The period from 71280 to 8.2.83 should be treated as a period of unauthorised absence and a break in service;  (ii) I also impose a penalty of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect from the date of increment accruing to him after the issue of this order."
The said order of punishment was affirmed in appeal vide order dated 23.5.1985.
Thereafter, the petitioner attained the age of superannuation on 3131998.
However, the petitioner was not granted benefit of pension for the period 3041966 to 6121980 on the ground that such period stands forfeited on account of order of punishment (Annexure A.2).
3.
Aggrieved against the action of the respondents in forfeiting the service, the petitioner invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
The learned Tribunal has dismissed the application, inter-alia, on the ground that the order of punishment cannot be permitted to be disputed after a long lapse of time and that under Fundamental Rule 17A, the period of unauthorised absence shall be taken to cause an interruption or break in service, which leads to forfeiture of the past service.
The Tribunal relies upon Rules 27 and 28 of the Central Civil Service (Pension) Rules, 1972 (for short `the Rules') and Article 412 of the Civil Services Regulations, to hold that the entire past service stands forfeited.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that under Rule 27 of the Rules, if unauthorised absence is in continuation of authorised leave, the interruption in service does not entail forfeiture of past service.
Reliance was placed upon Clause (b) of Rule 27(1) of the Rules.
It was also argued that in any case, by virtue of Rule 27 of the Rules, substituted with effect from 19.5.1980, such interruption is automatically condoned as there is no specific indication to the contrary in the service book.
Rules 27 and 28 of the Rules, read as under :  "27.
Effect of interruption in service.
- (1) An interruption in the service of a Government servant entails forfeiture of his past service, except in the following cases : (a) authorised leave of absence;  (b) unauthorised absence in continuation of authorised leave of absence so long as the post of absence is not filled substantively;  (c) suspension, where it is immediately followed by reinstatement, whether in the same or a different post, or where the Government servant dies or is permitted to retire or is retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement while under suspension;  (d) transfer to non-qualifying service in an establishment under the control of the government if such transfer has been ordered by competent authority in the public interest;  (e) joining time while on transfer from one post to another.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the appointing authority may by order, commute retrospectively the periods of absence without leave as extraordinary leave.
28.
Condonation of interruption in service.
- (a) In the absence of a specific indication to the contrary in the service book, an interruption between two spells of civil service rendered by a Government servant under Government including civil service rendered and paid out of Defence Services Estimates or Railway Estimates shall be treated as automatically condoned and the pre- interruption service treated as qualifying service.
(b) Nothing in Clause (a) shall apply to interruption caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service or for participation in a strike.
(c) The period of interruption referred to in Clause (a) shall not count at qualifying service."
5.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner at some length, we are of the opinion that the order of forfeiture of past service is not sustainable in law.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was on authorised leave upto 6121980.
It was thereafter that the petitioner remained on unauthorised absence for which punishment has been imposed upon the petitioner.
Therefore, in terms of Clause (b) of Rule 27 (1) of the Rules, such absence does not entail forfeiture of past service.
6.
Even otherwise, Rule 28 of the Rules automatically condones the interruption between the two spells of civil service rendered by the petitioner.
Such Clause of Rule 28 of the Rules, came for interpretation before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgment reported as Director General, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research v. Dr. K Narayanaswami and others, 1995(2) SCT 489 : (1995)3 Supreme Court Cases 124, wherein it has been held that where the qualifying service has commenced, Rule 28 of the Rules would take care of interruption and period of interruption would then stand condoned in the absence of contrary in the service book.
7.
The qualifying service of the petitioner commenced on the post of Lower Division Clerk on 3041966.
He retired as Deputy Office Superintendent after being promoted on such post on 3131998.
There was interruption on account of absence from duty.
Such interruption is between two spells of civil service and thus, in terms Rule 28 of the Rules, it stands automatically condoned.
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the order passed by the Tribunal holding that the absence from the duty entails forfeiture of service, is not sustainable.
Consequently, we allow the present writ petition.
Set aside the impugned order dated 2622003 passed by the Tribunal and direct the respondents to redetermine the pensionary benefits payable to the petitioner.
The arrears of pension shall be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of the certified copy of the order.
Petition allowed.