KS Radhakrishan, CJ.
- Writ petition was preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India read with Section 103 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir for quashing FIR No. 25/2003 registered under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471 of Ranbir Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act by Police Station, Crime Branch.
The learned Single Judge declined to entertain the writ petition and dismissed the same.
2.
Mr. Leher, counsel appearing for the appellant, submitted that appellant belongs to Scheduled Caste community by name Bishit.
A certificate was issued to that effect by the authorities after due verification.
He was promoted as Lecturer in the Education Department and later he has also retired from service.
But due to personal animosity a complaint has been lodged against the appellant which led to registration of the aforesaid information report.
Learned counsel placed before us certificates issued by the various authorities and laid stress on his submission that he belongs to Scheduled Caste community.
3.
Mr. BS Salathia, learned counsel appearing for the State, submitted that the petition itself is not maintainable as factual details cannot be gone into by this Court in its writ jurisdiction and that the petitioner has remedy available to him under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
4.
Learned Single Judge found favour with the contention of the respondents and dismissed the petition.
He had found no reason to entertain the writ petition, since the petitioner had alternate remedy under the Code.
5.
This Court in its jurisdiction is not justified to examine the factual matrix and hold that the charge was frivolous or vexatious.
This status report filed by the respondent State states that investigation revealed that the petitioner managed to get Schedule Caste certificate with the connivance of Office Qunoongo, Shri Satpaul Sharma, the then Girdawar in the Office of Tehsildar, by misrepresenting the facts.
The said office Qunoongo did not bother to obtain the requisite documents and with the connivance of the petitioner managed to get the Schedule Caste certificate signed by the Tehsildar, Sunderbani by misusing official position.
It is stated that the certificate was produced by the petitioner before the authorities and sought promotion in the Scheduled Caste category and got wrongful gain.
6.
We are of the view that these factual aspects cannot be gone into by this Court in its writ jurisdiction.
We, therefore, find no reason to entertain this appeal and it is open to the petitioner to take remedies, if any, available.
We are of the view that the learned Single Judge has rightly declined the relief and dismissed the writ petition.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.