Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the order of the District and Sessions Judge retiring the petitioner with effect from April 30, 1996 on payment of three months' salary and that of the Chief Justice of the High Court in dismissing the appeal illegal ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner, a Civil Nazir in the Court of the Senior Subordinate Judge, Gurgaon, was charge-sheeted.
It was alleged that in spite of being asked, he had not prepared an annotated statement in reply to the objections raised by the auditors.
He was asked to explain his position.
Still he did not submit any explanation.
It was alleged that he was guilty of negligence in the discharge of his duties.
He was informed of "disciplinary action under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987."
The petitioner submitted a reply.
Mr. ML Sharma, the Additional District and Sections Judge, Gurgaon was appointed as the Enquiry Officer.
The charges were proved.
A show-cause notice was issued.
A copy of the enquiry report was also supplied.
After considering the petitioners' reply, the District Judge passed an order dated April 22, 1996.
He held as under :-  "Taking into consideration that he has been found guilty of both the charges of which regular enquiry has been held and he has not been keeping accounts for articles purchased during his tenure as Civil Nazir, I find that he is not fit to be retained in service when he has already completed more than 55 years of age.
He is therefore retired from service w.e.f.
3041996 afternoon against payment of three months salary."
3.
The petitioner submitted an appeal.
Hon'ble the Chief Justice granted personal hearing to the petitioner.
Thereafter, vide order dated April 1, 1997, the appeal was dismissed.
Aggrieved by the order of retirement, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
4.
Mr. RK Jain has contended that the conditions of service governing the petitioner and other members of the ministerial establishment in the subordinate courts are laid down in the rules contained in Chapter 18 of the High Court Rules and Orders, Volume I The penalties which can be imposed on an employee are enumerated in Rule IX.
The penalty of compulsory/premature retirement is not one of the prescribed punishments.
Consequently, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
Secondly, it was also contended that it was the duty of the Senior Subordinate Judge to explain the objections raised by the auditors and that the petitioner could not be penalised for this failure to do so.
5.
Admittedly, the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner by the District and Sessions Judge, Gurgaon.
The petitioner was specifically informed that he was liable for disciplinary action "under Rule 7 of Haryana Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987."
The petitioner had submitted a reply.
He had not taken an objection that 1987 Rules were not applicable.
He had inter alia submitted that "no action may please be taken against me under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (P and A) Rules, 1987."
The enquiry was held.
A show-cause notice was given to the petitioner.
The petitioner has not produced anything to show that he ever raised an objection that the 1987 Rules were not applicable or that the action should have been initiated under the rules contained in Chapter 18 of the High Court Rules and Orders, Volume I On April 22, 1996, the learned District Judge had ordered the petitioner's retirement "from service w.e.f.
April 30, 1996 afternoon against payment of three months' salary."
The petitioner had filed an appeal.
A copy of the appeal petition has been produced as Annexure P.8.
It was not alleged that the petitioner could not be retired from service.
Even when he appeared for personal hearing before Hon'ble the Chief Justice, it was not contended that he was not liable to be retired.
In this situation, it is clear that the petitioner had not raised the question regarding the applicability of the rules at any stage of the proceedings prior to the filing of the present petition.
That being so, he cannot be permitted to raise this issue for the first time at the stage of the present writ petition.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It is true that the rules contained in chapter 18 of the High Court Rules and Orders, Volume I do not provide for the imposition of the penalty of compulsory/premature retirement.
However, it is the admitted position that in respect of matters regarding which no specific provision has been made in the rules promulgated by the Chief Justice, the employees of this court as well as those working in the subordinate courts are governed by the provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
Rule 326 contained in Chapter III, Volume I, inter alia provides that "the appointing authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in the public interest so to do, have the absolute right to retire any government employee.....by giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or three months' pay and allowances in lieu of such notice ......
Such a power can be exercised in case of a member of the Class III service on or after he has attained the age of 55 years.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had completed 55 years of age.
It is also indisputable that the provisions of Rule 326 are applicable to the petitioner.
Thus, it is clear that the appointing authority has the right to retire an employee after he had completed the age of 55 years.
The petitioner had admittedly crossed the age of 55 years.
The charges against him having been proved, the authority could have legitimately come to the conclusion that he was not fit to be retained and as such, it will be proper to retire him.
This is precisely what the District and Sessions Judge had ordered.
It is not disputed that he had the power to do so.
Merely because a reference had been made to a wrong provision (assuming it was so), it cannot be said that the action was illegal and, thus, untenable.
7.
Another fact which may be mentioned here is that even under the provisions of Rules IX relied upon by the petitioner, a penalty of removal from service can be awarded.
Consequently, it was not disputed by the counsel for the petitioner that in exercise of powers under those rules, the petitioner could have been ordered to be removed from service.
The award of such a penalty would have disentitled the petitioner to claim the retiral benefits like pension etc. By virtue of the order of retirement, the petitioner's right to retiral benefits has been protected.
He has not suffered any loss.
No undeserved harm has occurred.
No avoidable loss has been caused.
Consequently, no interference is called for.
8.
It was also contended that under the financial rules, the responsibility to meet with the objections raised by the auditors was of the competent authority and not that of the petitioner.
9.
In the context of this case, the contention is misconceived.
The petitioner has not been punished for his failure to meet with the objections raised by the auditors.
The punishment has been awarded to him for his failure to prepare the comments in an annotated form and to submit a reply when he had been asked to explain.
No other point was raised.
No ground for interference is made out.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed in limine .
Petition dismissed.