KC Puri, J - Challenge in this Civil Writ Petition is to the order dated 2682003, Annexure P-7, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench vide which recovery of Rs. 48,371/- from the death-cum- retirement gratuity of the petitioner has been upheld.
2.
The petitioner joined at Ganga Nagar as Sectional Officer (Electrical) on 3111997.
On retirement, the petitioner was paid all the retiral dues except an amount of Rs. 48,371/- which was deducted from his gratuity on account of shortage in the store stock of Shri Ganga Nagar which was verified in April, 1986.
Two show-cause notices dated 422002 and 21.2.2002 were issued to the petitioner as to why the recovery of Rs. 48,371/- be not made.
The petitioner submitted reply.
The Divisional Electrical Engineer, respondent No. 4 upheld the recovery of Rs. 48,371/- from the death-cum-retirement gratuity of the petitioner.
The petitioner challenged the said order dated 14112002 but vide impugned order dated 2682003, the claim of the petitioner was rejected by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
3.
Aggrieved by the abovesaid order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging the same on the ground that no departmental proceedings were initiated against him.
It is submitted that the petitioner has placed on record the report of the Store Keeper and in the report, it is mentioned that it is a mere lapse for not posting the stock consumed and on that count, no recovery could be made.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that there were seven persons incharge of the store.
According to the order of Central Administrative Tribunal, there was supervisory lapse on the part of the petitioner.
The Central Administrative Tribunal has mentioned in its order that the Store Keeper has been charge-sheeted for the misconduct on account of loss to the department.
It is submitted that the department cannot twicely charge for the alleged shortage from the petitioner.
The department could hold a regular inquiry and only thereafter order of recovery could be passed against the petitioner.
5.
We have carefully considered the said submission but do not find any force in the same.
6.
The reply of the Store Clerk is immaterial as he has also been charge- sheeted for the loss of store items.
Mentioning of the fact in the report of Store Keeper that there was error of posting only does not appeal to reason.
No explanation has been given by the petitioner whether the material which was found less has been consumed.
No authentic document has been placed on the record.
The penalty of recovery of amount is a minor penalty and as such there was no necessity of conducting regular inquiry before awarding the punishment.
7.
So far as the submission made by the counsel for the petitioner that the department cannot have benefit by charging the amount of alleged loss from the petitioner as well as from the Store Keeper is concerned, in this regard it is observed that in case any amount is ordered to be recovered from the Store Keeper, in that case, the department shall refund that much amount which is actually recovered from the Store Keeper in respect of store items for which the petitioner has been held liable.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the department may become wiser and may not impose the penalty of recovery on the Store Keeper and may impose penalty of other kind than the recovery and on that count, the order would be bad.
9.
We have carefully considered the said submissions but do not find any force in the same.
It is up to the department to proceed against the employee in accordance with law and the Court cannot interfere in the matter of punishment unless glaring mistake has been committed by the department.
10.
So far as the submission that seven persons are involved in the loss in question, the learned counsel for the petitioner could not give the name of any other employee nor the said fact has been pleaded before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
So, that argument cannot be allowed to be raised for the first time before the Writ Court.
The Central Administrative Tribunal has passed the order by giving reasoning.
There is nothing on the file that the said order is, in any way, perverse or illegal.
Therefore, in view of the above discussion, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same stands dismissed.
However, it is made clear that in case any amount is recovered from the Store Keeper in respect of shortage in question, in that case the department shall refund that much amount which is recovered from the Store Keeper regarding the shortage in question.
This Civil Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition dismissed.