Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioner, mother of late Kuldeep Singh, has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court claiming extra ordinary family pension on account of the death of her son Kuldeep Singh in firing accident when he was posted in Baramulla area in Jammu & Kashmir.
2.
Kuldeep Singh, son of the petitioner, was enrolled in the Central Reserve Police Force (hereinafter to be referred as "CRPF") on 20022003.
He was posted with the unit in disturbed area of Jammu and Kashmir.
He suffered bullet injuries in the firing incident and he died on 27112004.
He left behind his mother, the present petitioner, and father Raj Pal Singh including his younger brother.
The petitioner sought financial assistance through Zila Sainik Board, Jhajjar on 14122004.
On 22022005, the documents for the grant of extra ordinary family pension were got completed.
It is asserted in the petition that husband of the petitioner is getting service pension for the duty performed by him in the army and except to this he is not getting any other kind of pension from any other authorities and he has no objection in granting the family pension to the petitioner.
However, the claim of the petitioner for pension has been declined by the reason that the husband of the petitioner has been getting service pension from the army authorities.
The petitioner relies upon The Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, 1939 (hereinafter to be referred as "Extraordinary Pension Rules").
As per said Rules, the mother is entitled for the family pension and that there is no stipulation of any income of the father as a factor to decline the grant of extraordinary family pension.
Therefore, the petitioner claims extraordinary family pension on account of death of her son.
3.
In reply, it is admitted that son of the petitioner died on 27112004 due to serious bullet injuries during firing incident at Baramulla.
The opinion of the Court of Inquiry is to the effect that he was on bona fide government duty/service and that the death of petitioner's son falls in category "C" under the provisions laid down in Govt. of India, Ministry of Personnel.
Public Grievances and Pension Memorandum dated 03022000.
It is also pointed out that Kuldeep Singh died as a bachelor leaving behind his father aged 46 years, mother aged 41 years and younger brother aged 15 years.
It is also averred that the proposal for authorization of Extraordinary Dependent Family Pension at the rate of Rs. 1913/- per month w.e.f.
28112004 was sent to DIGP, CRPF Chandigarh along with all relevant documents.
The recommendations were returned on 07042005, Annexure R-1, with the remarks that Shri Rajpal Singh father of the deceased, is an ex-army pensioner and also landlord, therefore, parents of the deceased are not entitled to extraordinary family pension.
It was intimated that if income of both the parents including pension and income earning from farming is less than Rs. 2550/- per month, then they would be entitled for subject pension otherwise only death gratuity is to be paid in favour of nominated family member.
It is alleged that monthly income of both parents exceeded to Rs. 2550/- per month, therefore, extraordinary dependent family pension is not payable to the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the Extraordinary Pension Rules do not provide for any condition regarding extent of income of the family of the deceased.
Therefore, declining of claim of the petitioner is wholly unjustified.
It is also disputed that the pension of the husband of the petitioner cannot be taken into consideration for determining the means of the family and, in any case, meager amount of pension received for the army service rendered by her husband cannot form the basis for declining extraordinary family pension on account of unfortunate death of her son.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondent could not refer to any condition of income under the Extraordinary Pension Rules.
Reference was made to Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter to be referred as "1972 Pension Rules").
However, the claim of the petitioner is for extraordinary family pension in terms of the Extraordinary Pension Rules as under Rule 52 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 (hereinafter to be referred as "CRPF Rules"), all members of the Force on duty or on duty with a military force shall be entitled to wound, injury or family pensions or gratuities as laid down in Civil Service Regulations or Extraordinary Pension Rules.
Rule 52 of the CRPF Rules reads as under :-  "All members of the Force on duty or on duty with a military force shall be entitled to wound, injury or family pensions or gratuities as laid down in Civil Service Regulations or the Central Civil Service (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, 1939, as may be amended from time to time."
6.
The term `accident' in Rule 3 of the Extraordinary Pension Rules has been defined as a sudden and unavoidable mishap; or a mishap due to an act of devotion to duty in an emergency arising otherwise than by violence out of and in the course of service.
Rule 11 of the said Rules contemplates that if the deceased Government servant has left neither a widow nor a child, an award may be made to his father and his mother individually or jointly and in the absence of the father and the mother to minor brothers and sisters, individually or collectively, if they were largely dependent on the Government servant for support and are in pecuniary need.
However, the orders of the Government of India from 01011996, regulating Disability Pension and Extraordinary Family Pension under the Central Civil Services (Extraordinary) Pension Rules consequent to Fifth Central Pay Commission, contemplate that when the Government servant dies as a bachelor or as a widower without children, dependent pension will be admissible to parent without reference to pecuniary circumstances at the rate of 75% of pay last drawn if both parents are alive and at the rate of 60% if only one of them is alive.
The relevant provision reads as under :-  "Category `D' Death or disability attributable to acts of violence by terrorists, anti-social elements, etc., whether in their performance of duties or otherwise.
Apart from cases of death or injury sustained by personnel of the Central Police Organizations while employed in aid of the civil administration in quelling agitation, riots or revolt by demonstrators, other public servants including Police personnel, etc., bomb blasts in public places or transport, indiscriminate shooting incidents in public, etc., would be covered under this category.
Category `E' Death or disability arising as a result of (a) attack by or during action against extremists, anti-social elements, etc., and (b) enemy action in international war or border skirmishes and warlike situations, including cases which are attributable to (i) extremists acts, exploding mines, etc., while on way to an operational area, (ii) kidnapping, by extremists; and (iii) battle inoculation as part of training exercises with live ammunition."
"II.
Family Pension under Categories `D' & `E' :- (1) Family pension in cases, falling under categories `D' & `E' shall be determined under the existing provision of Liberalized Pensionary Awards Scheme.
(2) If the Government servant is not survived by widow but is survived by child/children only, all children together shall be eligible for family pension at the rate of 60% of basic pay, subject to minimum of Rs. 2,500.
Children allowance, as admissible now, shall stand abolished.
(3) When the Government servant dies a bachelor or as a widower without children, dependent pension will be admissible to parent without reference to pecuniary circumstances, at the rate of 75% of pay last drawn if both parents are alive and at the rate of 60% if only one of them is alive."
In view of the said decision of Govt. of India, the communication rejecting the claim of the petitioner for extraordinary family pension is wholly unjustified and not tenable.
Therefore, we allow the present writ petition and direct the respondents to calculate the amount of family pension payable to the petitioner w.e.f.
28112004 and disburse the same within two months from today.
Petition allowed.