Mohinder Pal, J - This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the Union Territory, Chandigarh through the Executive Engineer, Project, Public Health Division No. 3 (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner-Administration), for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated August 19, 2002 (Annexure P-3) passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal') whereby Original Application filed by the private respondents under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') was allowed.
The private respondents are Bill Distributors (a Class-IV post) of water consumption for Chandigarh.
Their claim before the Tribunal was that they are entitled to the same pay scales as were being given by the petitioner-Administration to the Bill Distributors of electricity consumption for Chandigarh.
The private respondents invoked the principle "equal pay for equal work".
The Tribunal has upheld their claim.
2.
The private respondents were appointed as Bill Distributors in the Public Health Circle of the Engineering Department, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
On the formation of the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, respondent Nos. 4 to 13 (respondent Nos. 12 and 13 Sheela Devi and Sona Devi are widows of Bill Distributors Prem Chand and Gurmit Singh, respectively) were transferred to the Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh, whereas respondents Nos. 2 and 3 were allowed to remain in the Public Health Circle of the Engineering Department.
They used to distribute the water bills for Chandigarh.
Similarly, there were Bill Distributors in the Electricity Wing who used to distribute electricity bills.
The former category of employees were getting their wages as per the corresponding scales in the Punjab Government.
As far as Electricity Wing employees were concerned, they were governed by the Wage Structure of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
The private respondents, who are drawing pay scales on Punjab Pattern, are in the pay scale of Rs. 2520-4140 (with initial start Rs. 2620/-) whereas the Bill Distributors in the Electricity Wing are drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2920-5300.
3.
With effect from April 01, 1991, the pattern of combined Electricity and Water bills was introduced.
Thereafter, the private respondents filed Original Application No. 899/CH/1993 before the Tribunal claiming equal pay for equal work.
The said Original Application was decided vide order dated February 23, 2001 (Annexure A-2 to Annexure P-1) by which the private respondents were directed to file detailed representation and the petitioner-Administration was directed to decide the same.
The said representation dated March 20, 2001 was decided by order dated June 15, 2001 (Annexure A-1 to Annexure P-1) and the claim for pay parity was rejected.
The private respondents again filed representation dated June 22, 2001 in reply to Annexure A-1 to Annexure P-1, which was also rejected vide order dated September 27, 2001 (Annexure A-1/1 to Annexure P-1).
Thereafter, the private respondents filed Original Application No. 1015/CH/01, which was allowed by the Tribunal vide the impugned order dated August 19, 2002 (Annexure P-3) and the private respondents were held entitled to the same scale of pay as was being paid by the petitioner- Administration to the Bill Distributors of Electricity Operation Circle with effect from the date the petitioner-Administration had started joint billing i.e issuance of common bill for Electricity Power Consumption and Water Consumption (unless the pay scales of Bill Distributors of Electricity Department were brought at par to that of the private respondents with effect from the same date).
The petitioner- Administration was directed to release arrears of pay scales and the pay scale with effect from the date of start of joint billing.
The private respondents were held entitled to the same pay scale as being paid to the Bill Distributors of the Electricity Operation Circle with effect from April 01, 1991 or the date with effect from which joint billing was started by the Chandigarh Administration, whichever was later.
Costs of Rs. 10,000/- were also imposed on the petitioner- Administration with liberty to it to recover the same from the Officer who had signed the orders Annexures A-1 and A-1/1 to Annexure P-1.
4.
In the written statement filed by respondents Nos. 2 to 13, it has been averred that earlier the tariff bills in respect of water supply and electricity supply under the petitioner-Administration were separate.
However, from the year 1991, the petitioner-Administration started billing consumers through combined bills, which contained tariff for electricity as well as for water consumption.
Thus, since 1992 onwards, the bills being sent to the consumers are combined bills, which the Bill Distributors in both wings of the petitioner-Administration i.e Public Health and Electricity are distributing.
Now, the duties performed by the private respondents are the same as performed by the Bill Distributors of Electricity Wing.
So, with the introduction of identical work for the Bill Distributors of Public Health Circle and Electrical Circle, they could not be discriminated in the matter of pay.
5.
We have heard Mr. Rajneesh Sharma, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner- Administration, Mr. Pawan Mutneja, Advocate, appearing for respondent No. 2 and Mr. AL Vohra, Advocate, appearing for respondents Nos. 3 to 13 and have gone through the records of the case.
6.
The scales being given to the employees working under Electricity Operation Circle are the scales granted to the Punjab State Electricity Board employees and are higher than the scales given to the same category of employees working in the Public Health Circle of Engineering Department, which are on the Punjab pattern.
It has come on record that there is no Electricity Wing in the Engineering Department in Punjab.
The Chandigarh Administration is now filling up the posts of Bill Distributors as per the Punjab pattern; meaning thereby that henceforth there will be no question of disparity in the pay scales of Bill Distributors.
7.
The whole area of Chandigarh is divided into various Sectors and these Sectors have been further divided between Bill Distributors of Public Health Circle as well as Electricity Operation Circle.
The Tribunal adjudicated upon the issue as to whether the private respondents were performing the same duties as compared with Bill Distributors of Electricity Operation Circle and gave a definite opinion that after adopting practice of preparing a joint bill for electricity consumption and water consumption, one could find nothing which distinguishes between the categories of Bill Distributors distributing same set of bills in various Sectors of Chandigarh.
8.
The petitioner-Administration, vide order dated June 15, 2001 (Annexure A-1 to Annexure P-1) declined the representation of the private respondents for granting them parity with the pay scales drawn by the Bill Distributors in the Electricity Operation Circle of the Engineering Department on the ground that as the employees of Electricity Operation Circle of the Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration, are enjoying the pay scales as are admissible to the employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board, the others cannot claim parity with them.
Another representation made by the private respondents in this regard was rejected by the petitioner-Administration vide order dated September 27, 2001 (Annexure A-1/1 to Annexure P-1) by stating that the order dated June 15, 2001 (Annexure A-1 to Annexure P-1) was final and did not require to be reversed.
9.
A perusal of the orders Annexures A-1 and A-1/1 to Annexure P-1 shows that the petitioner-Administration did not take note of the fact that both the categories of Bill Distributors ie Bill Distributors in the Electricity Operation Circle and the Public Health Circle are performing their duties under the same Department of Engineering, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
The private respondents could not be discriminated in the grant of pay scale forming part of the same cadre.
No Rules have been brought to our notice contemplating separate pay scale to the holders of the post in the same cadre.
In this view of the matter, we have no hesitation in holding that the action of the petitioner-Administration in declining the prayer of the private respondents to grant them parity with the pay scales drawn by the Bill Distributors in the Electricity Operation Circle of the Engineering Department on the ground that the employees of Electricity Operation Circle of the Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration, are enjoying the pay scales as are admissible to the employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board, is not sustainable in law.
The authority relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner ie Chandigarh Administration and others v. Naurang Singh and others, 1997(2) SCT 648 : 1997(2) Services Law Reporter 230 is distinguishable and has no bearing on the facts of the present case.
In that case, it was held by the Apex Court that personal pays cannot furnish a ground for invoking the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work".
The respondents in that case were granted the relief of parity of pay scale by the Tribunal with the pay scale of five Storekeepers (to whom it was already given) and later on the said higher pay was treated as personal pay and the Administration had declined the higher pay scale to the respondents on the ground that the respondents could not treat the said mistake as a precedent nor could they make it a basis for claiming equal pay.
The Tribunal did not accept the case of the Administration and granted the higher pay scale to the respondents.
Under these circumstances, it was held by the Apex Court that the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" has no application in such a situation.
An evident mistake cannot constitute a valid basis for compelling the Administration to keep on repeating that mistake.
Personal pay is granted to employees on various grounds.
In certain services where the Matriculation is the minimum educational qualification for a particular post, and a Graduate joins that post, additional increments are given to him to start with.
Increments are also given to male employees for undergoing family planning operation.
Such personal pays cannot furnish a ground for invoking the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work".
10.
In view of the above, we do not find any illegality in the impugned order which may warrant interference by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
Hence, the present petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.