Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is challenging the vires of r. 8(5)(a) of the West Bengal Schools (Recruitment of Non-teaching Staff) Rules, 2005.
His case is that rule offends the provisions in s. 3(1)(d) of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 and arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
2.
Dealing with identical questions, I have delivered judgment dated July 18th, 2006 in W.P. No. 16785 (W) of 2006 Smt. Smritikana Roy (Halder) v. State of West Bengal & Ors.
In that case I held that provisions in r. 8 (5)(a) do not offend any provisions of the 1959 Act or the provisions in arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution.
3.
Counsel argues that in the recruitment rules regarding panchayet service the state government has made provisions for advertising the employment notice, and hence the provisions in r. 8 (5) (a) of the abovementioned rules should be struck down on the ground that the state government is not empowered to frame different rules for different services.
I do not see any merit in the contention.
In my view, the state government is quite empowered to frame different rules for different services in its different departments.
4.
Simply because in one set of rules the state provided that the employment notice should be published inviting applications from all, it cannot be said that provisions in r8(5) (a) of the present rules confining the source of eligible candidates to the employment exchanges in the first instance, and providing that employment notice should be published inviting applications from open market only on receipt of non availability reports from the employment exchanges, are bad.
5.
Counsel says that the rule is in conflict with the circular issued by the central government that all employment notices should be given wide publicity I see no merit in this contention as well.
The order dated June 4th, 1998 (at page 61) has nothing to do with the statutory recruitment rules framed by the competent authority.
That was issued by the Deputy Director of Employment Exchange Ministry of Labour of the Central government to the Director of Employment of all States.
6.
By that the employment exchanges were directed to follow-the apex court decision in Excise Superintendent, Malkapattam v. KBN Visheswar Rao & Ors., (1996) 6 SCC 216.
In the decision I have given in the other case, after considering the authorities I held that in view of the statutory recruitment rules the employment notice was not to be published in the first instance inviting applications from all.
7.
On the strength of the apex court decision in Bir Bajrag Kumar v. State of Bihar & Ors., AIR 1987 SC 1345, counsel submits that sitting in co-ordinate jurisdiction I cannot dismiss this writ petition, when dealing with identical questions Soumitra Pal, J was pleased to allow the Writ Petition No. 13542 (W) of 2006 (In re: Indrajit Dhar) by final order dated June 8th, 2006.
I do not see how the apex court decision is relevant.
8.
From the order dated June 8th, 2006, I find that none of the questions involved in the present case were argued or decided in that case.
As already mentioned, in the case of Smt. Smritikana Roy (Haldar) v. State of West Bengal & Ors., I have decided identical questions by delivering final judgment.
I am therefore unable to agree with counsel that dismissal of the present writ petition will amount to breach of judicial comity.
In any case, it is not the situation here that one writ petition was admitted the other day and today I am dismissing this writ petition involving same issues.
9.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.