Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Joint Secretary (A & L), Central Board of Secondary Education dated August 25th, 2006 turning down her request to correct the certificate that was issued to her by the board on passing the Higher Secondary Examination, 1976.
2.
By her letter dated August 6th, 2006 the petitioner requested the board authority to correct the certificate for substituting the date July 17th, 1962 for the date July l7th, 1958 recorded in the certificate regarding her date of birth.
The board stated that in view of its bye-laws a request for changing date of birth made after lapse of two years from the date of recording was not entertainable unless it was supported by an order of a court of law.
It further stated that in terms of the order of the magistrate dated August 5th, 2006 produced by her, there was no scope to effect the change.
3.
Case of the petitioner is that on the basis of the certificate dated July 7th, 2006 issued by the Registrar, Birth and Death, Port Blair, the order of the Metropolitan Magistrate, 10th, Court, Calcutta dated August 5th, 2006 made in Misc. Case No. M/249/06 directing the Registrar.
Birth and Death of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation to register her name recording that she was born on July 17th, 1962 in Aberdeen Bazar.
Port Blair, the Andamans and Nicobar Islands, and the certificate of the Principal, Carmel SS School, Port Blair dated July 6th, 2006 stating that her date of birth was wrongly recorded as July 17th, 1958, the authority of the board was bound to correct the date of birth recorded in the certificate.
4.
In support of his contention that the board authority was wrong counsel relies on the apex court decision in Birad Mal Singhvi v. Anand Purohit, AIR 1988 SC 1796.
He argues that it was held by their Lordships that an authority requested to correct the date of birth is bound to correct it, if the request is accompanied by a school certificate supported by an affidavit of the parent of the person.
His contention is that in this case also the school issued the certificate and the mother of the petitioner affirmed an affidavit in August 2006.
5.
As to the certificate issued by the principal of the school it is apparent on the face of it that it was not issued on the basis of the admission register.
There is absolutely no reason to accept it which was issued merely on the basis of an affidavit produced by the petitioner that her correct date of birth was July 17th, 1962.
It was not a school leaving certificate, which, even if it were, would have been of no use, unless the person issuing that was in the school at the time the petitioner was admitted therein (see Ravinder Singh Gorkhi v. State of UP, AIR 2006 SC 2157).
6.
The certificate dated July 7th, 2006 issued by the registrar, births and deaths was not a certificate of registration issued in terms of provisions of the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886.
The registrar was not empowered to register the date of birth on July 7th 2006, unless the request for registration was accompanied by an order made by the appropriate judicial magistrate.
This was so because of the provisions in s. 13 of the Registration of Births and Death Act, 1969.
The request made not within one year of the birth, was just not entertainable.
7.
It is further to be noted that the registrar stated in his certificate that the 1962 registrar of births was not available.
The certificate was issued in terms of provisions in s. 17 of the 1969 Act.
Provisions of that section did not empower the registrar to say that the date claimed by the petitioner was her actual date of birth when the 1962 register was not available.
It is not the case of the petitioner that in 1962 her date of birth was duly registered in terms of the law that was existing at that time.
8.
The order of the metropolitan magistrate dated August 5th, 2006 is of no use as well.
That was made on the basis of the certificate of the registrar dated July 7th, 2006.
It is not known how the magistrate assumed jurisdiction over the matter.
He wrongly treated the certificate of the registrar as a birth certificate.
Besides, it has remained a mystery how he could make an order directing the Registrar.
Births & Deaths of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation to register the petitioner's name and claimed date of birth when she was born in the Andamans and Nicobar Islands.
9.
While taking the higher secondary examination conducted by the board in 1976 the petitioner declared her date of birth with supporting documents.
It is on the basis of her such own declaration that her date of birth was recorded in the certificate as July 17th, 1958.
She requested the board to correct the date of birth recorded in the certificate only on August 6th, 2006.
Counsel says that since for career advancement the petitioner needs the change to be recorded, she sent the request letter dated August 6th, 2006.
10.
It is not her case that in 1976 the date of birth was wrongly recorded by the board.
She started agitating the issue for the first time in 2006, and as conceded by her counsel, for the purpose of career advancement.
The affidavit of the mother, it goes without saying was brought into existence for supporting the grossly belated move.
I have no hesitation in holding that the claim made by the petitioner was not a bona fide one.
By giving different declarations at different points of time evidently to suit her immediate purposes, she was not entitled to confer on herself any legally enforceable right, or any duty or obligation on the board.
11.
For these reasons, I hold that the board has rightly turned down the request.
There is no reason to interfere with the impugned decision.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
12.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.