Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is praying for a mandamus directing the university to produce script of the paper Legal Education and Research Methodology of his Master of Laws (LL.M) Part-I Examination, 2005, so that the script may be scrutinized and judicially reviewed (this is how counsel has explained the prayer) by this court.
2.
Counsel says that the petitioner failed in the examination that he took for the second time.
By referring me to the marks given on account of written part and internal assessment, he says that in both the examinations almost identical marks were awarded by the examiners.
His argument is that when the examiner making the internal assessment awarded good mark, there was no earthly reason why the examiner who assessed the script awarded unexpectedly low mark.
3.
Counsel for the university submits that according to the rules governing the examination the script was assessed by two examiners.
He says that marks awarded by the first examiner were not recorded on the script, so that the second examiner might assess it without being influenced by the assessment of the first examiner.
He says that according to the rules, unless there is a defference of fifteen or more between the assessment of the two examiners, the scope is not sent to the third examiner.
He clarifies by saying that average of the marks awarded by the two examiners is given to the candidate.
4.
According to the rules governing the examination, no review is permissible.
Simply because marks obtained by the petitioner in two successive examinations are almost identical, in my view, it cannot be concluded that the examiners did not assess the script properly.
On the ground that the petitioner did not obtain the pass mark, the writ court is not supposed to exercise the power of judicial review.
In my view, assessment of script made by an examiner in a university examination is not open to judicial review of the writ court.
Hence there is no scope to issue a mandamus as prayed for.
5.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
6.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.