Shantanu Kemkar, J - By filing this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India the petitioner is seeking quashment of his suspension order dated 1691992 (Annexure A/1), the memos issued by the respondents to him (Annexures F/1 and G) by which deduction of penal rent from his salary was ordered and also the order dated 841994 (Annexure K) issued by the respondents by which his services were terminated.
2.
The petitioner was working as Line Attendant Grade-I at Sarni.
He was transferred from Sarni to Bhopal vide order dated 771988.
As he did not join at the transferred place, he was served with a show cause notice for his long unauthorized absence.
After considering his reply he was inflicted with the penalty of withholding of one increment with cumulative effect vide order dated 20.8.1990.
According to the respondents, on 61.1992 the petitioner unauthorisedly entered and occupied the residential quarter no. F-164 of the respondents, situated at Bijli Nagar Colony, Govindpura, Bhopal.
On this he was called upon by the respondents to vacate the unauthorized occupation of the said quarter but he refused.
In the circumstances, the respondents suspended him from service vide order no. 1845 dated 1691992 (Annexure A/1) and simultaneously vide order no. 1846 dated 1691992 decided to conduct departmental enquiry against him.
Following were the charges levelled against the petitioner :-  "1.
Shri MS Pandian, ALM attached to E.H.T.
(Maint) SUB.
DN.
Bhopal is entrusted with the works and responsibilities as defined by the Board for its employees in the capacity of Line Attdt.
Grade I since there occurred indiscipline by Shri MSPandian due to unauthorized occupation of Board's quarter no. F-164 at Bijli Nagar Colony, Bhopal.
2.
Now while working at Bhopal Shri MS Pandian, ALM again kept unauthorized possession of Board's quarter no. F-164 at Bijli Nagar Colony, Bhopal with effect from 61.
92 and even after repeated instructions issued to him in writing by the Mains Officer (EHT/Maint), MPEB, Bhopal and also by Division Office for immediate vacation of said quarter Shri MS Pandian still kept in possession the quarter in question unauthorisedly.
The S.E.H.T.
(C&M), Bhopal has also issued instructions for vacations the quarter but he has not vacated the quarter hence disobeyed the instructions of SE(EHT/C&M), Bhopal.
3.
Shri MSPandian, Line Attdt.
Grade I transferred from Sarni to Bhopal vide order no. EE/EHT/Maint/2211 dtd.
771988 and joined at Bhopal on 821990 after long absence from duties for which his one annual grade increment was withheld with cumulative effect.
Letter No. 410-11 dtd.
24.5.1990 that even after joining at new place of posting at Bhopal, Shri MS Pandian, ALM has not been vacated Board's quarter at Sarni and kept unauthorized 2 possession since long and due to his negligency and indiscipline an amount of Rs. 4993/- as recovery of penal rent at the rate of Rs. 274/- per month has been effected from the salary of Shri MS Pandian, ALM 4.
The Board has extended facility of house rent allowance to its employees and accordingly Shri MSPandian, ALM is receiving Rs. 250/- in salary per month towards house rent w.e.f.
6/91 where as Shri MSPandian kept possession in Board's quarter unauthorisedly, hence it is, clear that he is taking un-due advantage from Board's therefore, Shri MSPandian has rendered himself liable for disciplinary action.
5.
He has refused the monthly salary at the time of disbursement of salary and disobeyed the Board's instructions.
Thus he is in habit to create indiscipline and negligency against Board's rule.
When at the time of his appointment in Board's service he took a oath that he solemnly affirm that he will be faithful and bear to allegiance of India & the Constitution as by Law established and the he will carry out the duties in Board loyally and honestly.
But Shri MS Pandian, ALM failed to follow the instructions of his superior and still kept possession of Board's quarter No. F-164 at Bijli Nagar Colony, Bhopal.
Therefore Shri MS Pandian, ALM has rendered himself liable for disciplinary action."
3.
The petitioner duly participated in the departmental enquiry conducted to enquire into the aforesaid charges.
He examined himself in support of his defence.
The Enquiry Officer vide his report dated 30.12.1992 held him guilty of all the aforesaid charges.
The disciplinary authority issued him show cause notices on 321994 and on 1821994 (Annexure R/12).
The petitioner did not submit any reply to the said show cause notices.
On 2821994 a notice was published by the respondents in the news paper informing the petitioner to submit his reply to the show cause notice, mentioning therein that if no explanation is submitted by him his services would be terminated.
However, before the disciplinary authority could take any decision and pass any order, the petitioner approached this Court by filing this misc. petition.
On 18.3.1994 this misc. petition was admitted and notices were issued to the respondents.
In the meanwhile as the petitioner did not submit any explanation the respondents vide order dated 841994 dismissed the petitioner from services.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner moved an application before this Court on 1842004 (I.A.No.
3532/1994) seeking relief of issuance of directions to the respondents to keep in abeyance the operation of the impugned order dated 841994 by which he was dismissed from service.
After hearing the parties on 26.4.1994 this Court stayed the operation of the order dated 841994 (Annexure K), thereafter the petition was amended and the quashment of the order dated 841994 (Annexure K) was also sought.
4.
The petitioner contends that the charge sheet issued to him is vitiated as in the charge no. 3 of the charge sheet the respondents have reiterated the misconduct of his long absence though for the said misconduct he was already punished.
In the circumstances, he contends that the whole charge sheet goes and on this ground itself the enquiry conducted against him is void abinitio, therefore, the order of dismissal of his service be quashed.
He also contends that the charge no. 3 is in regard to his non vacating the quarter at Sarni even after his transfer to Bhopal and for this unauthorized retention of the quarter at Sarni the respondents having recovered the penal rent from him, the alleged misconduct to that effect stood condoned and as such for this unauthorized retention of quarter at Sarni no charge sheet could have been issued.
As regards the allegation of unauthorized possession of the quarter no. F-164, Bijli Nagar Colony at Bhopal with effect from 61.1992 till date the petitioner contends that he was allotted the said quarter by an oral order of the then Chief Engineer and as such he was not occupying it unauthorisedly.
He further contends that even if it is assumed that he could not prove that he was allotted the quarter by the said oral order, the act of unauthorized retention of the quarter is not a misconduct of so grave nature warranting his dismissal from service.
He contends that in the facts and circumstances of the case the penalty of dismissal from service is excessive and harsh.
He also contends that he was not served with the copy of the enquiry report, therefore, he could not reply to the show cause notice.
According to him, this non supply of the enquiry report caused prejudice to him and for this reason also the petition deserves to be allowed.
5.
The respondents contend that the petitioner was transferred from Sarni to Bhopal on account of various complaints received from the Unions and Staff of Sarni Power House, pointing out petitioner's mis-behaviour and un-warranted habits.
The petitioner on one pretext or other did not join at the transfered place, ultimately, he was relieved on 2471989.
However, he left the head quarter without any intimation and did not comply the transfer order and the relieving order.
Consequently the said orders were published in the news paper.
He was also issued a show cause notice for his long absence without leave.
After considering his reply he was inflicted with a penalty of withholding of one increment with cumulative effect.
As regards the unauthorized entry and occupation of quarter at Bhopal the respondents contend that the petitioner was not permitted to occupy the said quarter but he entered unauthorisedly and occupied the quarter no. F-164 situated at Bijli Nagar Colony, Govindpura, Bhopal.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was neither entitled for, nor allotted the said quarter.
The respondents submit that the petitioner was called upon to vacate the unauthorized occupation of the said quarter by issuing various letters but he refused to do so.
In the circumstances, it is stated that the respondents left with no option but to suspend the petitioner and to take disciplinary action against him for his aforesaid misconducts.
It is also stated that since the petitioner refused to vacate the quarter which he was unauthorizedly occupied and retained, it became necessary on the part of the respondents to charge penal rent from the petitioner as per the circular of the Board (Annexure R/8).
According to the respondents the petitioner was given full opportunity in the departmental enquiry to defend himself.
The evidence was led in his presence.
He examined himself in support of his defence.
Thus it is contended that the principles of natural justice were fully complied with.
The respondents further contended that in the enquiry the Enquiry Officer found him guilty of the misconduct and submitted his report to the disciplinary authority.
It is further stated by the respondents that merely because the penal rent was charged and recovered from the petitioner, it will not amount to condonation of the misconduct of disobedience of the orders to vacate the unauthorized occupation of the quarter.
It is further contended that mere mention in the charge sheet that the petitioner unauthorisedly remained absent after his transfer from Sarni and was inflicted with the punishment of withholding of one increment with cumulative effect would not vitiate the charge sheet which contains the charge like his unauthorised occupation of Boards quarter at Sarni, non compliance of the order of the Officers including Executive Engineer and Superintendent Engineer, to vacate the Boards quarter at Sarni after relieving from Sarni for Bhopal and unauthorisedly entering and keeping unauthorized occupation of quarter at Bhopal.
It is also contended by the respondents that the petitioner on being found guilty of the charges by the enquiry officer, was served with a show cause notice by the disciplinary authority against the proposed action.
The petitioner refused to receive the said show cause notice, the same was ultimately published in the news paper, inspite of this the petitioner did not submit any explanation.
In the circumstances, it is contended that the petitioner cannot make any grievance of non supply of enquiry report to him.
It is further stated that the petitioner never demanded copy of the enquiry report and on the other hand, refused to accept the show cause notice.
He, therefore, cannot be allowed to say that for non supply of enquiry report the order of punishment is vitiated.
It is also contended that the petitioner could not point out as to what prejudice has been caused to him.
Thus, according to the respondents the petition is misconceived and is liable to be dismissed.
6.
So far as the challenge to the charge sheet on the ground that it contains the misconduct for which he was already penalized, suffice is to say that merely because in the impugned charge sheet it was mentioned that for unauthorized absence of the petitioner he was penalized would not mean that for the same misconduct the charge sheet has been issued against him.
The mention of the said fact has to be looked into the context in which it has been mentioned and cannot be construed to say that for the same misconduct for which he has been punished the enquiry is proposed.
Similarly the petitioner also cannot claim condonation of his misconduct on the ground that the respondents have recovered penal rent from him for his unauthorized retention of the quarter.
The recovery of penal rent is for the unauthorized use of the quarter while the charge sheet is for disobedience of the orders of the Superiors directing him to vacate the unauthorized occupation of the quarter which he forcibly occupied and retained without there being any allotment in his favour.
The charging of the penal rent will not condone the aforesaid misconduct of taking forcible possession of the quarter and retaining the same without there being any allotment order.
7.
It is not in dispute that in regard to the charge sheet dated 1691992 (Annexure B) a full fledged enquiry was conducted by the respondents.
In the said enquiry the Enquiry Officer gave full opportunity to the petitioner to defend himself.
The Enquiry Officer held the petitioner guilty of all the charges.
It is found proved in the departmental enquiry that the petitioner did not vacate the quarter at Sarni even after his transfer to Bhopal.
At Bhopal also he unauthorisedly occupied and retained the quarter.
It is also found proved in the departmental enquiry that inspite of repeated letters he did not vacate the quarter at Bhopal.
It is also established from the records of the enquiry that the petitioner was issued a show cause notice on 321994 which he refused to accept and again a letter dated 1821994 was issued directing him to submit his explanation to the show cause notice within seven days.
The said notice was also published in the daily news paper dated 2821994 however, the petitioner failed to submit his explanation.
Thereafter, the disciplinary authority issued the impugned order of termination dated 841994 (Annexure R/15).
Thus the petitioner having refused to receive the show cause notice cannot be allowed to say that he was not supplied with the copy of the enquiry report along with the show cause notice.
8.
Thus, in my considered view the charge sheet issued against the petitioner cannot be said to be vague or based upon the allegation which stood condoned or do not constitute misconduct.
The charges against the petitioner having been found to be fully proved by the Enquiry Officer in the disciplinary proceedings, no case for interference is made out.
Having regard to the nature of misconduct found to be proved the punishment of dismissal from service cannot be said to be harsh or shockingly disproportionate warranting any interference in the same.
9.
No other point urged.
10.
Accordingly, the petition deserves to be and is hereby dismissed.
No orders as to costs.
Petition dismissed.