LN Mittal, J - Petitioner's husband Gursewak Singh (since deceased) joined the services of the respondents and was eventually promoted as Development Officer.
2.
Petitioner's claim is that her husband was compulsorily retired on medical grounds on 16.9.1986 after rendering services for about 26 years.
He was paid gratuity only because Pension Scheme was not introduced till then.
However, the respondents introduced Pension Scheme dated 2861995 with retrospective effect from 111986.
Petitioner's husband allegedly came to know of the Pension Scheme in the year 2000 and accordingly applied for service pension and offered to refund the gratuity as per Pension Scheme.
Aforesaid request of petitioner's husband was declined on 1532000 only on the ground that it was time barred.
Petitioner's husband died on 1762000.
Petitioner sent legal notice dated 1992000 claiming arrears of pension till the death of her husband and also claiming family pension thereafter.
3.
In earlier CWP No. 6685 of 2003 filed by the petitioner, respondent No. 2 was directed to consider the petitioner's legal notice and to pass a speaking order.
Respondent No. 2 sent letter dated 4.7.2003 Annexure P-9 intimating allegedly a new stand that the services of petitioner's husband had been terminated and thus he was not entitled to pension.
It was also stated in the letter that option furnished by petitioner's husband was barred by time.
Petitioner's claim is that the services of her husband were not terminated and that he was compulsorily retired from service on medical ground.
4.
Through the instant petition, the petitioner has sought quashing of letter Annexure P-6 dated 1532000 and letter dated 4.7.2003 Annexure P-9 whereby the claim of pension and family pension has been declined.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the case file.
7.
Learned counsel for the parties while addressing arguments reiterated their aforesaid respective stands.
8.
On careful consideration of the matter in its entirety, we find ourselves unable to accept the claim of the petitioner for various reasons.
9.
It is not a matter of dispute that the Pension Scheme relied on by the petitioner is applicable to employees, who retired on or after 111986.
Respondents have pleaded that services of the petitioner's husband were terminated on 2101985.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, on pointed inquiry, was unable to refer to any material on record to substantiate the petitioner's version that her husband was retired on 16.9.1986 on medical ground.
In fact, learned counsel for the petitioner could not refer to any material on record to show that petitioner's husband continued in service of the respondents on or after 111986.
In this view of the matter, the Pension Scheme, which is applicable to employees who were in service on 111986, is not applicable to the petitioner's husband as he was not in service of the respondents on or after 111986.
10.
The other reason for repudiating the petitioner's claim of pension and family pension is that the Pension Scheme is applicable to employees who retired from service of the respondents.
In the instant case, however, learned counsel for the petitioner acknowledged that there is no material on record to substantiate the petitioner's claim that her husband was retired from service.
There is no order or other document on record regarding the alleged retirement of petitioner's husband from service on medical ground or otherwise.
11.
On the other hand, according to the respondents, the services of the petitioner's husband were terminated.
The Pension Scheme in question is not applicable to employees whose services were terminated, but is applicable to only those employees who retired from service.
In this view of the matter also, petitioner's claim for pension and family pension cannot be accepted.
12.
It is also not a matter of dispute that under the Pension Scheme, the retiree had to give option for the pension within a period of 120 days from 2861995, the date of Notification of the Pension Rules.
Thus, option for pension had to be furnished up to 26101996 only.
It is also not a matter of dispute that petitioner's husband for the first time furnished option under the Pension Scheme vide his letter dated 2622000 (received by the respondents on 1132000).
Thus, the option was furnished more than four years after the lapse of the period for furnishing the option under the Pension Scheme.
Such a belated option could not possibly have been accepted by the respondents.
Counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that petitioner's husband was not informed about the Pension Scheme by the respondents and having retired from the service of respondents several years before promulgation of the Pension Scheme, the petitioner's husband was not in contact with the respondents and did not, therefore, come to know of the Pension Scheme in time and, therefore, he could not furnish his option under the Pension Scheme within the prescribed period.
The submission is devoid of any merit.
The respondents have specifically pleaded that the Pension Scheme was promulgated by way of Notification of the Pension Rules in the Government Gazette and so all concerned are deemed to have acquired knowledge thereof.
In this context, counsel for the respondents relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Jai Singh B Chauhan v. Punjab National Bank and others, reported as 2005(3) S.C.T.
732 : JT 2005(6) SCC 272.
The Hon'ble Apex Court held in para 12 as under :-  "So far as argument advanced by learned counsel for the appellant that the publication in the official gazette cannot be treated as notice to the appellant is concerned, the same has no substance and deserve to be rejected outright."
In view of the aforesaid decision of Hon'ble Apex Court, the contention of petitioner that her husband did not come to know of the Pension Scheme cannot be accepted as the Pension Scheme was notified in the Official Gazette and has to be treated as notice to the petitioner's husband also.
However, in spite thereof he did not furnish his option for pension and under the Pension Scheme within the prescribed period of 120 days and rather furnished the option more than four years after the expiry of the said period.
Such a belated option could not have been accepted by the respondents in contravention of the Pension Rules.
13.
It also stands undisputed that a retiree opting for pension under the Pension Scheme had to redeposit the employer's contribution of Provident Fund with interest thereon on or before 26.12.1995 under the Pension Scheme.
Further, it is not a matter of dispute that the petitioner's husband or after his death the petitioner never deposited the said amount with the respondents.
Mere offer to deposit the same does not constitute compliance of the aforesaid mandatory requirement of the Pension Scheme so as to entitle the retiree to receive pension.
For this added reason as well, the petitioner's claim for pension and family pension as raised in the instant writ petition cannot be allowed.
For the reasons stated hereinabove, we find no merit in this writ petition and so the same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.