Hemant Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners qualified Class X examination conducted by the Central Board of School Education (hereinafter referred to as the Board) in the year 2004.
Thereafter the petitioners were admitted as regular students of either St John's School, Sector 7, Faridabad, Ryan International School, Sector 21-B, Faridabad or Carmel Convent School, Sector 7, Faridabad.
All the petitioners could not pass their Class XI examination conducted by their respective schools in March/April, 2005.
It is needless to mention here that all the three schools are affiliated to the Board itself.
2.
The petitioners approached the respondent No. 4 School and on the basis of internal examination conducted by such school in May, 2005, the petitioners were admitted in Class XII.
It is the case of the petitioners that respondent No. 4 has charged a handsome sum from the petitioners for admission in Class XII.
It is also pointed out that some of the petitioners were admitted as private candidates by respondent No. 4.
The petitioners were not concerned whether they have been admitted as regular students or private students by the respondent-school, but on the assurance of the school authorities that the school is competent to admit the petitioners in Class XII, the petitioners.
sought admission in Class XII in the respondent-School.
The petitioners appeared in Class XII examination conducted by the Board in March, 2006 and some of the students, who appeared in such examination, secured 1st Division as well.
When the petitioners applied for detailed mark-sheets, a letter was received by the School on 1272006 that the petitioners were not eligible to appear in the examination conducted by the Board and, therefore, the detailed mark-sheets sought by the petitioners, cannot be released.
3.
Since the petitioners were found to be not eligible for 10+2 examination, the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioners praying for quashing the letter dated 12.7.2006, Annexure P-6, sent by respondent No. 3 to respondent No. 4  4.
In a short reply filed on behalf of the respondent-Board, reliance is placed on Bye-Law 75 of the respondent-Board, wherein it is provided that admission to Class XII in a school shall be open only to a student who has completed a regular course of study for class XI and has passed Class XI examination from a school affiliated to the Board.
It has been pointed out that since the petitioners have failed in Class XI examination, they got illegal admission in Class XII in the respondent-school on payment of very hefty fees obviously to play some fraud on the academic discipline of the education system and to by-pass the governing laws.
The petitioners could not be admitted as private students nor the school could admit the failed students of other school, in violation of the Examination Bye Laws.
There is no provision that any of the school could give the certificate of qualification of Class XI examination after charging hefty fee "by holding any internal examination".
It is further pointed out that the School and the students have joined hands in misleading the respondent-Board even at the time of sending the list of candidates duly signed by the School.
The School has violated Bye-law 8(iii) of the Board as well.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have vehemently argued that the petitioners having qualified Secondary School Certificate Examination in the year, 2004, were eligible to appear in the Senior School Certificate Examination (10+2) for the year 2006 as requisite precondition by Bye-laws 75 and 101 stand satisfied.
It is argued that sub-clause (i)(b) of Bye-law 75 contemplates that the candidate has to pass class XI examination from a school affiliated to the Board.
The petitioners have passed Class XI examination conducted by the respondent-school.
Therefore, it cannot be said that petitioners were not eligible for appearing in 10+2 examination.
It is contended that sub-clause (i)(b) does not provide that Class XI examination has to be qualified from the same school.
Reference is also made to Bye-law 37 which is to the effect that Class XI examination is required to be conducted internally by the schools themselves and, therefore, it is not relevant whether the petitioners qualified from a school in which they have regularly attended their classes or from the respondent school.
In the alternative, it is argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners were even eligible to appear as private candidates in terms of Bye-law 16 of the Bye-laws referred to above.
Lastly, it is submitted that the communication dated 12.7.2006, Annexure P-6 has been issued declaring the petitioners ineligible, without giving any opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
6.
Before proceeding further, some of the relevant Examination Bye-laws of the respondent board are reproduced as under :  "6.
Admission : General Conditions : 61 A student seeking admission to any class in a 'School' will be eligible for admission to that Class only if he : (i) has been studying in a School recognised by or affiliated to this Board or any other recognised Board of Secondary Education in India; (ii) has passed qualifying or equivalent qualifying examination making him eligible for admission to that Class; (iii) satisfies the requirement of age limits (minimum and maximum) as determined by the State/UT Government and applicable to the place where the School is located; (iv) produced : (a) the School Leaving Certificate/Transfer Certificate signed by the Head of the Institution last attended and countersigned, if required as provided elsewhere, in these Bye-laws.
(b) document(s) in support of his having passed the qualifying or equivalent qualifying examination; and (c) Date of Birth Certificate issued by the Registrar of Birth and Deaths, where ever existing, as proof of date of birth.
Explanation  (a) A person who has been studying in an institution, which is not recognised by this Board or by any other recognised Board of Secondary Education or by the State/UT Government of the concerned place, shall not be admitted to any class of a 'School' on the basis of Certificate(s) of such unrecognized institution attended by him earlier.
(b) 'Qualifying Examination' for the purpose of this Bye-laws means an examination the passing of which makes a student eligible for admission to a particular class; and 'equivalent examination' means an examination conducted by any recognised Board for Secondary Education/Indian University or an institution recognised by or affiliated to such Board/University and is recognised by this Board equivalent to the corresponding examination conducted by this Board or conducted by a 'school' affiliated to/recognised by this Board.
75 Admission to Class XII :  (i) No admission shall be taken in Class XII directly : Provided further that admission to Class XII in a school shall be open only to such a student who: (a) has completed a regular course of study for Class XI; and (b) has passed Class XI examination from a school affiliated to this Board.
(ii) A student who has completed a regular course of study for Class XI and has passed Class XI Examination from an institution recognised by/affiliated to any recognised Board in India, other than this Board, can be admitted to a school only on the transfer of the parent(s) or shifting of their families from one place to another, after procuring from the student the mark-sheet and the Transfer Certificate duly countersigned by the Educational Authorities of the Board concerned.
In case of such admissions, the schools would obtain post facto approval of the Board within one month of the admission of the student.
101 A candidate for All India/Delhi Senior School Certificate Examination should have : (a) passed the Secondary School Examination (Class X) of this Board or an equivalent examination from any other recognised Board/University at least two years earlier than the year in which he/she would take Senior School Certificate Examination (Class XII) of the Board; and (b) secured a grade higher than grade E in each of the subjects of Internal assessment at Secondary School Examination (Class X) referred to at (a) above.
16.
Private Candidates Definition For the purposes of the bye-laws contained in this chapter and in chapter 5, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, a 'Private candidate' means a person who is not a Regular candidate but, under the provisions of these bye-laws, is allowed to undertake and/or appear in the All India/Delhi Senior School Certificate Examination or All India/Delhi Secondary School Examination of the Board.
18.
Persons eligible to appear as 'Private Candidate' at All India Senior School Certificate (Class XII) Examination (i) A candidate who had failed at the All India Senior School Certificate Examination of the Board will be eligible to reappear at a subsequent examination as a private candidate in the syllabus and text books as prescribed for the examination of the year in which he will reappear.
(ii) Teachers serving in educational institutions affiliated to the Board who have already passed Secondary or an equivalent examination at least two years before taking the Senior School Certificate Examination.
Teacher candidates shall submit his application form alongwith a certificate by the Head of school in which they are serving duly countersigned by the Director of Education of the State/Union Territory concerned to the Regional Officer of the Board of the region in which the teacher is serving.
37.
General Conditions  (i) The Scheme of Examination and Pass Criteria for All India/Delhi Senior School Certificate and All India/Delhi Secondary Examinations conducted by the Board, shall be as laid down from time to time.
(ii) Class XI/IX examinations shall be conducted internally by the school themselves."
7.
The Bye-laws reproduced above show that the candidates appearing in All India Senior School Certificate Examination should have passed the Secondary School Examination (Class X) of the Board or an equivalent examination from any other recognised Board/University at least two years earlier than the year in which he would take Senior School Certificate Examination (Class XII) of the Board.
The said condition is satisfied by the petitioners as they have pass out 10th Class examination in the year 2004 and they were eligible to appear as candidates of 10+2 examination in the year 2006.
Bye-law 75 is to the effect that no admission shall be taken in Class XII directly.
Sub-clause (i)(a) is to the effect that a student has to complete regular course of study of Class XI examination from a school affiliated to the Board.
This bye-law has been complied with by the petitioners as the petitioners have completed regular course of study for Class XI in their earlier schools.
But the difficulty is in respect of Clause (i)(b) of Bye-law 75.
The petitioners appeared in the examination for Class XI in their previous schools, but have not qualified.
The respondent No. 4-school took another examination to make them eligible to take admission in Class XII.
It is not disputed that respondent No. 4-School has taken a regular examination in respect of their regular students admitted in Class XI in the month of March, 2005.
A separate internal examination was said to be conducted for the petitioners in the month of May, 2005.
It is so apparent from Annexure P-8, whereby examination result of student is tabulated.
8.
In my opinion, Bye-law 75(i)(b) contemplating passing of Class XI examination from a school affiliated to the Board, means a school from which a candidate has attended regular classes.
The internal examination conducted by respondent-school is in fact an attempt to overcome the bye-law 75 as the petitioners were never the students of the said school in Class XI.
Since the petitioners have not passed the XI examination from a School of which they were the regular students, they could not have admitted as regular students by another school on the basis of some make believe examination which was specifically conducted for the petitioners.
The test to admit the student in a school is different than the qualifying examination which makes you eligible to appear in next examination.
Though Bye-law 47 provides that the school is to conduct Class XI examination internally.
But the school relevant for the petitioners is the school in which they have attended the regular class.
But in the present case, the petitioners have approached respondent-school after failing to qualify Class XI examination from a school where the petitioners have attended regular classes.
The examination is the culmination of the regular studies.
The regular studies of the petitioners were in one school and the examination by another school.
In fact, such admission of the petitioners violates Bye-law 75, which prohibits that no student shall be admitted directly in Class XII.
Having failed in Class XI examination of a school, the admission of the petitioners is in fact direct admission in Class XII.
Therefore, I do not find any illegality in the communication dated 12.7.2006, Annexure P-6, holding that the petitioners were not eligible to appear in XII examination as they have not qualified Class XI examination from an affiliated school.
9.
The argument that the petitioners can be treated as private students, is again devoid of merit.
Bye-law 18 provides eligibility to appear as private candidate at All India Senior School Certificate (Class XII) examination.
It is contemplated that a candidate who had failed at the All India Senior School Certificate Examination of the Board alone can be reappear at a subsequent examination as a private candidate.
In the present case, the petitioners have not failed in All India Senior School Certificate i.e. +2 examination and, therefore, the petitioners cannot be treated as private candidates in terms of Bye-law 18 of the Board.
10.
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that opportunity of hearing was not granted to the petitioners, is again not material and does not prejudice any of the rights of the petitioners.
It is admitted fact that the petitioners have not qualified in Class XI examination from a school of which they have attended regular classes.
On the basis of admitted facts, the opportunity of hearing is meaningless more so such an argument has been raised faced with the interpretation of the Bye-laws alone.
The conduct of the petitioners is not such which can be said to be bona fide having been admitted in respondent school on payment of handsome fee.
The principles of natural justice cannot be said to be violated as the averments in the writ petition lead to inference that the petitioners and the School were aware of the interpretation of the Bye-laws.
11.
Lastly, it is argued that there was not any concealment of facts on the part of the petitioners when they were admitted in Class XII examination by the respondent-school on the basis of an internal examination, therefore, the admission should be regularised.
Reliance is placed on the order of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 19445 of 2002.
Ashish Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, decided on September 20, 2006.
However, the said argument is without any merit.
In that case, the petitioners were admitted in 3rd semester of Engineering Course under Lateral Entry Scheme.
The petitioners had appeared in all the semester examinations under the interim orders passed by the Court from time to time and in fact, the admission of the petitioners in that case regularized earlier by the University, but later on cancelled.
But the situation in the present case is different.
The petitioners were aware of the Bye-laws which made them to pay hand some fee for admission.
Therefore, I do not find any reason to grant relief to the petitioners in equity as well.
12.
The action of the Board cannot be said to be arbitrary unreasonable or discriminatory which may warrant interference of this Court in writ jurisdiction.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed