Vinod K Sharma, J - The petitioner, a student of MBBS Course at Bathinda has challenged the order dated 22.12.2006, Annexure P-11, refusing his registration as student of MBBS Course and thereby terminating him from MBBS course with immediate effect.
The reason for cancellation of the candidature of the petitioner is that he did not fulfil the eligibility conditions for being admitted to the MBBS course.
2-3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order of cancellation of his admission on the following facts :-  That the petitioner had passed his Matriculation Examination in the year 2002 and thereafter got his admission in 10+2 with RB DAV Sr.
Secondary School, Bathinda which is affiliated with Central Board of Secondary Education.
The petitioner in +1 examination has taken up the subject of Physics, Chemistry and Biology along with English and Punjabi as his subjects.
The petitioner was on medical leave during the examination of 10+1, however, the school promoted him to 10+2.
The petitioner appeared in 10+2 examination and passed in all the subjects with 58 per cent marks.
The petitioner obtained certificate from the school to the effect that he had passed 10+1 and 10+2 from their school.
The petitioner thereafter appeared in PMET-2006 in MBBS Course and was placed in merit at rank 361.
In view of the merit of the petitioner the counseling was held at Patiala and he was granted admission in the MBBS Course in Adesh Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Barnala Road, Bathinda and he deposited a fee of Rs. 1,03,000/- with the University at the spot.
In pursuance to the admission the petitioner joined the college on 2.8.2006 and since then he is studying in the college for MBBS course.
The petitioner was thereafter informed by respondent No. 2 i.e. the College where he was undergoing his studies that as he has not cleared 10+1 Examination he could not be registered as a student in MBBS Course.
He was even provided an opportunity to explain his position.
4.
In response to the letter issued by respondent No. 2 the petitioner explained that he is deemed to have cleared +1 Examination as he was promoted by the school in which he was studying.
The petitioner thereafter had taken admission in +2 and appeared in the said examination and his candidature was duly accepted by the Central Board of Secondary Education.
The explanation submitted by the petitioner was not accepted in view of the fact that respondent No. 1 i.e. Baba Farid University of Health Sciences had directed the college to terminate the admission of the petitioner.
5.
Mr. BS Jaswal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has challenged the order of cancellation primarily on the ground that the cancellation of admission of the petitioner is the outcome of the misreading of the provisions of the Prospectus.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made reference to the eligibility criteria which reads as under :-  "2.
Eligibility (1) The eligibility and qualification shall be as given below which are laid down in Government of Punjab notification No. 5/18/06-3HBIII/1940, dated 24th April, 2006 and subsequent notifications :- A.
For PMET-2006 (common criteria for all courses) : (i) The candidate should have passed qualifying examination as a regular candidate from a recognized institution/university as per details give below :-  (a) The Higher Secondary examination or the Indian School Certification Examination which is equivalent to 10+2 Higher Secondary examination after a period of 12 years study, the last two years of study comprising of Physics, Chemistry and Biology after the introduction of the 10+2+3 years education structure as recommended by the National Committee on Education.
xxx xxx xxx B.
For MBBS/BDS Courses : Candidate must have passed in the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Biology and English individually and must have obtained a minimum of 50% marks (40% for SC/BC) taken together in Physics, Chemistry and Biology in 10+2 examination or equivalent examination."
6.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the requirement of eligibility as given in the prospectus is that a candidate should have undertaken a study of 2 years in Physics, Chemistry and Biology after the introduction of 10+2+3 years of education structure and further that a student who has undertaken studies of 2 years in subjects referred to above is further required to pass 10+2 examination with minimum of 50% marks taken together in Physics, Chemistry and Biology though requirement for SC/BC candidate is only 40 per cent.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that reading of the clauses of eligibility leaves no manner of doubt that there is no requirement that a candidate is separately required to pass 10+1 Examination also as the words used are that a candidate should have undertaken 2 years of study and there is no mention of passing the said examination as has been mentioned, whereas, in the subsequent para it is clearly mentioned that a person should pass 10+2 Examination with minimum of 50% marks.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner thereupon submitted that once the petitioner was promoted by the school authorities he would be deemed to have passed the said examination as no eligibility marks are mentioned for 10+1 examination.
9.
Mr. TS Dhinda learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1, on the other hand, contended that under Clause 3.4 of the Prospectus the candidate is allowed to appear provisionally and therefore, the University is required to check the eligibility subsequent to finalisation of admission and therefore, the claim of the petitioner that he was admitted after checking of his certificate can be of no help to him.
He further refers to Clause 4(xiii) to contend that in the Prospectus it was made very clear that all the selections are provisional and if any candidate is found ineligible at any stage his admission could be cancelled and once the petitioner was not found to be ineligible then the University has a right to cancel his selection and therefore, no fault can be found with the cancellation of his candidature.
He further made reference to the clauses of eligibility as referred to above and submitted that the very fact that the eligibility is that the candidate should have passed 10+2 Examination with 50% marks envisages that the candidate is also required to pass +1 Examination and as the petitioner cannot be said to have passed 10+1 Examination, in view of marks sheet submitted, he was ineligible.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in CWP No. 17386 of 2006 titled Jaspreet Kaur v. State of Punjab and another, decided on 14122006 which reads as under :-  "Written statement on behalf of respondent No. 1 has been filed in Court today and the same is taken on record.
Copy thereof has been supplied to learned counsel for the petitioner.
Concededly, the petitioner has not passed her Biology Examination in her 10+1 Examination.
As per clause 4(a) of the Prospectus issued by Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot (Annexure P-5), providing the eligibility criteria, a student to be treated as eligible should have passed "the last two years of study comprising of Physics, Chemistry and Biology after the introduction of the 10+2+3 years education structure as recommended by the National Committee on Education."
In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot be treated to be eligible for admission to the course as sought by her.
Dismissed.
The petitioner may seek her appropriate remedies for refund of the fee which according to the petitioner have been deposited by her with the College authorities.
Copy of the order be given dasti on usual payment."
10.
We have considered the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties and find force in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is the settled law that the Prospectus has the force of law and therefore, eligibility has to be considered as per the criteria laid down in the Prospectus.
The reading of Prospectus shows that State Government while laying on (down ?)
the eligibility condition has chosen to use the word studying in the subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology for 2 years and thereafter used the words that the candidate should have passed 10+2 Examination with 50% marks.
Thus, it is clear that criteria of 50 per cent marks in +1 examination cannot be read into the subsequent part as is sought to be submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Even otherwise, once the school which is affiliated with Central Board of Secondary Education has chosen to promote the petitioner he would be deemed to have passed 10+1 Examination and nothing more can be read into eligibility condition as is sought to be contended by the learned counsel for the respondent.
11.
The correct interpretation of the prospectus leads to only one conclusion that a student should have studied for 2 years in the subject of Physics, Chemistry and Biology and that he should pass 10+2 Examination with minimum of 50% marks.
The petitioner qualifies both these conditions and therefore, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were wrong in coming to the conclusion that the petitioner was ineligible for admission to the course of MBBS.
12.
As regards the reliance on the judgment of this Court in Jaspreet Kaur v. State of Punjab and another (supra) is concerned the same does not apply to the facts of the present case.
In the said case it was revealed that Miss Jaspreet Kaur had not studied Physics, Chemistry and Biology in 10+1 class and had taken up subject of Biology only in +2 though she cleared the examination.
Therefore, she was rightly held to be ineligible for admission as study of 2 years course was must as per Prospectus.
However, the ratio of said judgment cannot apply to the facts of the present case as it is not in dispute that the petitioner had undertaken 2 years study with subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology before appearing in +2 Examination.
Thus, the judgment in Jaspreet Kaur (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent is not applicable to the facts of this case.
For the reasons stated above we allow this writ petition and quash the order Annexures P-11 and P-12 and the respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to continue with his studies.
Petition allowed.