Harjit Singh Bedi, ACJ.
(Oral) - The petitioners were appointed as clerks on ad-hoc basis by the Superintendent Engineer in the year 1972 under Rule 4 of the Punjab Public Works Subordinate Services (B&R Branch) Rules, 1934, after their names had been requisitioned from the Employment Exchange.
The necessity of making the appointments in this manner, appears to have arisen because at the time when their appointments were sought to be made, the Subordinate Services Selection Board, had been dissolved and the State Government had directed that the Appointing Authority, which in the case of the petitioners was the Superintending Engineer, should made the appointments.
2.
It appears, in the meanwhile, that the private respondents herein were appointed as clerks by the Secretary of the defunct Punjab Service Selection Board.
The petitioners along with several others, apprehending that their services would be terminated on the arrival of candidates selected by the Secretary, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2434 of 1973 (Ashok Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others), challenging the selection made by the Secretary.
This writ petition was allowed by the Learned Single Judge on 15.1.1974 with the following observations :  ".....I am, therefore, of the view that the selection of candidates made by the Deputy Secretary has to be quashed as far as the Punjab P.W.D.
(B& R Branch) is concerned.
No such selected candidates can be thrust on the Superintending Engineer nor is he bound by such selection.
That selection as contained in the letter dated June 25, 1973, a copy of which is annexure `E' to the writ petition, is quashed.
The Superintending Engineers will, however, be at liberty to reconsider the matter without being influenced by the fact that they have to accommodate any person selected by the said Deputy Secretary.
If they are of the view that the, petitioners should be allowed to continue in service, they need not pass any orders to disturb their employment.
I, accordingly accept this petition and direct the Superintending Engineers to act in accordance with the observations made above.
Since the matter was not free from difficulty, I make no order as to costs."
It has been pointed out by Mr. AS Grewal, the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab that a Letters Patent Appeal filed against the judgment of the Learned Single Judge, was also dismissed.
3.
It appears that as a consequence of the observations of the Learned Single Judge (as quoted above), the Department decided to continue with the services of the petitioners in the present writ petition, who were respondents in that matter.
It is the conceded position that some of the present writ petitioners, who were petitioners in that case are still in service.
The State Government subsequently issued a seniority list Annexure P 7 dated 3111982 in which the private respondents herein were shown to be senior keeping to be senior keeping in view their continuous length of service.
The present writ petition has been filed impugning Annexure P 7.
The argument of the petitioner is that after the appointment of the private respondents made by the Secretary of the Board had been quashed by the Learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 2434 of 1973, the date of appointment given to the respondents could not be based on the selection made by the Secretary.
A reply has been filed by the respondents and the facts stated above have not been denied.
It has, however, been pointed out by Mr. Grewal, the learned Additional Advocate General that the petitioners had been appointed on an ad hoc basis and as such, they could not get the benefit of their ad-hoc service towards seniority.
4.
The learned counsel for the parties has been heard, at length.
5.
It is clear from the record that the petitioners had been granted appointment somewhere in April, 1972 as would be clear from Annexure P 1 and that this selection had been made by the Superintending Engineer, who was the Appointing Authority under the Rules, in the light of the fact that the Selecting Agency i.e.
Subordinate Services Selection Board, had become defunct, in the meanwhile.
It is also clear from the letters of appointment of the private respondents dated 23.6.1973, which had been issued by the Secretary of the defunct Board, were wholly without any authority of law as has been so held by the Learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 2434 of 1973.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the date of appointment of the private respondents herein must be taken as 23.6.1973.
Moreover, while determining the status of employees employed on ad hoc basis, the Full Bench of this Court in Chambel Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgment 383 (Pb.
& Hry.
)], has held as under :  "15.
For the purpose of present enquiry, clauses (A) and (B) in the Direct Recruit Class-III Engineering Officers' Association and others case (supra) coupled with elucidation of these clauses in Aghore Nath Dey's case (supra) and also the views expressed in the earlier judgments of the apex Court, it can be said : (i) that the period as an ad hoc appointee cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of an Incumbent; (ii) it is only when such an appointment is as per rules and not by way of a stop gap arrangement and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with that the services so rendered will be taken into account towards his seniority in the cadre; (iii) In the absence of Rules, it would have to be kept in view as to whether the appointment so made is against an existing vacancy and not for a limited period and in that case the period so spent by an incumbent can be considered to determine his seniority in the cadre; (iv) If the appointment is otherwise regular except for the deficiency of certain procedural defects, such defect/defects stand cured with the subsequent regularisation; (v) mere long stay at the post on account of some inaction on the part of a delinquent officer or on account of interim direction of the Court will not clothe an appointee with any right to tag such a period to determine his seniority in the cadre.
Period of service as to stop gap arrangement shall be ignored while determining his seniority in the cadre.
The above points are only illustrative and not exhaustive in content.
Any point which is not specifically covered therein is to be examined in the light of clauses (A) and (B) of Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others case (supra) as explained in Aghore Nath Dey's case supra)."
It would be clear from Clause (ii) quoted above that the period of ad-hoc service can be counted towards seniority in case the appointment had been made as per the Rules and not by way of a stop gap arrangement.
6.
Concededly in the present case, the appointment had been made by the Superintending Engineer, the Appointing Authority after a proper selection process had been initiated through the Employment Exchange, at a time when the Subordinate Services Selection Board was not in existence.
7.
Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P 7 and all resultant action is quashed.
Consequential benefits shall flow to the petitioners within a period of six months from today.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.