MM Kumar, J - The petitioner who is working on the post of Assistant Secretary with the respondent Red Cross Society, Gurgaon has approached this Court with a prayer that a direction is issued to the respondents for consideration of his case for promotion to the post of Secretary, Red Cross Society, Gurgaon.
A further prayer has been made that advertisement dated 5112005 (Annexure P.6) seeking to fill up the post of Secretary by direct recruitment be set aside primarily on the basis of instructions dated 692000 and 432005 (Annexures P.7 and P.8) issued by the President of the Red Cross Society, Haryana (His Excellency the Governor of Haryana).
2.
The petitioner has been working as Assistant Secretary of Red Cross Society, Gurgaon.
For the purposes of consideration of his case for promotion to the post of Secretary, he had earlier approached this Court by filing CWP No. 10957 of 2005.
It was claimed that the charge of the post of Secretary could not have been given to Smt. Urmil, Warden, Working Women Hostel without considering the case of the petitioner for promotion on the basis that the petitioner was the senior most eligible person for promotion to the post of Secretary.
The writ petition was disposed of on 21.7.2005 with a direction to the respondents to decide his representation by passing a speaking order within a period of two months.
The claim of the petitioner has been rejected by the President of the District Red Cross Society, Gurgaon-cum-Deputy Commissioner, respondent No. 3 vide order dated 992005 (Annexure P. 2).
The operative part of the order reads as under :  "Naveen Kumar Behl has been working as Assistant cum District Training Officer in the District Red Cross Society, Gurgaon Branch.
One Sh. MS Dahiya was working as Secretary in the District Red Cross Society, Gurgaon Branch.
He expired on 142004.
After his death no regular appointment on the said post has been made.
The applicant has submitted that he looked after the work of the post of Secretary from 742004 to 5.5.2005 in addition to his own duties.
He has further submitted that on the basis of his long experience, educational qualifications and other awards earned by him his right for promotion to the post of Secretary may be considered.
At the out set it may be observed that the post of Secretary is not going to be filled up for the time being.
The charge of the said post at present is with Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Gurgaon, in addition to his own duties.
He is not drawing any extra remuneration for the same.
It is settled proposition of law that no one can claim his promotion to a particular post, as a matter of right.
As and when the department intends to fill in the post of Secretary on regular basis, the applicant will be at liberty to compete for the said post.
The mere fact that the applicant happened to work for same period on the same post does not give him a right to claim his promotion to the said post."
The petitioner has claimed that he has been working with the respondent Red Cross Society for the last over 30 years and has unblemished service record.
Besides he fulfills the requisite qualification for the post of Secretary.
According to him, he is entitled to be considered for promotion in accordance with the resolution passed on 1321975 in the meeting presided over by Shri BN Chakravarty, ICS, the then Governor, Haryana.
According to the resolution, the district branch which has the Assistant Secretaries working for the last 10 years or more are required to be considered for promotion as whole time paid Secretary.
However, the Deputy Commissioner-cum- District President of the Red Cross Society, Gurgaon, has issued an advertisement on 5112005 (Annexure P-6) and has called applications for filling the post of Secretary by direct recruitment.
The petitioner has also placed reliance on a letter dated 692000 issued by respondent No. 1 to respondent Nos. 2 and 3 directing them that no appointment was to be made without his prior approval.
To the same effect reliance has been placed on the letter dated 432005 (Annexure P. 8).
The petitioner has filed a representation dated 7112005 (Annexure P. 9).
3.
It has been alleged by the petitioner that in order to deprive him of the post of Secretary, respondent No. 3 with a mala fide intention had issued a charge sheet to him on 292005 (Annexure P. 4).
He was placed him under suspension.
The petitioner challenged the afore-mentioned charge sheet and suspension order by filing CWP No. 1669 of 2005.
The afore-mentioned writ petition was dismissed as premature on 21102005.
4.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the stand taken is that the President of Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana State Branch-cum-His Excellency the Governor of Haryana, has written a letter to all the Deputy Commissioners-cum-President of District Red Cross Branches for filling up the posts through advertisement by giving wide publicity.
The applications are to be placed before the Selection Committee for conducting interview and recommendation of suitable names.
The Selection Committee comprised of:  "1.
Vice-Chairman, IRCS, Haryana State Branch (Director General, Health Services, Haryana), Chairman  2.
Honorary Secretary, IRCS, Haryana State Branch, Member  3.
Concerned Deputy Commissioner cum President, Member  District Red Cross Society Secretary"  The recommendations of the Selection Committee would then be submitted to respondent No. 1 for approval.
It is asserted that respondent No. 3 has not disclosed the afore-mentioned fact.
Accordingly, an advertisement has been issued for filling up the post by direct recruitment and the selection process has to be completed.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties at some length, we are of the view that the writ petition is maintainable against the Red Cross Society as has been held by a Division Bench of this court in the case of JN Gahlaut and others v. Indian Red Cross Society and others, 2002(2) RSJ 719 (P&H)].
It is admitted fact that there are no rules framed providing for filling up the post of Secretary, Red Cross Society, Gurgaon.
The resolution dated 1321975 provide that wherever Assistant Secretaries with ten years or more services have been working in the district branches then such Assistant Secretaries may to promoted as whole time paid Secretaries.
Thereafter, respondent No. 1 has issued letters dated 692000 and 432005 (Annexures P.7 and P.8) directing respondent Nos. 2 and 3 that prior approval of respondent No. 1 must be obtained before making any appointment.
Again respondent No. 1 has issued letter dated 6102005 (Annexure R/1) to all the Deputy Commissioners cum Presidents of District Red Cross Branches, Haryana stipulating that wherever any vacancy in the district branch arises the same has to be advertised in the newspaper so as to give wide publicity.
The applications of all the eligible candidates received in response to the advertisement are required to be placed before the Selection Committee comprising following members :  "1.
Vice-Chairman, IRCS, Haryana State Branch (Director General, Health Services, Haryana), Chairman  2.
Honorary Secretary, IRCS, Haryana State Branch, Member  3.
Concerned Deputy Commissioner-cum-President, Member District Red Cross Society Secretary  The recommendations of the Selection Committee are then required to be submitted to His Excellency the Governor cum President of the Indian Red Cross Society for approval.
In pursuance to the aforementioned letter, respondent No. 3 has issued an advertisement dated 5112005 (Annexure P. 6) inviting applications for filling up the post of Secretary.
According to the advertisement, the candidate is required to possess the qualification of post graduate in any subject preferably in Social Work or Sociology or Psychology.
Experience of five years in Project formation, implementation and planning fund raising Administration and Accounts and age between 25 to 40 years has been fixed.
The candidates who are eligible according to the aforementioned qualification, experience and age etc. are entitled to be considered.
There is no rule or direction which may clothe the petitioner with a right to seek mandamus directing the respondents to enforce their legal duty.
The post could be filled by promotion or by direct recruitment as per the decision of respondent No. 1.
Therefore, we do not find any merit in the contention that the post could be filled up only by the process of promotion.
There is no merit in the petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
6.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.