Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is seeking a mandamus directing the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Burdwan (the second respondent) to regularize his service as a member of the group `D' staff of the school (Aruur BMDP Institution, Burdwan).
2.
By resolution dated May 13, 1992 the then managing committee of the school appointed him as a night guard in the school.
By resolution dated April 24, 1977 the managing committee confirmed his appointment.
Thereafter the managing committee adopted resolution dated May 28, 1979 for removing the defects in the previous resolution dated May 13, 1972 and appointing the petitioner as a member of the class four staff of the school with effect from May 13, 1972.
The headmaster of the school permitted him to exercise option for getting the scale in terms of the relevant rules revising the pay and allowances.
3.
In 1985 the district inspector of schools wanted necessary information from the school in connection with the request of the school to approve his appointment.
By order dated November 26, 1987 the administrator of the school informed him that from December 1987 no remuneration would be paid to him from the school fund, since his appointment had never been sanctioned and approved by the director of school education and the district inspector of schools.
Feeling aggrieved he moved this court by filing writ petition No. 1577 (w) of 1988, and in that an interim order was made.
By order dated September 14, 200 that writ petition was disposed of in terms of the interim order dated August 26, 1988.
4.
In 2002 he moved this court for the second time by filing writ petition No. 14885 (w) of 2002 alleging that the authorities had been threatening to superannuate him.
By order dated June 13, 2003 that writ petition was disposed of ordering that the state must not take any step adverse against him except in accordance with law.
By letter dated March 8, 2004 the secretary of the school alleged non-cooperation on the part of the district Inspector of schools regarding extension of the desired benefit to him.
Since the district inspector of schools failed and neglected to take necessary steps for regularizing his service and approving the appointment, he was compelled to take out the present writ petition dated April 25, 2006.
5.
Counsel says that in view of the fact that the petitioner has been working in the school from 1972, he is entitled to seek regularization of his service and approval of his appointment.
He says that the government order No. 536 Edn (Estd.)
9-A-9/80 dated July 16, 1980 created the petitioner's right to seek regularization of his service and approval of his appointment, since the facts of the case will show that he has been working in the school against a permanent post.
6.
I do not find any reason to entertain the writ petition.
The petitioner's initial appointment in the school as night guard was made by the managing committee of the school without obtaining any prior permission for initiating selection process and making appointment against a sanctioned vacant post.
There is no dispute that the school was governed by the Management of Recognized Non-government Institutions (Aided and Unaided Rules), 1969 framed under the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963.
Rule 28 of those rules conferred power of the managing committee of an aided institute (like the school involved in the present case) to appoint teaching and non-teaching member of the staff according to prior permission of the district inspector of schools against sanctioned posts.
All appointments made by the committee were always subject to the approval of the district inspector of schools.
Even a temporary appointment was to be approved by the district inspector of schools concerned.
7.
In the present case the admitted position is that the appointment of the petitioner was made not against any sanctioned post.
At the date he was appointed no lawfully arising vacancy was existing.
The managing committee in exercise of its extra legal power appointed the petitioner.
It is known that such illegal appointment, for however long a period one may continue in service on the basis of such appointment, does not create any right in favour of the appointee to seek legalization of the appointment.
The initial appointment being illegal it continued to remain illegal all through.
Mere length of the illegality does not create any sort of right to seek permanent appointment to the post.
8.
As will appear from the order of the administrator dated December 01, 1987 the above-noted legal position was known to the petitioner.
The administrator had mentioned in his order that the appointment of the petitioner had never been sanctioned by the director of school education or approved by the district Inspector of schools.
It is apparent that the petitioner was being paid something on account of remuneration from the fund of the school.
The head of the institute, it seems to me wanted to show some favour permitting him to fill in the option form.
But mere submission of the filled in option forms was not sufficient to entitle the petitioner to get the benefit of scale, since lie had never been lawfully appointed.
9.
True it is that in the previous two writ petitions he got some favourable orders.
But even those orders have not, and rather cannot, create any right in his favour to get his initial appointment legalized.
Hence I do not find anything to say that the district inspector of schools committed any wrong by not obliging the petitioner by approving his illegal appointment in the school.
The contention that the government order July 16, 1980 created the petitioner's requisite right is totally misplaced.
That order was to apply to the circumstances indicated therein and in any case, it was to govern only those cases in which the appointments had been made against the existing sanctioned vacant posts.
That government order has no manner of application to the present case.
10.
For these reasons I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
11.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by Assistant Registrar (court) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on the usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.