RP Vyas, J - The instant petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking a direction against the respondents to consider the candidature of the petitioner for the post of Physical Training Instructor Grade III after granting him bonus marks for the sports certificate (Annex.
6).
2.
The brief facts of the case are that an advertisement was issued by the respondents on 2872003, inviting applications for the post of Physical Training Instructor.
The petitioner, being eligible for appointment, on the said post, applied for the same.
3.
It has further been averred by the petitioner in the writ petition that in the advertisement, a provision was made for awarding bonus marks for participation in the National Level Tournament.
4.
Further case of the petitioner is that he participated in XXXI National Schools Games (Winter Meet Part I and II) organized at New Delhi, in January, 1986 by the School Games Federation of India.
5.
The controversy involved in the present writ petition is that the sports certificate (Annex.
6) submitted by the petitioner alongwith the application form was equivalent to national level certificate, but the respondents have awarded only bonus marks for the same considering it to be of State Level.
It has also been alleged that the petitioner secured 7221% marks and the respondent No. 4 secured 7719% marks.
If she would have been awarded bonus marks for the sports certificate (Annex.
6), she would have got appointment.
Hence, this writ petition.
6.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents have submitted that the Sports Certificate (Annex.
6) is not of national level and furthermore, it has not been counter signed by the Director, Secondary Education and, thus, bonus marks have been awarded to the petitioner.
It has also been submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the certificate (Annex.
6) produced by the petitioner is not a Sports certificate, but it was a certificate showing participation in the celebration of International Year of the Youth.
7.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
8.
So far as the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that it was not a sports certificate, but was a certificate showing participation in the celebration of International Year of the Youth is concerned, this argument raised by the respondents is absolutely irrelevant, in as much as, the respondents themselves have already granted bonus marks to the petitioner for participation in the sports activities treating the sports certificate (Annex.
6) to be of State Level.
Therefore, now to contend that the certificate (Annex.
6) is not a sports certificate is absolutely misconceived.
That apart, a plain reading of the certificate (Annex.
6) clearly reveals that the petitioner represented the Rajasthan State Schools Team in XXXI National School Games (Winter Meet Part I and II), this clearly shows that the petitioner participated in games activities and hence, this argument raised by the respondents is absolutely misconceived and baseless.
9.
So far as second argument raised by the petitioner that the certificate has not been countersigned by the competent authority is concerned, a bare perusal of the certificate (Annex.
6) reveals that the same has been countersigned by the Dy.
Director, Secondary Education.
Bikaner in conformity with the circular dated 3172003, whereby the Dy.
Director (Sports), Secondary Education has bean authorised to countersign the sports certificate issued by School Games Federation of India.
That apart, when the sports certificate (Annex.
6) has not been countersigned by the competent authority, then how the respondents have awarded bonus marks to the petitioner on the basis of sports certificate (Annex.
6).
Therefore, this argument raised by the respondents also stands rejected.
10.
So far as the argument that the sports certificate (Annex.
6) is a State level certificate is concerned, it may be stated here that the certificate (Annex.
6) itself reveals that the petitioner participated in XXXI National School Games (Winter Meet Part I and II).
Furthermore, a bare perusal of the circular dated 3172003 produced by the petitioner, during the course of arguments, reveals that the tournament organized by the School Games Federation of India are National Level tournament.
Thus, the petitioner participated in National level tournament and is entitled for bonus marks.
11.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the controversy involved in the instant case is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in the case of Laxman Singh v. State of Rajasthan and ors. (SB CWP No. 1423/98.
Decided on 1382002) reported in 2003(1) WLC (Raj.)
337.
The Division Bench of this court vide judgment dated 852003 delivered in DB Civil Special Appeal No. 377/2003 (DRJ) has also affirmed the order dated 1382002 delivered in the case of Laxman Singh (supra).
12.
This fact has not been controverte by the learned counsel for the respondents, therefore, the present writ petition deserves to be allowed in terms of the observations made in the case of Laxman Singh (supra) and it is held that the petitioner is entitled to get bonus marks on the basis of Certificate (Annex.
6) instead of bonus marks, already awarded to him by the respondents.
13.
Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed in view of the observations made by this Court in the case of Laxman Singh (supra) and the respondents are directed to consider the candidature of the petitioner for appointment on the post of Physical Training Instructor Grade III after granting bonus marks in place of bonus marks on the basis of Certificate (Annex.
6) and in case after granting bonus marks, if any person who stood lower in merit than the petitioner has been offered appointment, then the case of the petitioner be also considered for appointment from the date the person less meritorious to her has been given appointment.
On her appointment, the petitioner shall not be entitled for the emoluments of the post for the past, however, she will be entitled to claim seniority over the persons who were lower in merit, but have been offered appointment prior to her.
14.
With the aforesaid observations and directions, the writ petition is allowed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.