NK Mody, J - This petition shall also govern the disposal of WP No. 656/03.
2.
Petitioner Shri Badri Prasad Verma has filed this petition with a prayer to direct the Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 to appoint the petitioner on the post of Sanvida Shala Shikshak Grade-III in place of Respondent No. 5.
Devkaran Verma, who has been removed from service with effect from 632002.
3.
WP No. 656/03 is filed by Devkaran Verma, who is Respondent No.
Sin WP No. 1578/02, with a prayer to quash the order dated 5802, 18.11.02 and 2712003, whereby the petitioner has been removed from service.
4.
Short facts of the case are that Respondent No. 4.
Janpad Panchayat, Sonkashha invited applications for the post of Sanvida Shala Shikshak Grade- III.
Petitioner and Respondent No. 5 submitted applications for the said post under OBC category.
List of candidates who applied for the post was prepared in which the name of Respondent No. 5 was not existing.
In spite of that vide order dated 21.8.2001 appointment was given to Respondent No. 5 in OBC category and posted at Primary School, Ralaiti, Tehsil Sonkach, Distt.
Dewas and the petitioner was kept at Sr. No. 1 in the waiting list.
Further case of the petitioner is that vide order dated 1772001 the State Govt. informed that with effect from 11.7.2001 provisions of MP Sanvida Shikshak Bharati Prakriya Niyam, 2001, has been amended whereby after sub-rule (4) of Rule 6 of the Rules, sub-rule (5) and (6) had been added which reads as under :-  "5.
Any candidate who has solemnized marriage before completing the minimum age prescribed under the law will not be eligible for any post or service.
6.
Any candidate who is having more than two issues out of which one was born on or after 26.1.2001 will not be eligible for post or service."
5.
Case of the petitioner is that Respondent No. 5 solemnized the marriage before completing the age prescribed under the law.
Complaint was made by the petitioner in this regard on 20th September, 2001 with a request to terminate the services of Respondent No. 5.
Thereafter, since no action was taken against respondent No. 5, therefore, petitioner filed an appeal before Collector, Dewas u/S.
91 of MP Panchayat Raj Adhiniyam, which was dismissed vide order dated 292002 on the ground that petitioner has filed to prove the date of marriage of Respondent No. 5, in the meantime on 632002, the wife of Respondent No. 5, delivered a male child.
It was further alleged that as per the information it was the sixth child of Respondent No. 5 in pursuance of the amended provisions of the Act, the service of Respondent No. 5 were terminated vide order dated 582002.
It was prayed that since the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 1 in the writ listed, candidates, therefore, the petitioner be appointed as Shiksha Karmi-Grade-III on the post which is lying vacant because of termination of services of Respondent No. 5.
6.
In the petition 656/03 filed by Respondent No. 5 it was alleged that on 26702 a show cause notice was issued by respondent No. 1 i.e. Chief Executive Officer, Janpad Panchayat, Sonkach, in which it was mentioned that the Dev Karanhas got six children, therefore, the petitioner has become disqualified for continuing on the post of Shiksha Karmi Grade-III.
It was alleged that in the said notice Dev Karan was asked to submit the reply within seven days.
Instead of filing the reply petitioner submitted an application on 282002 and prayed for time to file reply.
It was alleged that before expiry of the time prayer in the application vide order dated 582002 services of the petitioner have been terminated.
The order dated 582002 was challenged by Dev Karan Verma under the provision of MP Panchayat Raj Adhiniyam 1993 on the ground that the order was in violation of principles of natural justice.
Vide order dated 18112002 the appeal filed by Dev Karan Verma was dismissed against which revision petition was filed before Additional Commissioner, Ujain.
Vide order dated 2712003, the revision petition was also dismissed.
Hence, the petition is filed with a prayer that the order of termination dated 5802 be quashed as it has been passed in violation of principles of natural justice.
7.
Reply has been filed by the respondents, wherein it was alleged that the appeal filed by the petitioner was only on the ground that Respondent No. 5 has solemnized marriage prior to completion of minimum age of 21 years.
The appeal was dismissed as the petitioner failed to prove the date of marriage or Respondent No. 5.
Thereafter since wife of Respondent No. 5 delivered sixth child, therefore his services were terminated.
So far as the claim of the petitioner for appointment on the vacant post is concerned, it was alleged that as per the provisions of MP Sanvida Shikshak Bharati Prakriya Niyam, 2001, the waiting list is valid only for a period of nine months from the date of completion of selection process.
Therefore, it was alleged that there is no waiting list in existence.
8.
Shri CB Patne, learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on a decision of Hon'ble Apex Court reported in 2003 AIR SCW 3892, Javed v. State of Haryana, wherein Hon'ble Supreme Court has examined the validity of Sections 175(1) (q) and 177 (1) of Haryana Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 which reads as under :  "175(1) No person shall be a Sarpanch or a panch of a Gram Panchayat a member of a Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad or continue as such who.
(q) has more than two living children : Provided that a person having more than two children on or up to the expiry of one year of the commencement of this Act, shall not be deemed to be disqualified :  177(1).
If any member of a Gram Panchayat, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad (a) who is elected, as such, was subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in Section 175 at time of his elections :  (b) during the term for which he has been elected, incurs any of the disqualifications mentioned in Section 175, shall be disqualified from continuing to be a member and his office shall become vacant."
9.
In the above case the Hon'ble Apex Court observed as under :-  "It was submitted that the number of children which one has, whether two or three or more, does not affect the capacity, competence and quality of a person to serve on any office of a panchayat and, therefore, the impugned disqualification has no nexus with the purpose sought to be achieved by the Act.
There is no merit in the submission.
We have already stated that one of the objects of the enactment is to popularize Family Welfare/Family planning Programme.
This is consistent with the National Population Policy.
Under Article 243-G of the Constitution the Legislature of a State has been vested with the authority to make law endowing the Panchayats with such powers and authority which may be necessary to enable the Gram Panchayat to function as institution of self-Government and such law may contain provision for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats, at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein.
Clause (b) of Article 243-G provides that Gram Panchayats may be entrusted the powers to implement the schemes for economic development and social justice including those in relation to matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
Entries 24 and 25 of the Eleventh Schedule read :  24.
Family Welfare.
25.
Women and Child Development.
In pursuance of the powers given to the State Legislature to enact laws the Haryana Legislature enacted the Haryana Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (Haryana Act No. 11 of 1994).
Section 21 enumerates the functions and duties of Gram Panchayat, Clause XIX (1) of Section 21 reads : "XIX.
Public Health and Family Welfare :- (1) Implementation of family welfare programme.
The family welfare would include family planning as well.
To carry out the purpose of the Act as well as the mandate of the Constitution the Legislature has made a provision for making a person ineligible to either contest for the post of Panch or Sarpanch having more than two living children.
Such a provision would serve the purpose of the Act as mandated by the Constitution.
It cannot be said that such a provision would not serve the purpose of the Act.
In our opinion, the impugned disqualification does have a nexus with the purpose sought to be achieved by the Act.
Hence it is valid.
The provision is discriminatory ?
We are clearly of the opinion that the impugned provision is neither arbitrary nor unreasonable nor discriminatory.
The disqualification contained in Section 175 (1)(q) of Haryana Act No. 11 of 1994 seeks of achieve a laudable purpose-socio economic welfare and health care of the masses and is consistent with the National population policy.
It is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
10.
In the facts and circumstances of the case no illegality has been committed by the Chief Executive Officer, Janpad Panchayat, Sonkach District Dewas in terminating the services of Devkaran Respondent No. 5 in WP No. 1578/02.
It is to be noted that Respondent No. 5 has filed WP No. 656/03 on the ground that no sufficient opportunity was given to him but nothing has been said about the validity of the order passed by Chief Executive Officer.
11.
In view of this WP No. 656/03 stands dismissed.
So far as WP No. 1578/02 is concerned, petition is disposed of with a direction that if the post which has become vacant by terminating the services of Respondent No. 5 is lying vacant then Respondent No. 4 may consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on the said post, who was duly selected and was kept at S. No. 2 as wait listed candidate but could not be appointed because of wrong selection of Respondent No. 5 by Respondent No. 4 who was not eligible for appointment.
12.
Needful be done within a period of two months.
13.
With the aforesaid observations, petition is disposed of.
No order as to costs.
C. C. as per rules.
Order accordingly.