Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - On a reference on the issue regarding the legality of the termination of the service of the respondent No. 2, an industrial dispute case being Case No. VIII-190/01 was initiated before the learned Judge, Ist Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal.
2.
In connection with the said proceeding, the respondent No. 2 filed an application praying for interim relief under section 15(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
3.
An objection was raised by the writ petitioner regarding the status of the respondent No. 2 as that of a workman in connection with the said proceeding.
While disposing of the said interlocutory application, the learned Judge of the Tribunal held that the petitioner is not a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act and as such, he is not entitled to any interim relief under section 15(2)(b) of the said Act.
Thus, the prayer for interim relief which was made by the respondent No. 2 was rejected by the learned Judge of the said Tribunal.
4.
Subsequently, the respondent No. 2 filed an application before the learned Judge of the said Tribunal for fixing a date for hearing of the said dispute case on merit.
The writ petitioner has also filed an application for dismissal of the said reference on the ground that the respondent No. 2 being not a workman within a meaning of Section 2(s) of the said Act, the Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to adjudicate such a dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act.
5.
By the order impugned, the learned Judge of the said Industrial Tribunal, fixed a date for hearing of the said dispute case on merit by holding, inter alia, that the decision which was arrived at by the said Tribunal in connection with the interlocutory proceeding being tentative in nature, such a decision cannot operate as res judicata on the said issue at the final hearing of the said dispute case.
6.
The said order of the learned Tribunal is under challenge in this writ petition on the ground that since the learned Tribunal has already held that the respondent No. 2 is not a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the said Act, the learned Judge, instead of fixing any date for hearing of the said dispute case on merit, should have dismissed the said proceeding on the ground of lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal to entertain the said dispute.
7.
Heard the learned Advocates for the parties.
It is the settled principles of law that any decision which was arrived at the interlocutory state is neither conclusive nor final to attract the principle of res judicata at the final hearing of the said dispute.
As such, the learned Tribunal while considering the merit of the said dispute case, is required to decide the dispute afresh on evidence as to whether the respondent No. 2 is a workman or not.
As a matter of fact, the objection regarding the lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal to entertain the said dispute depends upon the determination of the status of the respondent No. 2.
8.
Since a dispute regarding the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to entertain such a dispute has been raised in connection with the said case, this Court relying upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Hussan Mithu Mhasvadkar v. Bombay Iron & Steel Labour Board and another reported in 2001 (Vol.
VII.)
SCC 394, directs the concerned Industrial tribunal to decide the dispute as to whether the respondent No. 2 is a workman or not first as such an issue is correlated with the issue regarding the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to entertain the said dispute and in the event the learned Tribunal finds that the respondent No. 2 is a workman and the dispute which was raised by such a workman is an industrial dispute within the meaning of the said Act, then the learned Tribunal will enter into the merit of the said dispute and will consider the same in accordance with law.
9.
Before parting with, this Court makes it clear that while deciding the issue regarding the jurisdiction of the tribunal, the learned Tribunal will consider the said issue independently without being influenced by any of the observations made by the Tribunal while deciding the interlocutory application under Section 15(2)(b) of the said Act.
10.
The application is thus, disposed of.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the parties as expeditiously as possible.
Order accordingly.