Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner questions the decision of the authority dated December 8, 1993 asking him to avail of the opportunity given to him once again to produce the original school leaving certificate in support of his claim that his date of birth was March 14, 1938 and not April 24, 1935 as had been recorded in his service records.
The authorities terminated his service on the ground of reaching superannuation age on December 31, 1993.
He took out this writ petition on January 6, 1995.
2.
On April 24, 1956 he joined the first respondent as a motor fitter learner.
Since as proof of his age he did not produce any documentary evidence, according to practice of the company and the rules existing at that time, the company took steps for his medical examination.
Such steps were taken on November 24, 1956.
The medical officer determined his age as 21 years on April 24, 1956.
As a result his date of birth was recorded as April 24, 1935.
3.
In 1961 he obtained national trade certificate.
On the reverse of the certificate concerned his date of birth (allegedly according to the school certificate) was recorded as March 14, 1938.
For the first time on January 3, 1975 he requested the personnel manager of the company to correct the recorded date of birth on the basis of the national trade certificate obtained by him in 1961.
The authorities did not accept the request.
He, however, came to possess an identify card stated to be issued on August 5, 1981; and it was recorded on that card that his date of birth was March 14, 1938.
4.
In 1993 he agitated the question once again.
Accordingly by a letter dated November 26, 1993 the authority called upon him to produce his original school certificate.
Since he failed to do so, the authority issued the further letter dated December 8, 1993 giving him one more opportunity.
He did not produce the certificate.
On the other hand he sent a letter dated December 14, 1993 that a copy of the original had been submitted in 1975, and the original certificate had been shown to the officer who was dealing the matter at that time.
In the circumstances, the authorities did not oblige him by changing his recorded date of birth.
They took steps to superannuate him with effect from December 31, 1993.
Long thereafter he took out this writ petition.
5.
Advocate for the petitioner submits that by issuing the identity card in 1981 the authority represented that the date of birth had been duly corrected, and hence they were not empowered to superannuate him before reaching the age of superannuation to be calculated on the basis that the petitioner's date of birth was March 14, 1938, and not April 24, 1935.
6.
Advocate for the respondents submits that though age of the petitioner had been duly determined through the process of medical examination and there was no reason to permit him to apply for change, to give him a fair deal the authorities gave him repeated opportunities to produce the original school certificate, but he never submitted such certificate.
He says that the respondents did not act wrongfully in any manner whatsoever.
7.
In my view, the case of the petitioner never merited any consideration at all.
Once his age was determined through the process of medical examination, there was no reason to permit the change in the recorded date of birth, unless he produced any unimpeachable piece of evidence which had been in existence even before his joining the service.
True it is that his school leaving certificate in such a case would have been a relevant material.
But the admitted position is that inspite of repeated opportunities given, he failed to produce such certificate.
8.
He relied fully on the national trade certificate obtained in 1961, and the identity card stated to be issued in 1981.
In my view, those were absolutely irrelevant materials, and on the basis of those documents he was not entitled to seek correction of his duly recorded date of birth.
It is also apparent that he raised the issue very belatedly, and that even after raising it belatedly he became silent almost for around twenty years.
He raised the dispute finally at the fag end of his service.
Not only that, he approached the writ court also long after his retirement from service.
In my view, there is absolutely no scope to give him any relief.
9.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
10.
Copy of this order duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court) of Assistant Court Officer shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on usual undertakings.
11.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.