Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the District Inspector of School (SE), Paschim Medinipur dated August 29, 2002 rejecting his request for stepping his pay up to the stage and level of the sixth respondent.
2.
There is no dispute that the petitioner joined the school concerned on August 03, 1976 and the sixth respondent joined it on January 02, 1981.
Both of them were appointed as assistant teacher in physical and working education group.
Being a person joining the same service first, the petitioner was always getting pay higher than the sixth respondent.
3.
The fifth pay commission recommendations were accepted by the government, and by memorandum No. 25-SE(B) IM-120/08 dated February 12, 1999 they were made effective as from January 01, 1996.
As a result pay of the petitioner and the sixth respondent were to be notionally refixed with effect from January 01, 1996; they were to get actual benefits with effect from April 01, 1997.
It appears from the impugned decision that their pay were refixed with effect from April 01, 1996.
4.
While pay of the petitioner (in the scale of 4,800/- to 10,925/-) was fixed at Rs. 7,100/-, pay of the sixth respondent (in the scale of Rs. 4,650/- to 10,175/-) was fixed at Rs. 6,925/-.
On the ground that on January 02, 1999 the sixth respondent, having completed eighteen years service, became entitled to get her pay refixed, the authority refixed her pay (in the scale of Rs. 4,800/- to 10,925/-) at Rs. 7,550/-.
Her pay was again refixed on January 02, 2001 on the ground that having completed twenty years' service, according to provisions of the memorandum, she became to get one additional increment; as a result her pay was fixed at Rs. 8,225/- (in the same scale of Rs. 4,800/- to 10,925/-).
Consequently the sixth respondent started getting pay higher than the petitioner.
5.
Noticing the anomalous situation, the petitioner requested the authority for stepping up his pay.
Since no action was taken, he moved this court by filing a writ application in the year 2002.
By order dated April 19, 2002 that writ petition was disposed of directing the district inspector of schools to give a decision in the matter.
This is how the impugned decision came to be given.
6.
The respondents are contesting the case, though none appears for them today.
I am told that they have also affirmed an opposition.
Such opposition has, however, not been filed in court.
7.
In the impugned decision the district inspector of schools held as follows :-  Since there was no disparity at the tune of the pay fixation on 141996 and their pays were not fixed in similar scale of pay, the pay of the writ petitioner does not require to be stepped up in accordance with law."
Pay of the petitioner and the sixth respondent were fixed in terms of provisions contained in the above-mentioned memorandum dated February 12, 1999.
Paragraph 7 thereof prescribed the manner in which pay according to the revised scales were to be refixed.
Second and last para of Note 1 to para 7 of that memorandum reads as follows :-  "If the pay of an employee who was getting more pay in a particular scale than other employee before revision of pay in accordance with these Rules gets-fixed at a lower stage of the corresponding revised scale than that of the latter only as a result of operation of these Rules and for no other reason the pay of the former shall be stepped up to that the latter."
8.
After going through the impugned decision and the provisions of the memorandum dated February 12, 1999, I am of the view that the district inspector of schools has not given a fair, reasonable and equitable interpretation to the provisions of the relevant para of the said memorandum.
9.
The district inspector of schools proceeded on the basis that since at the relevant date i.e., April 01, 1996, the anomalous situation was not existing, there was no scope to step up the petitioner's pay simply because pay of the sixth respondent was subsequently refixed twice accordance to provisions of the memorandum.
10.
According to the district inspector of schools the initial refixation in terms of provisions of the memorandum was only relevant, and extension of subsequent benefits to the sixth respondent was no relevant.
In my view, this should not be the correct interpretation of the provisions of the relevant para of that memorandum.
11.
The provisions quoted hereinbefore were made to take care also of an anomalous situation like the present one.
A person senior in service and working in the same grade, is not subjected to a lower pay, unless there are good reasons for creating such an anomalous situation.
Compelling a senior person in the cadre or grade to receive a lower pay is demoralizing and humiliating.
This is why experts and governments have always taken care to see that anomalous situations arising in pay fixation matters are removed by stepping up the pay of the senior.
12.
In this case no one object to the petitioner's request for stepping up his pay.
But the district inspector of schools held that law would not permit the stepping up.
To my mind, that is not the position of law.
Relevant provisions of the memorandum provide that if as a result of operation of the rules contained in it pay of an employee is fixed at a stage higher than his senior, then pay of the senior should be stepped up.
13.
That is to say, in this case, once because of operation of those rules pay of the sixth respondent came to be refixed at a higher stage of the corresponding revised scale, it became necessary to step up the pay of the petitioner who had been getting higher pay till the refixation was effected for giving benefits to the sixth respondent.
14.
The benefits were given to the sixth respondent under those rules.
The question of stepping up in my view, cannot be confined only to the stage of initial fixation of pay according to those rules.
The provisions must receive a fair and reasonable interpretation, because they were incorporated for removal of anomaly in fixation of pay as a result of operation of those rules.
15.
For these reasons I hold that the district inspector of schools was not right in rejecting the petitioner's request for stepping up his pay to that of the sixth respondent.
16.
I hold that the petitioner was entitled to get the benefit of stepping up of his pay.
I accordingly set aside the impugned decision dated August 29, 2002.
The writ petition is hereby allowed to that extent.
17.
I direct the respondents, and in particular the district inspector of schools, to see that all benefits on account of stepping up of the pay to that of the sixth respondent are paid and extended to the petitioner within sixth weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order by the respondents.
All arrears to which the petitioner is entitled shall be paid and his pay shall be refixed.
18.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to make any order for costs or for interest on the arrears that shall be paid to the petitioner.
Hence there shall be no order for those purposes in the writ petition.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by Assistant Registrar (Court) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on the usual undertaking.
Petition allowed.