GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has filed Civil Writ Petition No 14573 of 1994.
Record of that writ petition was not traceable in the Registry and, therefore, the petitioner instituted second petition on 811995.
On 1011995, this Court ordered notice of motion.
On 631995, the Court ordered that both the petitions be clubbed together.
The petitioner had initially impleaded Senior Sub Judge, Ambala, Narinder Kumar son of Ved Parkash and Dalip Singh son of Chander Singh as parties to the writ petition.
During the course of arguments on 1271995, learned counsel for the petitioner made a request for impleadment of the State of Haryana and the Punjab and Haryana High Court as parties to the writ petitions.
This request was accepted and the State of Haryana through Legal Remembrancer and the High Court of Punjab and Haryana through its Registrar were added as respondents.
Notices were ordered to be issued to the newly added respondents.
Out of the respondents, only respondents No. 1, 2 and 3 have thought it proper to file reply.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record of the writ petition.
3.
Petitioner, Ajmer Singh, was appointed as Class IV servant in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940 vide Annexure P-1 dated 21111992 passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Ambala.
He worked upto 1051993 on which date his service was terminated by the Senior Sub Judge, Ambala, vide order Annexure P-2 on the ground that Courts of the Additional Senior Sub Judge and the Sub Judge Second Class, Ambala City, had been withdrawn.
The Senior Sub Judge treated the petitioner as surplus and ordered the termination of his service.
At the same time, he incorporated a promise that in case new Court was to be created, the petitioner will have right to be accommodated in service on preferential basis.
After termination of the service of the petitioner, the Courts of two Senior Sub Judges were created in Ambala in 1993 and 1994 and against the posts of Class-IV servants appointments were given to respondents No. 2 and 3 without considering the case of the petitioner, even though the Punjab and Haryana High Court had on administrative side issued instructions vide letter dated 161982 for giving preferential consideration to the persons whose services are terminated due to surplusage.
On his part the petitioner did submit representation dated 4111993 to the District and Sessions Judge, Ambala, for being considered against the newly created posts but without any favourable result.
The petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 10921 of 1994 which was withdrawn by him with permission to file fresh one and thereafter he filed Civil Writ Petition No 14573 of 1994 on 6.10.1994 and then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 493 of 1995 on 811995 and prayed for issue of mandamus to the respondent No. 1 to appoint him as Peon/Chowkidar over and above respondent Nos. 2 and 3 and to give him all other consequential benefits.
4.
In his reply, respondent No. 1 has stated that the petitioner was appointed on purely temporary basis and his services were terminated on account of withdrawal of two Courts.
According to respondent No. 1, the petitioner has no right to be given fresh appointment on the basis of assurance contained in Annexure P-2.
According to respondent No. 1, Narinder Kumar and Dalip Singh were appointed on 3111993, Tarsem Lal was appointed on 111994 and Satya Ram was appointed on 1281994 and although respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have been transferred to other Courts but are working under the control of the Senior Sub Judge, Ambala.
5.
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have contested the writ petition on the ground that the petitioner does not have any right to be appointed on the posts occupied by them.
Further assertion of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 is that they had been appointed in newly created courts in Ambala Sessions Division w.e.f.
511993 and against these posts, the petitioner can have no right to be appointed.
6.
There is no doubt that the petitioner was appointed as Class-IV servant on purely temporary basis, but it is more than clear from the order (Annexure P- 2) that while terminating his service on the ground of withdrawal of two Courts from Ambala, the Senior Sub Judge had assured the petitioner that in case a new Court is created then the petitioner shall have a right to be appointed in service on preferential basis.
If this assurance of the Senior Sub Judge is read in the light of letter No. 12431-E-II/VII-A, 23 dated 161982 written by the Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court to all the District and Sessions Judge in the State of Haryana, it becomes clear that the High Court had directed that the employees rendered surplus as a result of withdrawal of Court from one Sessions Division may be absorbed on priority basis against the new post which are to be created in another Sessions Division consequent upon the shifting/creation of any Court there.
District and Sessions Judges were also directed to send list of the employees along with their willingness to be transferred to any other sessions Division.
The import of the Circular of the High Court is that the surplus employees who are removed from service on account of abolition of posts should be given preference at the time of fresh appointments.
This is specifically reflected in the order Annexure P-2.
Therefore, the respondent No. 1 was duty bound to consider the case of the petitioner before appointing respondent Nos. 2 and 3 as Class-IV servant.
The principle which is incorporated in Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, requiring an employer to offer the post for re-employment of a retrenched employee may not be applicable in strict sense to services in the Courts but the principle underlying that provision has been incorporated in the Circular (Annexure P-3) and, therefore, it was the duty of the respondent No. 1 to have given preference to the petitioner at the time of appointment of new hands.
In our opinion, the respondent No. 1 had acted arbitrarily in ignoring the claim of the petitioner for preferential consideration for appointment against the newly created posts or the post of Class-IV employees which may have become available otherwise and at the same time appointing fresh hands.
By not considering the case of the petitioner, the respondent No. 1 has violated his fundamental right of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
We, therefore, allow the writ petition and direct the respondent No. 1 to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Class-IV servant.
If any vacant post is available, the petitioner shall be accommodated against that post.
If no post is available, the petitioner must be accommodated by dispensing with the service of junior-most employee who should be given a notice before issue of order of termination of his service.
In either event, the appointment of the petitioner shall relate back to the date of appointment of respondent No. 3.
He shall get benefit of notional pay fixation with effect from that date but benefit of actual salary should be given to him with effect from the date of this order.
This action shall be taken by the respondent No. 1 within one month of the receipt of certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.