S Ravindra Bhat, J - Issue Rule.
With consent of parties, the petition was heard finally.
2.
In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution the order of the School Tribunal dated 20.9.2001 declining the petitioner's appeal has been impugned.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as a Music Teacher by the first respondent, an un-aided school, initially on 4111997 on contract basis.
Her services were continued, and another contract was issued on 171998.
The Contract/Letter of appointment was expressed to be for one year.
On 1071999 the respondent- School terminated her from its services.
The letter of termination indicated that upon appraisal during the probation, Management found her performance unsatisfactory to be confirmed in the services and, therefore, in terms of Clause 1 of the Service Agreement her employment was being put to an end.
4.
The petitioner had approached this Court on an earlier occasion challenging the termination order.
Her writ petition was disposed of, reserving liberty to move the School Tribunal.
The petitioner, therefore, preferred appeal under Section 8(3) of the Delhi School Education Act.
5.
The Tribunal after considering the materials and hearing parties declined to interfere in the matter.
It held, inter alia, as follows :  "The termination order dated 10799 states that the School Management has not fund the appellant fit to be confirmed in service of the School.
There is no other allegation against the appellant.
In the case of "Kunwar Arun Kumar and UP Hill Electronics Corporation Ltd & Ors. reported as 1997 LLJ (Vol. 3) 791 SC", it was held that whether the termination order was on the ground of unsatisfactory performance and absence, it was, not an stigmatic order.
During the probation, the authorities are entitled to assesss the suitability of the candidate.
If it is found that the candidate is not suitable to remain in service they are entitled to record a finding of unsatisfactory performance of work and duties during the probation.
If they record a finding that during the probation period, the work and performance of duties were unsatisfactory, they are entitled to terminate the service in terms of the appointment without conducting an inquiry.
That does not amount to any stigma.
In the instant case also I find that the order of termination is not carrying any stigma against the appellant.
The appellant was on probation.
She had not been confirmed as her probation had not been declared to have been satisfactorily completed.
The appeal has, therefore, no merits and is accordingly dismissed."
6.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Tribunal has not appreciated the facts in the correct perspective.
He submitted that the order resulted in a stigma and caused grave and irreparable consequences to the petitioner.
It was also submitted that the petitioner ought to have been given notice and afforded an opportunity before the issuance of the impugned termination letter; by not doing so, and allowing her to continue beyond a period of one year, the respondent-School violated the provisions of the Delhi School Education Act and, therefore, the Tribunal committed irregularity in the appreciation of facts, and correct legal position.
7.
Learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that the school is an unaided school and is required to follow the procedure as per Section 15 while issuing an employment contract.
In this case it was admittedly issued in 1998.
It remained in force for a period of one year.
The respondent assessed the need for continuing the petitioner in its employment and found that her services were not necessary on account of her unsatisfactory performance.
It was, therefore, submitted that such a termination does not result in stigma as it is not based on any misconduct.
Learned Counsel also submitted that the period of appointment itself had expired and come to an end and, therefore, there was nothing wrong or illegal in deciding that the petitioner could not be continued in employment.
8.
The first point which arises for consideration is whether the petitioner admittedly employed on contract basis can claim reinstatement.
It has been often held that in the case of contract appointees, the Court cannot exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 and hold that in spite of the contract having come to an end by efflux of time, such employee can be reinstated in the service [Ref.
Director, Institute of Management Development v. Pushpa Srivastava, AIR 1992 SC 2070 : 1992(3) SCT 742; Hindustan Education Society v. S Kaleem SK Gulam Nabi, 1997(2) S.C.T.
555 : AIR 1997 SC 2126].
9.
The second point is whether the termination of probation in this case can be characterised as stigmatic.
Undoubtedly, the order dated 1071999 refers to unsatisfactory performance of the petitioner.
However, in my opinion that by itself cannot be called a stigma or based on misconduct.
Wherever the employer has to decide to continue or not to continue an employee on probation, the assessment or evaluation has necessarily to be based upon the performance.
That aspect if reflected in the order, by itself cannot lead to a conclusion that the termination order is stigmatic [Ref.
State of Punjab v. Bhagwan Singh, VIII (2000) SLT 782 : 2002(9) SCC 6361 : 2002(1) SCT 253].
10.
Rule 105 of the Delhi School Education Rules reads as follows :  "105.
Probation - (1) Every employee shall, on initial appointment, be on probation for a period of one year which may be extended by the appointing authority [with the prior approval of the Director] and the services of an employee may be terminated without notice during the period of probation if the work and conduct of the employee, during the said period, is not, in the opinion of the appointing authority, satisfactory : Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule relating to the prior approval of the Director in regard to the extension of the period of probation by another year, shall not apply in the case of an employee of a minority school : Provided further that no termination from the service of an employee on probation shall be made by a school, other than a minority school, except with the previous approval of the Director.
(2) If the work and conduct of an employee during the period of probation is found to be satisfactory, he shall be on the expiry of the period of probation or the extended period of probation as the case may be, confirmed with effect from the date of expiry of the said period.
(3) Nothing in this rule shall apply to an employee who has been appointed to fill a temporary vacancy or any vacancy for a limited period."
11.
A reading of the above would show that prior approval of the Director for extension of the period of probation does not apply in the case of unaided minority schools.
Even, otherwise, as per the contract issued in the year 1998 the period of probation was extendable in terms of Rule 105(3) for another period.
The petitioner could not, therefore, claim the benefit of automatic confirmation.
12.
In view of the above, I am of the opinion that there is no infirmity in the order of the Tribunal.
13.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner at this stage submitted that there are certain vacancies in the school and that after the termination of the petitioner from the services a number of persons were appointed but their services were not found satisfactory.
It is open to the petitioner to apply to the respondent-Management which may consider her request for employment in case the services are required.
14.
The petition is disposed of subject to the above observations.
No costs.
Petition disposed of.