Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by his dismissal from service.
2.
The undisputed facts are these.
By appointment letter dated May 25th, 1981 CTI Co-operative Stores Ltd at Howrah appointed the petitioner as accountant on temporary basis.
He continued to work as such till his dismissal with effect from March 21st, 1997.
Though appointed as accountant, he perform ed duties in several capacities.
On March 22nd, 1995 certain allegations of defalcation and forgery were made against him by the society.
He gave a reply dated March 22nd, 1995.
The matter was referred by the society to the authority under the West Bengal Co-operative Societies Act, 1983.
The Co- operative Development Officer, Howrah Hqr.
was directed to make an enquiry.
After such enquiry, by letter dated February 28th, 1997 the Assistant Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Howrah advised the society to initiate a disciplinary action against the petitioner.
On the basis of such advice the board of the society in its meeting held on March 21st, 1987 resolved to take action against the petitioner in terms of rule 14 of the conditions of service prescribed in appendix II to Chapter VI of the West Bengal Co-operative Societies Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
The board simultaneously took the decision to dismiss the petitioner with immediate effect.
3.
Learned advocate for the petitioner submits that the dismissal order is liable to be set aside on the ground that it has been issued in clear violation of rule 14 of the conditions of service and the proviso to clause (f) of rule 48 of Rules.
4.
Learned advocate for the Registrar of Co-operative Societies submits that though by letter dated February 28th, 1997 the Assistant Registrar had advised the society to initiate a disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner, without initiating it, and merely on the basis of taking a decision to initiate it, the society dismissed the petitioner from service.
5.
Submissions of learned advocate for the society are these.
Since an enquiry had been made by the Co-operative Development Officer, no disciplinary proceeding was necessary.
As will appear from rule 108 of the Rules no disciplinary proceeding is necessary for dismissing a temporary employee.
In any case, the petitioner had admitted his guilt, and hence no enquiry was necessary at all.
Without challenging the decision of the Assistant Registrar the dismissal order cannot be challenged.
The writ petition is not maintainable against the society, though remedy was available to the petitioner before the co-operative tribunal.
6.
After hearing learned advocates for the parties, I find that the dismissal order cannot be sustained.
7.
The question whether a writ petition is maintainable against a cooperative society by its dismissed employee, is no longer res Integra.
It was clearly held in the division bench decision of this court reported at 1990(2) CLJ 456 (Cal.
), (Arjed Ali Gazi v. State of West Bengal) that a dismissed employee of a co-operative society is entitled to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this court with the allegation that his dismissal was effected in violation of the statutory conditions of service prescribed in appendix-II to chapter-VI of the Rules.
Hence, I find no merit in the contention of the society that for challenging the dismissal order the petitioner cannot invoke the writ jurisdiction of this court.
8.
For challenging the dismissal order, the petitioner was not required to challenge the decision of the Assistant Registrar.
By such decision the authority simply advised the society to initiate a disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner.
9.
I also find no merit in the contention of the society that in view of provisions in rule 108 of the Rules, it was not necessary to initiate a disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner, since he was only a temporary employee of the society.
10.
The contention is totally misplaced.
Provisions in rule 108 do not say that no disciplinary proceeding is necessary against a temporary employee for punishing him for committing misconduct.
11.
Rule 2 of the conditions of service speaks about the status of employees of a co-operative society.
It includes also a temporary employee.
12.
Rule 7(4) of the conditions of service specifically mentions that all appointments shall be temporary only.
The fact that after expiry of two years from the date of the petitioner's appointment the society did not take further steps in terms of rule 7(4) would not make any difference so far as the requirement of holding an enquiry against him, before punishing him for committing misconduct, is concerned.
13.
The expression "employee" mentioned in rules 13 and 14 of the conditions of service does not exclude a temporary employee of a co-operative society.
The expression includes all categories of employees appointed by a co-operative society.
14.
Rule 14 of the conditions of service specifically mentions about the misconduct and disciplinary action.
It enumerates the acts which shall constitute misconduct of an employee.
It provides that service of the employees of a society, including any employee employed temporarily, can be terminated for misconduct by the disciplinary authority, by imposing any of the penalties mentioned in its clause (b).
15.
Proviso to clause (f) of rule 48 of the Rules provides that no employee of a co-operative society shall be dismissed or removed from service except after an enquiry in which he were informed of the charges against him and were given a reasonable opportunity of being heard regarding the charges; and where it was proposed, after such enquiry, to dismiss or remove him, only after he was given a reasonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed.
16.
Hence there can be no doubt about the legal position that though the petitioner was employed in temporary capacity, his service could not have been terminated by the society without initiating a disciplinary action for which direction had been given by the Assistant Registrar, and decision was also taken by the board of the society.
17.
The stand taken by the society is, in fact, inconsistent with the stand taken by its board in its meeting held on March 21st, 1997.
The board took decision to initiate the disciplinary proceeding, but thereafter it lost direction, and instead of initiating the proceeding by issuing a charge-sheet, it straightway took the decision to dismiss the petitioner from service.
The decision is ex-facie bad, and it must be regarded as void ab initio, being totally contrary to the above noted provisions of the Rules.
18.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision dated March 21st, 1997 taken by the board of the society to dismiss the petitioner from the service of the society, and also the decision contained in communication dated April 4th, 1997 written by the secretary of the society, are hereby quashed.
The respondents shall reinstate the petitioner at once.
Since the petitioner was never suspended, and no disciplinary proceeding was ever taken, I am of the view that he is entitled to full back wages.
Hence, the respondents are directed to give full back wages to the petitioner.
The directions given by this order shall be complied with by the respondents within six weeks from date.
19.
This judgment and order, however, shall not prevent the respondents from initiating an appropriate disciplinary proceeding against the petitioner, if it is otherwise permissible in law.
20.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to make any order for costs in favour of the petitioner.
Hence there will be no order for costs in the writ petition.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition allowed.