Nirmal Yadav, J - The petitioner, wife of the late Baldev Kalsi, by filing the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has sought for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus restraining ht respondents from recovering the alleged excess amount of Rs. 58630/- which was paid to the petitioner on account of family pension.
2.
The petitioner's husband Baldev Kalsi was working as Deputy Director, Industries, Punjab and was posted as General Manager at Jalandhar.
He died in harness on 1391997.
After his death, the petitioner was getting family pension.
The petitioner received a latter dated 392004, Annexure P-1 from the Bank of India (respondent No. 4) asking her to contact them.
On petitioner's visit to the office of respondent No. 4, she was informed that an amount of Rs. 58630/- is to be recovered from her as the same has been paid in excess.
She was informed that her husband was due to retire on 15122002, therefore, as per rules, her family pension has been reduced.
It is averred that when petitioner withdrew family pension for the month of October-2004, she was given Rs. 2709/- only in stead of Rs. 4709/- and on enquiry, she was informed that deduction of Rs. 2000/- has been made on account of alleged excess payment of Rs. 58630/-.
3.
Respondent No. 4 in its written statement has stated that respondents No. 1 to 3 had fixed the family pension payable to the petitioner, @ Rs. 4463/- P.M. with effect from 1491997.
Thereafter, respondent-Bank was informed by respondent No. 2 vide letter dated 2262000 (Annexure R-4/2) that petitioner's family pension has been fixed at Rs. 2678/- with effect from 1512.
2002.
Due to shortage and frequent transfers of staff, the bank continued making payment @ Rs. 4463/- P.M. even after 14122002.
After this mistake was detected, the petitioner was directed to refund the excess amount so paid to her.
The petitioner was also fully aware that after 15122002 her pension would be reduced form Rs. 4463/- P.M. to Rs. 2678/- P.M. and that the excess amount of Rs. 58630/- which has been inadvertently paid to her, is to be recovered.
4.
We have learned counsel for the parties and pursued the material on record.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that there was no fraud or misrepresentation on the part of the petitioner nor was the petitioner, in any manner, instrumental in fixing the amount of family pension payable to her.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be penalized for the fault of the respondent by effecting recovery from her monthly family pension.
In support of his submissions, the learned counsel relied upon the ratio of law paid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana (1995(1) SCT 668).
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No. 4 argued that respondent-bank continued making payment of pre-revised family pension through an oversight due to frequent transfers and shortage of staff in the bank.
Learned counsel for the respondents No. 1 to 3 argued that since excess amount has been paid to the petitioner, therefore, the same has to be recovered in order to make good the loss caused to the State exchequer.
7.
In the totality of facts and circumstances of the case, the following observations of the Supreme Court would be relevant for the adjudication of the controversy involved in the case in hand :-  "5.
Admittedly the appellant does not possess the required educational qualification.
Under the circumstances the appellant would not be entitled to the relaxation.
The Principal erred in granting him the relaxation.
Since the date of relaxation the appellant had been paid his salary on revised scale.
However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances the amount paid till date may not be recovered from the appellant.
The principle of equal pay for equal work would not apply to the scales prescribed by the University Grants Commissions.
The appeal is allowed partly without any order as to costs."
8.
The Apex Court also examined the same issue in PH Reddy v.
N.T.R.D., 2000(2) SCT 987, wherein it was held that employees, who had been in receipt of a higher amount on account of erroneous fixation, could not be required to reimburse the excess amount paid to them although the authority was well within its rights to correct the error committed by it and to fix the pay of the employee in terms of their entitlement.
In the instant case, it is not disputed that the excess payment of family pension made to the petitioner was not based on any fraud or misrepresentation by the petitioner but was through an oversight on the part of the respondent-authorities.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed not to recover the aforesaid excess amount of family pension from the petitioner.
The recovery, if any, made from the petitioner be refunded within a period of two months of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.