Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioners are aggrieved by the decision of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Burdwan dated January 5, 2005 informing the Employment Exchange Officer, Kalna sub-division that for the post of clerk in government aided secondary schools essential qualification would be school final or its equivalent and desirable qualification would be knowledge of typewriting.
2.
Counsel for the petitioners argues that in view of the guidelines for recruitment of non-teaching staff for aided secondary schools issued by the Director of School Education, West Bengal by Memo No. 1736 (21) G.A.
dated November 1, 1999, persons possessing both the academic and the typewriting qualifications would only be eligible for the post of clerk, and hence persons not possessing the typewriting qualification cannot be sponsored by the employment officer for the post of clerk in the respondent school in response to the requisition put in by it.
3.
Counsel for the parties bring to my notice an unreported division bench decision of this court dated October 14, 2004 given in FMA No. 283 of 2004 (Sanjoy Kumar Majumder v. Sri Sukanta Ghosh & Ors.), and comment that considering the government order dated July 2, 1996 and the provisions of the guidelines dated November 1, 1999 their Lordships were pleased to hold that for the post of clerk in aided secondary schools essential qualifications would be both school final or its equivalent and knowledge of typewriting.
4.
Both the counsel agree on the point that decision was given by their Lordships in ignorance of the government order No. 493-SE(S)-40/95 dated August 26, 1996 in which the authority said :  "With reference to the Government Order No. 359-SE(S) dated 2.7.1996 the undersigned is directed to say that the standard of education among the members of Gr.
C. Clerical Staff of aided non-Govt. educational institutions laid down therein is modified with effect from the date of issue of that order to the extent that the knowledge of typewriting should be a desirable qualification and not an essential qualification."
5.
I think, in view of the controversy before me, it would be useful to mention the provisions which were made by the government by its previous order dated July 2, 1996, and they are:  'The undersigned is directed to say that the State Government in this Department has decided to maintain the following standard of education among the members of Group C(Clerical) Staff and Group-I (Peon, Laboratory Attendant, etc.) Staff of aided Non-Government Institutions which are eligible to get such post(s).
Group C (Clerical) : Madhyamik or equivalent with good knowledge in typewriting:  Group D : (Peon/Laboratory/Attendant/etc.)
Qualification :  (a) Must not be less than' VIIIth Standard from a recognized School Madrasah: and  (b) Must be able to read and write Bengali/Nepali, as the case may be and English.
The director of School Education, West Bengal or any officer authorized by him in his behalf is directed not to approve the appointment of any Group-C Staff or Group-D having less than the foregoing qualifications.
The decision takes immediate effect but the past cases and the cases where the interviews have already been held may not be re-opened.
He is requested to make suitable provision in the procedure of appointment.
This issues in modification of memo.
No. 41 Edn.
(S) Dated 3rd June, 1989 and the memo No. 1102-Edn.
(S) dated 27th November, 1990 and other orders circulars concerning the matter."
It is therefore apparent that the division bench decision brought to my notice would not decide the controversy raised before me; and I think, I am likely to be wrong, if I proceed on the basis that I am bound by it which, with great respect, is convenience, opportunity of getting by a candidate cannot be taken away, if on the basis of the essential qualification a candidate is entitled to be sponsored.
There is no scope to say that a candidate registering himself with the original academic qualification cannot be sponsored for the post for subsequent acquisition of the professional qualification of typewriting by him.
13.
For these reasons I do not find any merit in the writ petition and it is accordingly dismissed.
These will be no order for costs in it.
Xerox copy of the judgement and order duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court Officer of this court shall be given to the parties, on usual undertakings.
Urgent certified xerox copy of the judgment and order shall also be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.