We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the paper-book.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 138, no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
In the aforesaid case the Supreme Court has categorically held that "as a rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
However, an exception, out of pure humanitarian considerations has been made in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
A provision is, therefore, made to enable the family to make both ends meet.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for the post held by the deceased.
Furthermore, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family..."  The aforesaid observations make it abundantly clear that the aim and objective of granting appointment on compassionate ground is not to replace the deceased employee with a dependent of the deceased.
It is to be granted only where family is suffering from abject penury and is without any source of livelihood.
In the present case, the respondents have passed a speaking order.
The respondents have considered the claim of the petitioner on the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of General Manager (D&PB) and others v. Kunti Tiwari and another, in Civil Appeal No. 126 of 2004 arising out of SLP(C) No. 2644 of 2003.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.