Tapen Sen, J. (Oral) - Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a T Mate in the Haryana State Electricity Board, Panipat on 25.6.1968.
He was promoted as a Store Munshi and regularised w.e.f.
31.1.1981.
He retired from service on 3131997.
The grievance of the writ petitioner is that the Chief Accounts Officer fixed the pension of the petitioner only on the basis of the period beginning from the date of regularisation w.e.f.
31.3.1981 and he did not take into consideration the period rendered by him prior thereto i.e. the period from 25.6.1968 to 31.3.1981.
According to the respondents, the reason for not taking into consideration the aforementioned period appears to have been stated in Paragraph 3(iii) of the written statement in which it has been mentioned that the petitioner was a member of the Employees Provident Fund (EPF) Scheme while he was working as a work charged employee of the Board.
It is stated that he did not exercise his option within the stipulated period of three months as to whether he intended to have the work charged period counted for pensionary benefits or whether he desired to migrate to the pensionary scheme of the Board.
It is, in this context, that in Paragraph 3, the respondents have stated that the Haryana State Electricity Board in its meeting held on 2361993 approved the adoption of the Haryana Government Notification dated 421992 with regard to the counting of service rendered by workers in work charged capacity towards pensionary benefits.
Since most of the Board's work charged employees were members of the EPF Scheme, it was decided that pensionary benefits would be subject to the following conditions :-  (a) On regularisation from work charged to regular employees, the employee was to submit an option within three months from the date of regularisation or from the date of the circular i.e. 681993 and indicate as to whether he intended to count the period of work charged service rendered by him towards pensionary benefits or whether he intended to continue to be a member of the EPF Scheme.
Such an option was required to be furnished in writing to his Drawing and Disbursing Officer who was to authenticate and record its entry in the Service Book of the employee and place the same therein so that it would become permanent record for future reference.
(b) Such an option once having been exercised would be deemed to be final and would not be allowed to be changed under any circumstances.
If the option was not given within the stipulated period of three months, it would be presumed that the employee intended to continue to be a member of the EPF (c) In case he opted for pensionary benefits, he was required to refund the entire amount of the employer's contribution together with interest thereon towards the EPF in lumpsum for crediting to the Board's account.
The employees contribution along with interest was to be deposited with the Board for crediting to his EPF account.
3.
According to the respondents, when the option was not exercised by him within the aforementioned period of three months, it was presumed that he intended to continue to be a member of the EPF Scheme and his pension was fixed only on the basis of his regular service period rendered by him and his work charged service was not taken into consideration while fixing the pension.
4.
In reply to the aforementioned statements made by the respondents, the petitioner in his replication, in Paragraphs 3 and 4 has stated that he was neither informed nor was he aware about the exercise of option.
It has also been stated that the information was not circulated to him and he, being an illiterate person was not given any chance or opportunity to switch over to pensionary scheme.
He has further stated that he is willing to refund the amount of employees contribution which comes around to Rs. 3,222/- so that the same can be credited in the Board's account.
It has also been stated that the respondents have permitted a number of employees to deposit the employees contribution after their retirement.
5.
Let it be recorded that upon perusal of the written statement filed by the respondent No. 2, it is evident that the Electricity Board decided to adopt the Haryana Government's Notification relating to pensionary benefits.
It is, therefore, obvious that the decision to adopt was for the benefit of the employees and not towards their detriment.
Even assuming for the sake of arguments that the petitioner may not have given the option, that by itself was not such a gross irregularity on his part that it should have taken away an option to receive benefits under the pensionary scheme.
Moreover, it is evident that the decision to adopt the notification was taken on 2361993 and the petitioner retired in 1997 as an Assistant Line Man.
His post was such that it is possible to accept the explanation given by the petitioner to the effect that he, being an illiterate person, was not given any chance or opportunity to switch to the pensionary scheme or that he was not aware that he had to exercise an option.
6.
This Court, taking into consideration the menial job of the petitioner and his illiteracy, is therefore, inclined to interpret the aforesaid statement made by the petitioner to the effect that he perhaps did not even understand the benefits which would accrue to his favour if he had given the option.
That apart, the petitioner's reply given in paragraphs 3 and 4 of his replication to the effect that he was neither informed nor did the respondent ever got his signature noted on any circular or notice relating to the aforementioned decision, has not even been controverted by the Board by filing any rejoinder to the aforementioned replication.
For the foregoing reasons, this Court is inclined to take the view (specially after reading the contents of the reply to Paragraphs 4 and 5 given by the petitioner in his replication that he is still ready and willing to refund the sum of Rs. 3,222/-) that the Board, having once taken a decision to adopt the Haryana Government's Notification dated 421992 to extend pensionary benefits, such decision should not be allowed to be frustrated merely on account of the petitioner's not having given an option within a period of three months and that too, for reasons that are possible to accept and as stated in the replication.
For the foregoing reasons, this Court is inclined to allow the Writ Petition with direction to the respondents to allow the petitioner to refund the sum of Rs. 3,222/- as they have done in the case of other employees and re-calculate the pension of the petitioner by taking into consideration the services rendered by him right from 25.6.1968.
It is made clear that if the petitioner refunds the aforementioned sum of Rs. 3,222/-, the respondents would do the needful as expeditiously as possible but not later than a period of 3 months from the date of such refund.
Petition allowed.