Viney Mittal, J - The present petitioners were engaged as drivers on contractual basis by the Principal Medical Officer-cum-Director, Health Services, Chandigarh in April, 1998 for a initial period of six months on a consolidated salary of Rs. 3,000/- per month.
The term of the contract was extended from time to time, the last extension being vide order November 8, 2002.
The initial appointment letters issued to the petitioners stipulated that their appointment would be on contract basis and could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason and the aforesaid appointment would not bestow upon them any right to claim regular appointment against any post in the department.
2.
Since the term of their appointment was not extended after the last extension order on November 8, 2002, they approached the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "Tribunal") apprehending their termination.
In the meantime, a policy decision was taken by the Administration to requisition the services of the drivers through the contractor/service provider, approved by the department.
The petitioners withdrew the aforesaid Original Application with a liberty to challenge the aforesaid policy decision.
Subsequently, their services were dispensed with in the month of May, 2003, on the expiry of the contract period.
The petitioners, thereafter, filed another Original Application before the Tribunal claiming that the aforesaid policy decision was merely a camouflage to replace them and the department was not authorised to engage persons on contract basis in terms of the provisions of Contract Labour (Regulation of Abolition) Act, 1970.
It was further claimed by the petitioners that they were entitled to continued till they were replaced by regularly selected drivers.
The claim of the petitioners was contested by the department.
They reiterated the policy decision taken by the department for providing sanitation work of Primary Health Centre, Manimajra on contract on the pattern of Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector-32, Chandigarh and further that it was decided to follow the same modalities and procedure as in the above hospital.
Accordingly, it was claimed that certain categories of the staff for the Health Department is now engaged through the contractor/service provider, approved for the purpose.
3.
After examining the respective stand taken by the parties the learned Tribunal dismissed the Original Application filed by the petitioners.
It was held that since the employees now requisitioned by the Administration through the contractor are not the employees of the department, therefore, the petitioners had no grievance to make, nor any benefit of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 can be taken by them.
It was also held that the plea that the services provider is sham and a camouflage can also not be gone into in the proceedings before the Tribunal.
4.
The petitioners have now approached this Court challenging the action of termination by the department on the dismissal of their Original Application by the Tribunal.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record of the case.
6.
The stand taken by the Administration is that a policy decision has been taken not to fill up the post of drivers lying vacant with them but requisitioned the services of the drivers through a service provider approved by the department.
In view of the aforesaid stand, it is apparent that once the department has decided not to fill up the vacancies, then the Court cannot direct the employer to fill up a particular post simply because post is lying vacant.
If the department has chosen to requisition the services of the drivers to be provided by a service provider approved by the department, then the aforesaid decision cannot be held to be faulty in any manner.
7.
Faced with the aforesaid difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the provision of a contract service was contrary to the statutory rules and was in fact a circuitous method to oust the petitioners.
8.
We find ourselves unable to agree with the same.
The policy decision having been taken by the Administration not to fill up the posts lying vacant with it but to requisition the services of drivers from an outside agency cannot be treated to be a camouflage in any manner.
Moreover, the petitioners are not members of service or the employees of the Administration.
Therefore, the grievance with regard to violation of any rules cannot be made by them.
9.
In almost identical circumstances, this Court while dealing with the case of staff nurses in Civil Writ Petition No. 11969-CAT of 2004 (Veena Rani v. others v. Central Administrative Tribunal and others), decided on March 31, 2005, had repelled a similar contention raised on behalf of the aforesaid petitioners.
In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.