MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to sanction and pay family pension to the petitioner in accordance with the Family Pension Scheme as provided by Rule 617 of Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, Part II (for brevity `Rules').
2.
Brief facts of the case which are necessary to decide the controversy raised in the instant petition are that Sh. Manmohan Singh, husband of the petitioner superannuated from the respondent-department on 3181989.
A case under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (for brevity `P.C.
Act') was pending against him at that time.
On account of the pendency of criminal case, he was granted provisional pension on 1321990 as is evident from Annexure P-1.
Accordingly, the petitioner started drawing provisional pension @ Rs. 575/- pm plus dearness allowance admissible under Rules w.e.f.
191989 till the decision of the case registered under Section 5(2) of the PC Act.
Unfortunately Manmohan Singh, husband of the petitioner, died on 1621997.
The petitioner being widow filed an application for grant of family pension.
The Tehsildar, Patiala recommended her case for grant of family pension vide his letter dated 2631997 (Annexure P.-2).
It is claimed that under Rule 617(2) of the Rules family pension is admissible to a widow in case of death of an employee while in service or after retirement.
The only condition imposed is that such an employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without any break.
3.
Mr. Vikas Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that there is no provision in the Family Pension Scheme provided in Rule 617 of the Rules for denial of family pension to a widow of government employee in case of conviction of the employee by a Criminal Court, who was granted pension on superannuation.
According to the learned counsel, there is only exception as provided by Rule 13(a) of the Rules, which is to the effect that if the person, who is eligible to receive family pension under the Rules is charged with murdering the Govt. employee or for abetting the commission of such an offence and it is then that the family pension has to be remain suspended.
In case of conviction, he must be debarred from receiving the family pension.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Balwant Kaur v. State of Punjab and another, 1987 R.R.R.
28 : 1987(5) SLR 264 where family pension was sanctioned despite the fact that the Govt. employee was facing departmental proceedings on the allegation of embezzlement.
During the pendency of those proceedings he had died.
Reliance has also been placed on another judgment in the case of Smt. Kanta Devi v. The State of Punjab, 1988(1) SLR 642.
In that case also, disciplinary proceedings were pending and family pension was ordered to be sanctioned in favour of widow.
4.
Mr. Mansur Ali, learned State counsel referring to the averment made in the written statement has argued that the Govt. employee namely Manmohan Singh was facing prosecution in case FIR No. 127 dated 2851985 registered at Police Station Civil Lines, Patiala under Section 5(2) of P.C.
Act read with Section 161 IPC.
He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and fine of Rs. 200/-.
His conviction was ordered on 19101987 by the Special Judge, Patiala.
It has further been pointed out that Criminal appeal No. 572-SB of 1987 filed by the Govt. employee was pending has also been dismissed and he had retired during the pendency of the appeal.
According to the learned State counsel, provisional pension was granted under Rule 2.2(b) read with Rule 2.2(c) of the Rules vide order dated 1321990.
However, it is candidly admitted that no order has been passed.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that this petition deserves to be allowed because according to the family pension scheme a widow of Govt. employee has been held entitled to such a pension.
According to Rule 617(2) of the Rules, the only requirement is that the Govt. employee must be in service for a period of one year without break and he must also be in receipt of retiring or superannuation pension.
It has also been provided that the family pension would not be admissible in case of death after retirement if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
Rule 617(2) of the Rules is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :  "Family Pension Scheme 6.17 ... (2) The Scheme will be administered as below :- (i) The family pension will be admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement if at the time of death the retired Government employee was in receipt of a compensation, invalid, retiring or superannuation pension.
In case of death while in service, the Government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service, without break.
The family pension will not be admissible in cases of death after retirement, if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
Provided that the condition of completing a minimum period of one year of continuous service will not be applicable in the case of Government employee who has been medically examined and declared fit for entry into Government service.
(ii) The term "One Year Continuous Service" used in Clause (i) is inclusive of permanent and temporary service in a Pensionable establishment and any period of leave including Extraordinary leave but does not include Boy Service and suspension period unless that is regularised by the competent authority.
(iii) In the cases of persons who are transferred to Punjab State from the Central Government or other State Governments and in whose case it has been agreed to count their previous service for pension the Family Pension Scheme would be applicable in the event of their death/retirement without putting in one year continuous service under the State Government, if their total service at the time of death (inclusive of service rendered under the previous Government) exceeds one year."
6.
It is also pertinent to mention that there is no provision made in family pension scheme to impose a cut or debar a member of the family to receive family pension in case of conviction of the Govt. employee.
The only exception has provided by sub-rule 13(a) of the Rules.
However, the aforementioned exception would not be applicable to the facts of the present case.
The claim of the petitioner is also supported by the view taken by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Balwant Kaur (supra) where despite pendency of disciplinary proceedings against Govt. employee involving embezzlement family pension was allowed after his death.
The other judgment in the case of Smt. Kanta Devi (supra) is also equally applicable to the case.
It is further appropriate to mention that there is no provision in Rule 2.2(b) and 2.2(c) of the Rules adversely affecting the right of the petitioner for her entitlement to family pension.
7.
In view of the above, this petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to sanction and pay family pension to the petitioner in accordance with the Family Pension Scheme under Rule 617 of the Rules.
The arrears shall be calculated and be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months and the family pension shall be paid regularly in accordance with the Rules to the petitioner month by month.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 6% from the date family pension is due till the date the same is paid.
Petition allowed.