GS Singhvi, J - This writ petition can appropriately be described as an illustration of litigation which has been forced upon the petitioners because on account of unreasonable attitude of the departmental authorities the petitioners have been compelled to file this writ petition, which is third in the series.
The petitioners have prayed for quashing of Annexures P.5 and P6 whereby the respondents while according promotions to the petitioners have declined to give them monetary benefits.
2.
The petitioners joined the Indian Army in the years 1963 to 1964 during the National Emergency imposed by the Government of India in the wake of external aggression during the year 1962.
They were released from the Army during the years 1968 to 1970.
The petitioners were recruited as Constables in the service of the Government of Haryana in the years 1970 and 1972.
In lieu of the service rendered by them to the nation during the National Emergency, the petitioners became entitled to be given the benefit of military service for the purposes of seniority, increments, and pension etc. in terms of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965 (for short `the Rules').
Though the provisions of 1965 Rules are clear, the respondents did not accord those benefits to the petitioners compelling them to file C.W.P.
No. 3302 of 1989.
A Division Bench of this Court disposed of that writ petition on 2551989 with a direction to the respondents to consider and decide the claim of the petitioners for grant of benefits under the 1965 Rules.
A period of three months was allowed to the respondents to pass necessary orders.
Failure of the respondents to comply with the directions given by the High Court on 2551989, led to the issue of notice of demand for justice (Annexure P.3).
The petitioners also initiated contempt proceedings but the same did not yield any result.
Ultimately, they filed C.W.P.
No. 13519 of 1990 alleging that only a partial relief had been given to them.
The second writ petition of the petitioners was disposed of by this Court on 9.11.1990 and a direction was given to the respondents to decide the claim of the petitioners as specified in Annexure P.3 (legal notice) by passing a speaking order in accordance with law within a period of three months.
The Court further directed that in case any consequential relief flows to the petitioners as a result of the passing of that order, the same should be granted to them within two months thereafter.
Ultimately, the respondents passed orders Annexures P.5 and P6.
By these orders, the petitioners have been given the benefit of retrospective seniority and promotion to higher posts with retrospective effect.
However, in these very orders the respondents have declared that the petitioners shall not be entitled to monetary benefits on account of retrospective promotions.
Rather, it has been made clear that the benefits towards arrears for increments etc. shall be admissible from the actual date of appointment/promotion.
3.
Petitioners have contended that after they have been able to persuade this Court to pass orders for implementation of Rules enacted some 20 years ago, now the respondents have arbitrarily invoked the principle of `no work no pay' to deny them the monetary benefits flowing from their retrospective promotions.
This action of the respondents, according to the petitioners, is wholly arbitrary, irrational and contrary to the equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitutiton of India.
4.
In their reply, the respondents have asserted that the Government of Haryana had issued a circular dated 2581985 for granting military service benefits to the petitioners and similarly situated persons and after the issuance of these instructions an exercise was undertaken by the departmental authorities to accord benefit of military service to the petitioners and other similarly situated persons.
This exercise according to the respondents took some time because records of the petitioners had not been made available by the military authorities.
The respondents have further pleaded that after collecting the entire record they have passed the orders giving benefit of retrospective promotion to the petitioners but the petitioners do not have any right to be given monetary benefits.
Claiming that under the 1965 Rules there is no provison for grant of monetary benefits, as as equel to retrospective promotions, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioners are not entitled to get monetary benefit because they have not physically worked on the higher posts between the deemed date of promotion and the date of taking over of the charges of the higher posts.
5.
The point which needs determination is as to whether on the basis of their retrospective promotions the petitioners are entitled to be given monetary benefits in the form of fixation of pay with effect from the deemed date of promotion, grant of increments and other consequential reliefs.
While Shri Gill has argued that monetary benefits are admissible to the petitioners as a necessary concomitant of their retrospective promotions and the principles of `no work no pay' is not applicable to a case where promotion is denied to an employee by the Government/public authority, learned Assistant Advocate General emphatically argued that the Government cannot be saddled with the responsibility of paying emoluments to the petitioners because there was no delay on the part of the Government to give benefit of military service to the petitioners.
Learned Assistant Advocate General pointed out that after the issuance of circular of 1985 the Government had taken all necessary steps to give benefit of military service to the petitioners and the delay, if any, was on the part of the military authorities in furnishing the service records of the petitioners .
The rule that an employee is not entitled to wages for the period he does not work has been evolved by the courts to meet with a contingency where an employee voluntarily abstains from duty or he is responsible for non performance of duties of a particular post.
Even in matters involving promotion etc. such monetary benefits can be denied in a given case where the employee is found to be responsible for creating a situation where his promotion is delayed.
However, this rule has no application to a case where the employee is denied promotion or at least a consideration for promotion without his fault.
Where the employee does not contribute to the delay in the making of his promotion, he cannot be charged with the allegation of not having discharged the duties of the higher post.
In those cases where the employee is not responsible for delay in the making of his promotion, a matter which primarily lies in the domain of the employer, it is not open to the employer to deny actual monetary benefits flowing from promotion.
In State of Mysore v. CR Seshadari and others, AIR 1974 SC 460, their lordships of the Supreme Court reversed a direction given by the Mysore High Court for promotion of the respondents who were erroneously denied promotion by the employee.
But even while holding that the High Court cannot in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to issue a direction for promotion of the employee but can only direct consideration of his promotion, the Supreme Court took notice of the lordships suffered by the employee on account of erroneous decision of the Government in not considering his case for promotion.
The Supreme Court noted that the employee had retired during the pendency of the litigation but refused to scuttle his claim only on that ground.
Instead the Supreme Court recognised that a retired employee can have the solace of having monetary benefits as a result of retrospective promotion.
I would do better than to quote the following observations of the Supreme Court :-  ``The length of this litigation has really disappointed the petitioner by denying him the enjoyment of likely promotion.
He retired the day before the judgment of the High Court.
No one in service would be affected by the allowance of the petitioner's claim and what was a service issue has now been reduced to one of money payment.
A retired Government official is sensitive to delay in drawing monetary benefits.
And to avoid posthumous satisfaction of the pecuniary expectation of the superannuated public servant - not unusual in Government - we direct the appellant to consider promptly the claim of the petitioner in the light of our directions and make payment of what is his due - if so found - one or before April 15, 1974."
6.
In PS Mahal and others v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1984 SC 129, the Supreme Court dealt with a controversy involving seniority of Assistant Engineers, Executive Engineer and others and while allowing the writ petition and quashing the impugned seniority list the apex Court directed as under :-  ``The Government will prepare such seniority list within a period of two months from today.
When the seniority in the grade of Executive Engineers is re-arranged in accordance with the directions given in the judgment, the cases of Assistant Engineers who would have been due for consideration for promotion as Superintending Engineers and thereafter as Chief Engineers on the basis of their revised seniority, will be considered by a duly constituted Departmental Promotion Committee as on the dates on which they would have been due for such consideration if the correct seniority had been given to them, and if on the basis of their performance and record as on those dates they would have been selected for promotion, they must be given promotion with retrospective effect from such dates and if necessary, supernumerary posts in the grades of Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers shall be created for the purpose of accommodating them and all arrears of salary and allowances shall be paid to them on the basis of such retrospective promotions."
7.
In Union of India etc. etc. v. KV Jankiraman etc. etc., 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2010, their Lordships of the Supreme Court rejected the applicability of the principle of `no work no pay' in cases where the employee was denied promotion without any fault of his.
Their Lordships made the following observations :-  ``When an employee is completely exonerated in criminal/disciplinary proceedings and is not visited with the penalty even of censure indicating thereby that he was not blameworthy in the least, he should not be deprived of any benefits including the salary of the promotional post.
The normal rule of `no work no pay' is not applicable to such cases where the employee although he is willing to work is kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his.
This is not a case where the employee remains away from work for his own reasons, although the work is offered to him.
It is for this reason that FR 17(1) will also be in-applicable to such cases."
8.
In TP Sivasankaran and others v. State of Kerala and others, 1980(3) S.L.R.
224, a Full Bench of the Kerala High Court held that when promotions are given pursuant to the directions even by the High Court the Government's action of giving only notional promotions and refusal to pay back wages will be deemed to be contrary to the directions of the High Court.
9.
In Bir Singh Kadian v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 423 (P&H)(DB) : 1994(4) S.L.R.
424, a Division Bench of this Court followed the law laid down in KV Jankiraman's case (supra) and declared that with retrospective promotion an employee is entitled to all monetary benefits including fixation of his pay and grant of arrears of salary.
10.
In view of the principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court and by this Court, I have no hesitation to hold that denial of monetary benefits to the petitioners in spite of their retrospective promotions is without any legal or constitutional sanction.
By denying monetary benefits to the petitioners, the respondents have directly infringed their right of equality before law.
A direct consequence of denial of monetary benefits to the petitioners would be that the persons juniors to them would have enjoyed the actual benefits of promotions and the petitioners despite having been declared senior and having been found entitled to promotion from earlier dates will stand deprived of the real and substantial benefits.
11.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The conditions incorporated in Annexures P.5 and P6 denying monetary benefits to the petitioners are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to pay to the petitioners all monetary benefits to which they became entitled as a result of their retrospective promotions.
Such benefits shall be calculated and granted to the petitioners within a period of four months of the submission of a certified copy of this order before the Director General of Police, Haryana, failing which the petitioners shall get interest at the rate of 18% per annum with effect from the date of this order.
In the event thye respondent-Government is required to pay interest to the petitioners, the Government shall recover that amount from the salary of the officers of the Government who may be responsible for not giving effect to this order.
Petition allowed.