SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The petitioners have filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated 27111989, Annexure P-4 and a writ in the nature of mandamus declaring that the petitioners are eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Geologists, under the Punjab Agricultural Service (Class-II) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the "1974 Rules").
3.
The petitioners were appointed in the subordinate service of the department of Agriculture against the post of Sectional Officers during the years 1969 to 1970.
Throughout their tenure, the petitioners were discharging hydro- geological duties in the Ground Water Cell.
Under the 1974 rules, promotions to P.A.S.
Class-II can be made from the subordinate services.
Rule 9(ii) of 1974 rules provides that the officers are eligible for promotion within their respective category of Service.
The Punjab Agricultural Service (Class-II), was divided into three wings, namely, Engineering, Statistical and Administrative.
By notification dated 31.3.1981, the posts in the Service were grouped into four categories viz.
Administrative, Statistical, Engineering and Geological by making an amendment in the Appendix "A" to the Rules.
The post of Assistant Geologist in the grade of Rs. 850-30-1000-40-1200/50-1400-60- 1700/- was added under the category of Geological posts.
All the petitioners were considered and promoted on the post of Assistant Geologist purely on ad hoc basis for a period not exceeding six months or till approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission whichever is earlier, by order dated 1051985.
It was made clear that the petitioners are liable to be reverted as Sectional Officers at any time without any notice or cause being shown to them.
It was further made clear that they will not claim seniority in P.A.S.
Class-II as a result of their ad hoc promotions.
The promotions were also made subject to the decisions in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 307 of 1982, 932 of 1984 and 3575 of 1984.
Out of these three writ petitions, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 307 of 1982 and 932 of 1984 have been decided by this Court vide judgment dated 2852004.
After the promotions, the names of the petitioners were included in the tentative seniority list of P.A.S.
Class-II officers (Geologist Wing) as on 111988 which was circulated by Memo dated 8.12.1988, Annexure P-2.
It appears that certain representations were made against the promotions of the petitioners as well as tentative seniority list on the ground that the petitioners were ineligible for promotion on the post of Assistant Geologist.
4.
The respondent-State of Punjab had, however, supported the promotions of the petitioner in the Memo dated 23.11.1983 written to the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Chandigarh, in response to his Memo.
dated 2691983.
It is clearly stated therein that the petitioners being members of the Subordinate Service, were entitled to be promoted against 66-2/3 per cent of the posts as they were having experience of working in the category to which they had been promoted for a period of five years.
It is further clarified that the Geological Wing came into existence in the year 1981 and the Assistant Geologists are working in the department for a long time.
Since there was no grass-root staff working in the department below the Assistant Geologist, therefore, the petitioners had been made to do the work of Subordinates in the Geological Wing.
As an illustration, it is also stated that in the case of Assistant Agriculture Engineers, P.A.S.
Class-II, each have been provided two Agriculture Inspectors (Implements) and five mechanics.
Therefore, it is stated that in the absence of the field staff, the working cannot be done properly.
The petitioners who were selected and appointed in the Engineering Wing, had been performing the duties in the Geological Wing for the last more than five years.
Therefore, it would not be appropriate to ignore them for promotion altogether.
Surprisingly, on 27111989, the State of Punjab has passed an order directing that the petitioners be not given any seniority in the Geological Section.
5.
In the written statement filed by the State of Punjab, it has been stated that the petitioners were promoted on ad hoc basis as the incumbents from Technical Assistant (Geology) Category, were not available.
However, the Section Officers having the experience in the Geological Wing, were considered suitable to some extent to carry on the day-to-day work.
Hence, they were promoted on ad hoc basis although their actual line of promotion lies in the Engineering Wing because the petitioners are diploma holders in Mechanical Engineering.
The proposals of ratification of the promotion of the petitioners were sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, on 2011986 and further information was supplied on 1491989.
Since no response was received from the Punjab Public Service Commission, the State of Punjab had decided to drop the matter regarding suitability of the petitioners.
The seniority list not having been finalised, the petitioners have no right to claim that they have been regularly promoted on the post of Assistant Geologist.
Under Rule 9(ii) of the 1974 Rules, the promotions have to be made within the respective categories of Service.
Therefore, the petitioners could not be given regular promotion in the Geological Wing.
It is further stated that the promotions of the petitioners have already been made subject to the decisions in the Civil Writ Petitions mentioned above.
Therefore, they cannot claim any further benefit till the decisions of the aforesaid writ petitions.
However, in order to protect the interest of the petitioners, they have been permitted to continue to work on the post of Assistant Geologist till their turn as Assistant Agricultural Engineer comes in their own cadre i.e. in the Engineering Wing.
6.
The petitioners have filed a replication and controverted the plea taken by the respondents.
Apart from reiterating the plea taken in the writ petition, the petitioners have stated that the respondents had themselves justified the promotion of Section Officers discharging geological duties to the post of Assistant Geologist in the letter of February, 1985.
A proposal was sent for filling up six promotional quota posts of Assistant Geologists in P.A.S.
Class-II against the ten posts which were lying vacant by promoting six senior Section Officers due for promotion on ad hoc basis.
The petitioners also relied on an affidavit dated 1911989, Annexure P-6, filed by the State of Punjab in reply to Civil Writ Petition No. 3375 of 1984.
In paragraph 5 of the affidavit, it stated as follows :-  "That in the month of February, 1985, Govt. decided that henceforth the Sectional Officers shall only be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Geologist in PAS Class-II in Geological Wing and they shall not be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Agricultural Engineer in PAS Class-II (Engineering Wing).
Keeping this decision in view, 7 Sectional Officers were promoted to the post of Assistant Geologists in Geological Wing on 1051985."
7.
Mr. Malik has also relied on another communication dated 16.6.1987, Annexure P-10, sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, justifying the promotions of the petitions.
In paragraph 2 of the aforesaid communication, it is mentioned as follows :-  "Sectional Officers included in the slab had been working in the Geological Wing of the Agriculture department.
As per PAS Class-II rules stated above, 5 years experience in the working category is required for promotion to PAS-II posts.
The Sectional Officers who were promoted had possessed experience of 5 years in the Geological Category, as such they were promoted as Assistant Geologist.
In this regard there is no need of obtaining opinion of the Public Service Commission, Patiala, because promotions have been made in accordance with the service Rules stated above."
8.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
9.
In view of the communication addressed by the respondent-State of Punjab, the petitioners cannot now be denied the seniority or other benefits.
In the letter dated 16.6.1987, Annexure P-10, it is quite categorically stated that there is not even any need of obtaining the opinion of the Public Service Commission as the promotions have been made in accordance with the service rules.
It is also evident that the petitioners were not promoted to perform only the day-to-day functions.
In fact, they were promoted when there was a dire need of qualified persons in the Geological Wing.
It is, undoubtedly, true that the petitioners could not have claimed any right to be promoted in the Geological Wing as they had been recruited in the Engineering Wing.
However, the services of the petitioners having been utilised in the Geological Wing, the benefit of seniority cannot possibly be denied to them.
It has also been brought to the notice of this Court by Mr. Rameshwar Malik, on the basis of the order dated 1921986.
Annexure P-11, that two persons have been promoted in the Engineering Wing, who were junior to the petitioners without even considering the claim of the petitioners.
Not only the claim of the petitioners for promotion in the Engineering Wing was not considered, but they were not even given an option to go back to the Engineering Wing.
In such circumstances, it would be wholly inequitable to deprive the petitioners the benefit of the service rendered by them in PAS Class-II.
10.
In view of the judgment rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 307 of 1982, it is no longer necessary to consider the various Clauses of the 1974 rules, on first principles.
Considering Rule 8(b), it has been held by this Court in the case of Amarjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, C.W.P.
No. 307 of 1982, decided on 2852004, that the person to be promoted must have an experience of minimum five years in the category to which he is to be promoted.
Rule 9.2 makes it clear that the promotions have to be made within the respective categories in service.
The promotion of the petitioners had been made subject to the decision in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 307 of 1982, 932 and 3575 of 1984.
The decisions in the aforesaid writ petitions cannot have any adverse effect on the claim of the petitioners as in the decision rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 307 of 1982, it has been observed that even the private respondents whose promotions have been held to be illegal, would not suffer any prejudice as they had since retired.
In the present case also all the petitioners have retired.
Therefore, it would be wholly unjust and inequitable to unsettle the settled position.
11.
In view of the above, this petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 27111989, Annexure P-4, is quashed.
The petitioners are declared to be members of the PAS Class-II service from the date they were initially promoted i.e. with effect from 1051985.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits.
No costs.
Petition allowed.