SS Nijjar, J - On 18112004, we had passed the following order :-  "Allowed.
Impugned order is quashed.
Reasons to follow.
Copy of this order be given to the counsel for the petitioner duly authenticated by the Special Secretary of the Bench so that petitioner is permitted to join at the original place of posting at Sonepat."
Now we give the reasons.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Line Superintendent in the Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam (hereinafter referred to as "respondent No. 2"), on 1371967.
He was further promoted to the post of S.D.O.
on 621991.
At the time of his promotion, the petitioner was posted at Tohana District Hissar.
From 1992 to 1994, the petitioner was posted at Panipat.
In December, 1994 on the shifting of the office of Sonepat, the petitioner was also posted there.
The petitioner claims that overall past 37 years record of his service is unblemished.
No adverse remarks has ever been communicated to him.
He is due to retire on 3132005.
By order dated 2472004 (Annexure P-3) passed by respondent No. 2, the petitioner had been transferred from Sonepat to Cheeka.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the petitioner made a representation to respondent No. 2 for accommodating him on a non-operational post since he is due to retire within the next seven months.
The petitioner also sought a personal interview with respondent No. 2, who assured the petitioner that she will look into the matter and the order will be cancelled.
The petitioner was assured that he will be accommodated on a non-operation post at Sonepat.
On the assurance being given by respondent No. 2, the petitioner joined at Cheeka on 282004.
After joining, the petitioner again approached respondent No. 2, but no action was taken by the respondents on the representation as well as the assurance given by respondent No. 2.
Aggrieved by the order of transfer and inaction of the respondents on the representation, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition invoking the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
He prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order of transfer dated 2472004 (Annexure P-3) and a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to accommodate the petitioner on the non-operational post of S.D.O.
(Computer Cell) at Sonepat.
3.
The petitioner primarily challenges the order of transfer (Annexure P-3) on the ground that it had been issued in violation of the instructions issued by the State of Haryana-respondent No. 1 by letter No. 45/7/89-5GSI dated 741989 (Annexure P-1).
The aforesaid letter contains the policy and guidelines for postings and transfers.
He relies in particular on Clause III of the policy which is as under :-  (iii) The maximum period for continuously serving on a post shall normally be five years.
This maximum period shall not be applicable in respect of the employees who are working in Colleges, schools and laboratories including employees working in Industrial/Technical Training Institutions.
The maximum period of five years shall also not apply to Government employees both gazetted and non-gazetted who are due to retire within the next two years and they may be allowed to continue on their present posts till retirement."
The aforesaid Clause has been further amended by respondent No. 1 by CS Hr.
No. 45/9/98-I GSI dated 19111998 (Annexure P-2).
The amended clause is as under :-  "2.
Government have re-examined the matter and after careful consideration have decided that in future this relaxation in tenure beyond five years shall be admissible to only such employees as are due to retire within one year (repeat one year).
In other words this maximum period of five years shall also not apply to Government employees both gazetted and non-gazetted, who are due to retire within the next one year and they may be allowed to continue on their present posts till retirement.
These instructions shall be strictly complied with."
4.
Respondent No. 2 has filed a written statement.
It is stated that the instructions dated 741989 issued by the State of Haryana were not adopted by respondent No. 2.
However, respondent No. 2 issued policy and guidelines for posting and transfer of Board's employees on 2641989 on the pattern of the government instructions with some minor changes.
Copy of this policy has been attached to the written statement as Annexure R-2/1.
The case of the petitioner falls within Clauses (III) and (V).
The aforesaid Clauses are as under :-  (iii) The maximum period for continuously serving on a post involving general seats shall normally be 5 years.
This maximum period shall not be applicable in respect of employees working in Thermal/Hydel Projects.
Maximum period of 5 years shall also not apply to Board's employees both Gazetted and Non- gazetted, who are due to retire within the next two years and they may be in the normal course allowed to continue on their present posts till retirement.
The employees (Gazetted/Non-gazetted), who have worked on public dealing seats for 5 years, in aggregate or broken spells either at Faridabad, Ballabgarh, Gurgaon, Yamunanagar, Jagadhari, Ambala and Hisar, should generally not be posted back at such public dealing posts.
Such employees can be considered for posting back to such posts only after they have served for at least 3 years on non-public dealing posts.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx (v) No employee (Gazetted/Non-Gazetted) shall normally be posted in his Home Town/Village particularly those who are working in Public Dealing seats.
5.
It is further stated in the written statement that the petitioner has been transferred in public interest as the post of SDO (OP) at Cheeka was lying vacant since 1632004 and the work of (OP) Sub Division, Cheeka was suffering badly day by day.
A request dated 1062004 was received by the Chief Engineer of respondent No. 2 from the Superintendent Engineer at Kurukshetra for posting of an SDO at Sub Division, Cheeka, as the previous SDO had been placed under suspension on 1632004.
The Chief Engineer wrote to the SE/Admn.
on 992004 requesting him to fill up the post of SDO (Operation), Sub-Division, Cheeka immediately, in the interest of Nigam.
Respondent No. 2 has also stated that the petitioner is wrongly claiming that his service record is unblemished.
He was issued a charge-sheet dated 30.7.1968.
The petitioner was given the punishment of warning.
A complaint was also received from the SE (OP), Sonepat dated 1742003 by the MD of respondent No. 2 which is under investigation.
The petitioner was also issued a show-cause notice dated 862004 for damage to transformers during the period from 142003 to 3112004 in his Sub Division which exceeded the permissible limit of 1655% rate of damage.
Another complaint was received against the petitioner and certain other employees dated 942004 regarding constant practice being adopted by these employees.
It is admitted that the petitioner is due to retire on 3132005.
It is denied that the petitioner ever made any representation for being accommodated on a non-operational post at Sonepat.
It is also denied that any assurances were ever given to the petitioner.
It is admitted that one non-operational post of SDO (Computer Cell) is lying vacant at Sonepat.
But the same is not required to be filled up for the time being as many important posts of Assistant Engineers are lying vacant in the operational wing and work is suffering.
6.
The petitioner has filed replication to the written statement of respondent No. 2.
It is stated that the petitioner is even covered under the policy issued by respondent No. 2.
He has further stated that respondent No. 2 has tried to mislead this Court with regard to the service record of the petitioner.
Charge-sheet dated 3071998 was dropped, although a warning was given as pleaded by respondent No. 2.
The show-cause notice dated 862004 has also been decided on 3092004 wherein the last ACR of the petitioner has been down-graded one step below and the conduct of the petitioner was censured.
No complaint dated 942004 has been received by respondent No. 2.
In fact, the complaint was made on 942002 on which no action has been taken by the respondents till date.
In the intervening period from 2002 to 2004, a number of benefits i.e. time scale, cross of efficiency bar and letter of appreciation have been given to the petitioner.
The petitioner makes a reference to a letter dated 2532004, in which the work of the petitioner has been appreciated by the MD of respondent No. 2.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
8.
Even it is accepted that the guidelines issued by the State of Haryana are not applicable to respondent No. 2, the claim of the petitioner would be considered under Clauses III and V of the policy instructions dated 2641989 issued by respondent No. 2.
A perusal of Clause V shows that no employee shall normally be posted in his home town/Village, particularly those who are in public dealing seat.
The ordinary meaning of the aforesaid clause is one of caution rather than prohibition.
The clause provides that an employee normally should not be posted in his home town or village.
The Board has to be even more cautious particularly when the employee would be working in his own home town/village and occupies a seat of public dealing.
No such facts have been pleaded in the present case by the respondents.
The adverse record pleaded in the written statement has been explained and clarified by the petitioner in the replication.
In any event, according to the respondents, the petitioner has not been transferred due to complaints.
He is said to have been transferred on administrative grounds.
We are of the opinion that the reasons stated by the respondent have not been substantiated in the pleadings.
In the written statement, respondent No. 2 has stated that the petitioner was transferred as the work was suffering at Sub Division, Cheeka since the previous SDO has been placed under suspension on 1632004.
The transfer was made on the basis of request having been received on 1062004.
The order of transfer was issued on 2472004.
Surprisingly, the Chief Engineer did not even request the SE for filling up the post of SDO Sub Division, Cheeka till 992004.
It is, therefore, obvious that the transfer of the petitioner had not been made on the request having been made by the Superintending Engineer, Kurukshetra on 1062004.
The transfer, therefore, clearly cannot be justified under Clause V of the policy of respondent No. 2.
On the one hand, the respondents are claiming that the service record of the petitioner was not good, on the other the order of transfer has been issued so that the work of Sub Division, Cheeka does not suffer.
On the one hand the petitioner is not found suitable for working on a seat having public dealings at Sonepat, on the other he has been transferred to a seat of equal importance at Cheeka.
Clearly, the reasons stated for transfer are not the reasons underlying the transfer.
We have no option, but to hold that the transfer of the petitioner has been ordered arbitrarily and for reasons other than those stated in the order of transfer and in the written statement.
The impugned order of transfer also cannot be sustained in view of Clause III of the instructions issued by respondent No. 2.
Under these instructions, the maximum period of five years of posting at a particular place is not applicable to those employees who are due to retire within the next two years.
In normal counsel, they are to be allowed to continue on their present post till retirement.
Admittedly, the petitioner is due to retire on 3132005.
The period is less than one year.
No exceptional circumstances have been pleaded by the respondent, to the satisfaction of this Court as to why the petitioner cannot be permitted to continue at Sonepat till his retirement.
We are unable to uphold the order of transfer on any of the reasons advanced by the respondent.
We had already allowed the writ petition on 18112004.
If the petitioner has not been allowed to join till date, the respondents are directed to permit the petitioner to continue at Sonepat on any of the available posts till his retirement.
No costs.
Order accordingly.