The petitioners joined as Constables in the police force of Government of Punjab on various dates which have been disclosed in the petition.
It has been averred that all the petitioners are eligible for the promotion to the next rank as Head Constable.
For the purpose of promotion, a Constable is required to be brought on list B-I after he undergoes training as envisaged under Rule 137 of the Police Rules.
A total of 21 seats have been allocated to Hoshiarpur District out of which 13 were meant for general category and 8 were reserved for different categories.
The petitioners appeared for the written examination held on February 29, 2004 and as per their information, they were declared successful.
The merit list was prepared for sending the Constables from that district against the seats allocated as aforesaid.
The merit list has been challenged upon various grounds as set out in the petition.
2.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated May 7, 2004.
The respondents have filed detailed written statements respectively.
The stand of the official respondents is that after calculating the marks obtained by the candidates in the written exam, parade, service marks and interview, the merit list was prepared and on the basis of the said list, the caste benefit has been given to the Scheduled Caste candidates as per the prescribed roster i.e. 1, 6, 11, 16 and 21 etc.
The detail of the merit list of the 21 selected candidates as well as the petitioners has been enclosed as Annexure R-I and R-II respectively.
3.
The stand of the private respondents is that the private respondents have been correctly shown in the merit list.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that a perusal of the merit list prepared by the respondents shows that the candidates belonging to the reserved category have not been given the advantage due to the fact that they have made the grade in the general merit.
He has further argued that the quota for the reserved category shall not be effected and their claim upon reserved roster points have to be considered de hors the grade earned by some of them in the general list.
He relies on the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in re : Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC).
The relevant paragraph numbered 831 reads as under :-  "In this connection it is well to remember that the reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a communal reservation.
It may well happen that some members belonging to, say, Scheduled Castes get selected in the open competition field on the basis of their own merit; they will not be counted against the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes, they will be treated as open competition candidates."
In re : RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab & others, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : 1995(2) RSJ 895, the observations in paragraph reads as under :-  "When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve categories and the candidates belonging to the general category are not entitled to be considered for the reserve posts.
On the other hand the reserve category candidates can compete for the non-reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India permits the State Government to make any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizen which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the Services under the State.
It is, therefore, incumbent on the State Government to reach a conclusion that the backward class/classes for which the reservation is made is not adequately represented in the State Services.
While doing so the State Government may take the total population of a particular backward class and its representation in the State Services.
When the State Government after doing the necessary exercise makes the reservation and provides the extent of percentage of posts to be reserved for the said backward class then the percentage has to be followed strictly.
The prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply because some of the members of the backward class have already been appointed/promoted against the general seats.
As mentioned above the roster point which is reserved for a backward class has to be filled by way of appointment/promotion of the member of the said class.
No general category candidate can be appointed against a slot in the roster which is reserved for the backward class.
The fact that considerable number of members of a backward class have been appointed/promoted against general seats in the State Services may be a relevant factor for the State Government to review the question of continuing reservation for the said class but so long as the Instructions/Rules providing certain percentage of reservations for the backward classes are operative the same have be followed.
Despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the backward classes against the general category posts the given percentage has to be provided in addition.
We, therefore, see no force in the first contention raised by the learned counsel and reject the same."
In re : Jaskaran Singh v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H), the observations read as under :-  "For the reasons recorded above, the Government instructions dated 19.10.1983 are hereby quashed.
It is directed that while granting admission against the reserved and unreserved seats, a common merit list of all the reserved and unreserved candidates should be prepared and the open seats filled up as per that merit list and if any candidate from the reserved category falls in that list he will be treated to have been admitted in the General Category.
After this is done, the reserved candidates should be granted admission in the order of their merit against the reserved seats.
This method would certainly avoid the anomaly that has arisen in the present case."
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents have argued that the petitioners do not get the benefit either way, even if, the aforestated contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is accepted.
6.
We have heard at length learned counsel for the parties.
The admitted fact is that the merit list has been prepared by giving the benefit to the reserved category to shoe candidates who had otherwise made a grade in the general merit.
As a result thereof, the relief grantable to the reserved category stood virtually denied.
Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney's case (supra), RK Sabharwal's case (supra) and a Division Bench of this Court in Jaskaran Singh's case (supra), we allow this petition and quash the merit list, copy Annexures P-3 and P-4.
However, the official respondents are at liberty to redraw the merit list of selected candidates on the basis of the previous result on all counts for the purpose of list B-1 by following the law laid down as aforestated.
In carrying out such exercise, the claim of the petitioners be also considered by applying the rule and relief grantable to the reserved categories in accordance with law and the respective merit.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.