G S Singhvi, J - There cannot be any doubt that the entries made in the confidential reports play vital role in the service career of an employee.
Therefore, even though, in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court does not act as a Court of appeal while making an adjudication on administrative matters and it interferes in such like matters on limited grounds like violation of law, mala fide or patent arbitrariness, as will be seen hereafter the present one is a case in which the adverse remarks made in the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1991-92 deserve to be quashed as they are wholly arbitrary and have been made for extraneous considerations.
2.
Petitioner joined service of the Police Department of the Government of Haryana on his appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
16.11.1982.
He was given out-of-turn promotion as Sub-Inspector by an order dated 2141986 (Annexure P-2) of the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa.
This out-of-turn promotion was given to the petitioner on account of his act of bravery during his posting in police station City, Sirsa.
He was given regular promotion as officiating Sub-Inspector w.e.f.
2221990 vide Annexure P-3.
During June, 1991, the petitioner was posted as Station House Officer, Police Station, Rania, district Sirsa.
For his exceptionally good work in connection with the maintenance of law and order during the Parliament and legislative Assembly Elections of 1991, cases under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act and other works, he was given five commendation certificates Class-II and Class-III (Annexures P-4, P4(3) and P-5).
In October, 1991, the petitioner was transferred to Security Branch, Sirsa, and was made Incharge of the security.
There too, he was given several commendation certificates and cash awards.
In October, 1991, the petitioner was posted at Police Lines, Sirsa.
In February, 1992, he was posted as Station House Officer, Police Station, Ding, district Sirsa.
During this posting also, the petitioner arrested persons accused of serious crimes.
3.
Some time in the year 1992, the petitioner received communication letter dated 17.9.1992 (Annexure P-6) from the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar, who conveyed him adverse remarks in his confidential report for the period from 1651991 to 3131992.
Against these adverse remarks, the petitioner submitted his representation (Annexure P-7).
This was followed by another communication dated 26.5.1993 (Annexure P-8).
The only difference in the two communications is that while in Annexure P-6, the name of the police station has been given as Ratia, in Annexure P-8 name of the police station has been given out as Rania.
The petitioner once again submitted his representation dated 2161993 (Annexure P-9) and requested that the adverse remarks made in his Annual Confidential Report be expunged.
Representations made by the petitioner have been rejected by the Director General of Police, Haryana, and this rejection has been conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated 2591993 (Annexure P-10).
4.
In the writ petition, the petitioner has alleged that the remarks made in his Annual Confidential Report as well as the order rejecting his representations suffer from patent arbitrariness and they are contrary to the instructions issued by the Government on 4101956 for drawal of the adverse remarks.
Petitioner has further pleaded that the adverse remarks have been made by respondent No. 4 due to personal malice because the petitioner did not obey an illegal direction of respondent No. 4, who was interested in a case registered vide FIR No. 30 of 1992, in which the petitioner had seized a truck and effected recovery of 160 bags of poppy-husk.
Respondent No. 4 had desired that the petitioner should give a favourable report so that the truck could be released on sapurdari.
The petitioner did not comply with this direction of respondent No. 4 and this annoyed the respondent No. 4, who in the first instance transferred the petitioner from Police Station, Ding, to Bhiwani and then made adverse remarks in the confidential report.
Petitioner's assertion is that during the entire period from 1651991 to 3131992, he had never been called upon to submit any explanation in regard to a complaint doubting his integrity.
Further plea of the petitioner is that the representations made by him have been rejected on the basis of comments offered by respondent No. 4, without giving any opportunity to the petitioner to make a representation in the context of the comments offered by respondent No. 4.
5.
Respondents have, in their joint reply, denied the claim of the petitioner that his service record has been excellent.
According to them during the period from 141980 to 1781990 and 24.11.1990 to 261992, in which the petitioner remained posted at different places of district Sirsa, his working was not upto the satisfaction of the superior officers, he was placed under suspension from 21.7.1990 to 27.7.1990 and during the period between 1.4.1990 and 7.8.1990, a remark has been made that he disobeyed the order of superior officer and he needs improvement.
Regarding commendation certificates and rewards given to the petitioner, respondents have stated that the same were given to the petitioner for particular work done by him and they are not relevant in the context of adverse remarks.
Further plea of the respondents is that there were several complaints against the petitioner during his posting as Station House Officer, Police Station, Rania, and not only the members of public but Shri Jagdish Nehra and Shri Lachhman Dass Arora, two Ministers of the Government, had complained against the petitioner.
The whole Ding Mandi had appeared before the Ministers and complained against the corrupt practices of the petitioner.
The allegation of the petitioner that respondent No. 4 had desired giving of a report in a particular manner in case relating to FIR No. 30 of 1992 has been denied and it has been stated that respondent No. 4 had no interest in any case registered by the petitioner.
Respondents have asserted that adverse entries have been made against the petitioner on the basis of specific informations available to respondent No. 4.
According to the respondent on account of mistake, police station came to be described as Ratia instead of Rania in Annexure P-6 and on account of this adverse remarks were once against conveyed to the petitioner vide Annexure P- 8.
Respondents have also stated that adverse remarks have been made on the basis of complaints, which were verbally brought to the notice of respondent No. 4 by the Hon'ble Ministers of the State of Haryana, Sarvshri Jagdish Nehra and Lachhman Dass Arora.
6.
In his replication, the petitioner has stated that his suspension was revoked by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, vide his order dated 621991 and he was paid full pay and allowances for the period of suspension.
He has reiterated that thirty commendation certificates and cash awards granted to him during eleven years of service are sufficiently indicative of the meritorious service rendered by him in maintaining law and order, detection of crimes and arrest of persons accused of heinous crimes, committed within the jurisdiction of various police stations, including police stations of Rania and Ding.
Respondent No. 4 had himself granted commendation certificate Class-II on 1171991.
In para 4 of the replication, the petitioner has asserted that statement of respondents regarding receipt of a number of complaints is contrary to the record.
In fact, one complaint was sent by Shri Jagdish Nehra.
This complaint was got investigated by the Superintendent of Police.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, who was deputed to make an enquiry submitted his report with a conclusion that no allegation has been proved against the Station House Officer (the petitioner).
This report was accepted and filed by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, on 981991, vide Annexure P-13.
Further claim of the petitioner is that rewards cannot be given to the police officers for performance of ordinary/routine duties but are given on special merits in any branch of police activities in terms of Rule 152. of the Punjab Police Rules, which are applicable to the State of Haryana.
Continuing with this statement, the petitioner has asserted that as per Rule 1.8, District Superintendent of Police is direct supervising authority of Station House Officers and in terms of the Punjab Police Rule 1317 (5) he has to write reports on their working.
The District Magistrate is also empowered to give his comments as per Rule 115 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police is the accepting authority.
7.
A rejoinder to the replication has been filed by one Shri L D Narwal, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar.
In the rejoinder, it has been admitted that commendation certificates and cash awards granted to the petitioner pertain to the performance of the petitioner in successfully working out and arresting accused in a number of heinous crimes and other exceptionally good work and in connection with maintenance of law and order.
However, it has then been stated that these certificates do not pertain to the integrity of the petitioner and that an efficient police officer can be a corrupt officer.
In para 4 of the rejoinder, it has been stated that though in the report in dispute, respondent No. 4 has not specifically mentioned the total number of complaints, received by him, but the reporting officer has highlighted the details of the complaints while offering comments on representation of the petitioner.
In para 13 of the rejoinder, it has been stated that though the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner was written by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, but being controlling officer, respondent No. 4 had expressed his observation regarding the integrity of the petitioner.
8.
In pursuance of the directions issued by the Court, Sh. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General, has produced before us the confidential dosier of the petitioner.
This dosier contains remarks made in the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner between 4.10.1982 to 3131992.
In all 21 officers have given their comments in the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner for different periods.
Before proceeding further we consider it necessary to make brief reference to the remarks recorded by the various officers in order to examine the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner to the effect that the impugned remarks have been made out of malice and are wholly arbitrary.
A brief resume of the remarks made for different periods of working of the petitioner is as under :-  Sr. No. Period Remarks 1.
4.10.1982 to 31.3.1983 The ASI has remained under training and has not worked under me and, therefore, I am unable to write his annual confidential report.
(M S Malik, SP, Bhiwani) 2.
141983 to 971983 Undergoing upper school course hence no comments.
(M S Malik 3.
5.10.1983 to 20.10.1983 This ASI has worked for less than three months and, therefore, I am not competent to write his annual confidential report.
(P V Rathee, SP, Bhiwani) 4.
141984 to 911985 He is a young police officer, who is gradually and properly learning his work.
(V K Kapoor, SP, Sirsa) 5.
1011985 to 3131985 He has worked for less than 90 days and 6.
141985 to 3091985 He is a very good, hard-working and honest officer.
(V B Singh, SP, Sirsa) 7.
2101985 to 3131986 During this period 8.
1.4.1986 to 27.6.1986 Remained on medical leave.
9.
3061986 to 3131987 An intelligent, brave, hard-working and conscientious officer, whose work had been very good during the period.
(Resham Singh, SP Sirsa) 10.
24.4.1987 to 27.6.1987 Period of report is less than 90 days and, therefore, no comments.
(Resham Singh, SP, Sirsa) 11.
17.7.1987 to 31.3.1988 Satisfactory.
(Ravikant Sharma, SP, Sirsa).
Some adverse remarks were made by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar, which were subsequently expunged.
12.
9.4.1988 to 2881988 Satisfactory.
(Kartar Singh, SP, Sirsa).
During this period also, some adverse remarks were given by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar, but the same were subsequently expunged.
13.
3081988 to 6.12.1988 A good Sub Inspector, (Yashpal Singh, SP, Narnaul) 14.
1.4.1989 to 2531990 Takes interest in his work.
(Parvinder Rai, SP Kaithal)  15.
1.4.1990 to 1781990 Needs Improvement.
(Commandant, 8th Bn.
Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban).
This remark has been made in the context of alleged violation of directions of the superior officers.
The adverse entry has been communicated.
16.
24.11.1990 to 31.3.1991 Satisfactory.
(SP Sirsa).
Some adverse remarks were made, but were subsequently expunged.
17.
1651991 to 3111992 A hard-working, Intelligent, honest and conscientious officer.
(Girdhar Gopal, SP Sirsa)The Deputy Inspector General of Police has recorded the following comments :- ``This Sub Inspector was posted as Station House Officer 18.
10.6.1992 to 25.9.1992 Work of the Sub Inspector during the period under report has been good.
(SP Bhiwani) 19.
28.9.1992 to 3131993 An energetic Sub Inspector, who does not succumb to political pressure.
(H K L Dewan, SP, Bhiwani)The Deputy Inspector General of Police has recorded the following comments :- ``There was an allegation that he had not registered a cognizable offence and an enquiry was ordered, which is still pending.
A Sub Inspector above average category.
9.
A further scrutiny of the confidential reports shows that in almost all the years, the petitioner has been described as an officer of `B' category, which can be given to a police officer, whose work, conduct and integrity were good.
In almost all these years, the District Magistrates/Deputy Commissioners have recorded their agreement with the reporting officer, namely, the Superintendent of Police of the district concerned.
Even the controlling officers have by and large recorded their agreement with the remarks of the reporting officers.
For two periods, reference to which has been made above, the controlling officer recorded some adverse remarks, but all were expunged, except the remarks made by the Deputy Inspector General of Police for the periods between 1651991 and 3131992; and 28.9.1992 and 3131993.
In the last report, the Deputy Inspector General of Police has made remarks for the period from 10.6.1992 to 3131993.
Here too he described the petitioner as a Sub Inspector of above average category.
For the period under dispute, the Superintendent of Police has categorised the petitioner to be a very good officer and has given him report of `A' category.
Respondent No. 4 has, however, downgraded it to `C' category by making reference to one complaint received during his posting at Police Station, Rania and by observing that his reputation regarding integrity was not good during his posting at police station, Ding.
In no other confidential report of the petitioner, the reporting/controlling officer has cast a doubt on his integrity.
10.
Another important aspect of the case on which it is necessary to make a comment before we examine the merits and demerits of the rival contentions, relates to the apparent contradiction in the remarks entered by respondent No. 4 in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner and his comments, which have been placed on record as Annexure R-2.
In the Annual Confidential Report, respondent No. 4 has made a mention of one complaint received during the posting of the petitioner at Police Station, Rania.
The petitioner has produced before the Court, a copy of the complaint (Annexure P-12) and action taken on that complaint (Annexure P-13).
This complaint pertains to the period when the petitioner was posted as Station House Officer, Police Station, Rania.
Annexure P-13 shows that on investigation, the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, found no merit in the allegations levelled against the petitioner and it was filed by the Superintendent of Police on 981991.
Respondent No. 4 made adverse remarks against the petitioner on 1491992, i.e. more than one year after the filing of the complaint by the Superintendent of Police.
To us, it is clear that respondent No. 4 was totally oblivious of the fact that the complaint made by Shri Jagdish Nehra had already been enquired into and filed.
This fact is clearly indicative of mind of respondent No. 4.
In his comments, which he offered on the representations submitted by the petitioner and which have been placed on record as Annexure R-1, respondent No. 4 has stated that he had made remarks as per his knowledge about the work of the petitioner.
He then proceeded to write that ``the representationist is not only corrupt but is also indisciplined having temerity to make vague and false allegations against his senior officers in a veiled manner.
The representationist is a thoroughly corrupt Sub Inspector; that he remained posted as SHO of police station does not in any way prove his honesty; it only proves the paucity of honest man in the police department.''
He has then stated in his comments that there used to be several complaints against the petitioner while he was posted at Police Station, Rania.
These complaints were made by not only members of public but also by Shri Jagdish Nehra and Shri Lachhman Dass Arora.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police has also referred to the petitioner's assertion that he had done good work during his posting at Bhiwani and reported that his conduct and performance in district Bhiwani were also characterised by similar corrupt practices.
11.
We repeatedly enquired from the learned Deputy Advocate General as to whether there exists any written complaint other than Annexure P-12 against the petitioner.
He gave out that no such complaint is available on record.
We also enquired from him as to whether the Deputy Inspector General of Police has maintained any record regarding the oral complaints of the members of the public and two Ministers of the State of Haryana.
To this also, the learned Deputy Advocate General replied in negative.
It is, therefore, clear that except Annexure P-12, no written complaint pertaining to integrity of the petitioner was made and there is no other record showing that respondent No. 4 had made any note regarding alleged oral complaints pertaining to the integrity of the petitioner.
12.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that adverse remarks made by respondent No. 4 are not only contrary to the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana regarding confidential reports, but are wholly baseless.
Learned counsel argued that when none of the reporting officers, under whom the petitioner had worked during last eleven years, has recorded any adverse remark casting doubt on the integrity of the petitioner, except for sound and sufficient reasons, it was not open to respondent No. 4 to make adverse remarks against the integrity of the petitioner.
Learned counsel argued that the Superintendent of Police of the district concerned was the direct supervising authority of the petitioner and when he has rated the petitioner as an outstanding officer and has given category `A', respondent No. 4 was not entitled to downgrade to category `C' without there being any material.
Learned counsel vehemently argued that the sole reason for making adverse remarks by respondent No. 4 is failure of the petitioner to abide by his directions regarding the poppy-husk seized by the petitioner and that the remarks made on account of extraneous considerations should be nullified by the Court.
Learned Deputy Advocate General argued that the instructions issued by the Government are administrative in nature and, therefore, violation thereof cannot be a ground for quashing the entries made in the confidential reports.
He contended that violation of administrative instructions cannot be equated with violation of the statute and, therefore, even if the instructions issued by the Government have not been strictly adhered to by respondent No. 4, adverse entries pertaining to the integrity of the petitioner cannot be quashed.
Learned Deputy Advocate General submitted that respondent No. 4 was the controlling authority qua the petitioner and, therefore, he had every right to make his own assessment regarding the performance and integrity of the petitioner.
13.
We have briefly indicated the grounds on which the Court may interfere with the adverse entries made in the annual confidential report of an officer/employee.
We would like to reiterate that the entries made in the annual confidential report of an officer/employee play a vital role in his service career.
These entries at times become determining factors in the matter relating to confirmation, crossing of efficiency bar, promotion, grant of selection grade and retention in service.
Good entries made in the annual confidential reports enhance the chance of out-of-turn promotion/promotion on the basis of merit.
Adverse remarks made in the annual confidential reports may result in denial of promotion even in cases where promotion is based on seniority-cum-merit or seniority-cum-suitability or seniority-cum-fitness.
An employee, who earns adverse remarks may not be allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
He may be denied selection grade.
Adverse remarks may also constitute foundation for a decision by the competent authority to retire an employee before the age of superannuation.
14.
Although for recording of remarks in the annual confidential reports, no Act has been enacted by the legislature and no Rules have been framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Government of Haryana had adopted the instructions issued by the State of Punjab prior to its bifurcation.
At the same time, the Government of Haryana has issued its own administrative instruction in this regard.
For writing reports regarding integrity, one of the earliest set of instructions issued by the Government of Punjab, are contained in letter No. 8588/-G(C)-56/11533/GI(S)-56/73580 dated 4101956.
A recent circular issued on 12121985 by the Government of Haryana also contains instructions for making entries regarding integrity in the annual confidential reports.
Similarly, instructions have been issued from time to time for communication of the adverse remarks.
All these circulars/letters have been incorporated in a book printed by the Government of Haryana with the title ``Consolidated Instructions Regarding Confidential Reports''.
For the purpose of this case, we deem it proper to reproduce extracts of the circulars/letters dated 4101956, 12121985, 4121951 and 15.7.1959 :-  4101956 `Report regarding integrity - A special mention should invariably be made regarding the integrity of the officer to which Government attach the greatest importance.
It should be clearly stated if the officer is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt and his opinion should generally be fortified by reasons, which may be in the possession of the reporting officer.
Any ill-considered remarks in this respect may do a lot of mischief and harm, on the other hand, the reporting officer must be quite honest and frank and discuss an officer's worth from the point of view of his integrity openly and frankly in the column ``Defects, if any'' or elsewhere.
Government observe that reporting officers are still following the practice of making non-committal remarks the practice of making non-committal remarks like `no complaint'.
Government view this with disfavour and desire that the practice of making non-committal entries in the column relating to integrity should cease.
Reporting officers should give a definite opinion on the integrity of their subordinates while writing their confidential reports.
Further, instances have come to the notice of the Government in which even though officers are being proceeded against for serious forms of corruption, their confidential report for the same periods certify their integrity to be good.
It is felt that contradictions of this type arise only because the reporting officers are failing in their duty to make entries in the columns relating to integrity forthrightly and without hesitation.
In case an officer has been given a good report for integrity, which is later proved to be wrong, the reporting officer will run the risk of earning Government's displeasure.
Ordinarily, the interference would be that either he did not exercise proper supervision or he was in dishonest collusion with his subordinate.
The intention of Government is that the truth about subordinates should be known to reporting officers and brought to the notice of higher authorities.
This would not, however, justify the entering of ill-considered remarks based on inadequate observation.''
Instructions dated 12121985 ``Report regarding integrity :-  xx xx xx xx xx 2.
In spite of these clear instructions on the subject, it has come to the notice of the Government that the reporting officers are still making non-committal remarks against the column of integrity in ACRs.
Remarks regarding integrity are highly important and any ill-conceived remarks in this regard can cause lot of damage to the official concerned.''
Instructions dated 4121951 ``Communication of adverse remarks :- Attention is invited to paragraph 7 of Punjab Government Consolidated Circular No. 1 which is reproduced below :-  ``the attention of Government of India having been directed to the diversity of procedure followed in different provinces in regard to the communication to subordinate officers in civil employee of unfavourable remarks made by their superior in annual or other reports of a periodical nature, the Governor - General in Council has, with the approval of the Secretary of State, laid down the following general principles to which effect has to be given in all departments in all provinces :-  (a) when report is built up on the individual opinions as noted of different departmental superiors in gradation, it is only the opinion as accepted by the highest authority which need be considered from the point of view of communication; (b) an officer should not at any time be kept ignorant of the reporting officer's opinion where his service is not considered satisfactory; criticism should be communicated promptly and should indicate in suitable language the nature of the defects in question; (c) the practice of discriminating between a remediable and irremediable defect should be abandoned as far as practicable, except that a certain degree of discretion should be regarded as permissible in communicating reported defects of an irremediable nature.
For instance, it might do more harm than good to inform an officer year after year that his brains are below average or that he is unduly sensitive; (d) the reporting officer should specifically state whether the defects of administrative authorities, who are enjoined with the task or recording entries in the confidential reports, are bound to comply with these instructions.
A slight deviation of the procedural aspect of the confidential reports may not have the consequence of invalidating the adverse remarks but a wholesale breach of substantive part of these instructions may give rise to an inference of non-application of mind in the recording of remarks in the annual confidential reports.
It may also be indicative or arbitrariness and casual approach adopted by a reporting/controlling/reviewing officer.
Column regarding integrity is most vital for the Government servants as well as the public services.
There can be no denying that apart from the requirement of efficiency in the performance of duties by a public servant his integrity is of utmost importance.
A dishonest public servant or one whose integrity is doubtful may cause greater injury to public interest than an inefficient public servant, adverse remarks regarding integrity of a public servant ordinarily result in supersession at the time of promotion and denial of various service benefits.
Both from the point of the view of the Government and the public servant, column regarding integrity has to be filled with greatest care and caution.
While it is imperative that the dishonest public servant must not be spared by the superior officer, the competent authority must take all precautions and discharge his duty as per the instructions before making adverse remarks regarding integrity.
In this background, it is necessary to observe that if adverse remarks regarding integrity are found to be casual perfunctory of cryptic or where it is found that the entries have been made for extraneous consideration or the material available on record is sufficiently indicative of the non-application of the mind, the Courts will scrutinise the challenge with greater anxiety.
Perusal of the extracts of the instructions, quoted above, also highlight the importance of entry pertaining to the integrity of the public servant.
In the letter dated 4101956, it has been enjoined on the competent authority to indicate reasons in support of his opinion that the officer is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt.
In the letter dated 12121985, the Government once again emphasised the need for greater care in recording of entry in the column of integrity.
The Government made it clear that ill-considered remarks based on inadequate observations cause lot of the damage to the official concerned and, therefore, there must exist material to substantiate the adverse opinion regarding integrity.
Letter of the Government regarding communication of adverse remarks also requires that the reporting officer should specifically point out whether the defects have already been brought to the notice of the officer concerned.
15.
It is, therefore, clear that an onerous obligation is placed on the reporting officer or other authority, who makes adverse remarks regarding integrity of an officer, to be extra cautious and careful while making adverse entry pertaining to integrity.
16.
In the light of above, it has to be examined as to whether respondent No. 4 has made adverse remarks pertaining to the integrity of the petitioner on the basis of some material or the entries are based on extraneous consideration and they are ill-conceived.
It has also to be determined as to whether consideration of the representations submitted by the petitioner has been fair and objective.
In this regard, it is useful to reiterate the fact that during his 11 years service career, none of the reporting officer of the petitioner has doubted his integrity and during the year under report, the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, has characterised the petitioner as an outstanding/very good officer.
He has given `A' category report of the petitioner describing him as honest, hard-working and disciplined officer.
It is, therefore, reasonable to presume that the reporting officer did not find anything adverse regarding integrity of the petitioner.
Adverse remark have been made only by respondent No. 4.
In his turn respondent No. 4 has made reference to a complaint of corruption received against the petitioner during his posting as Station House Officer, Police Station, Rania.
It is, therefore, more evident that while recording this adverse remarks, respondent No. 4 had in his mind one complaint received against the petitioner.
The petitioner has furnished an explanation regarding this complaint in his replication and has pointed out that this complaint was sent by Shri Jagdish Nehra, Public Health Minister, Haryana, to the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa.
The Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, got it enquired into by Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, who found nothing against the petitioner.
Thereafter, the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, made an order that the complaint be filed.
Adverse remarks have been made by respondent No. 4 on 1491992, i.e. more than one year after the complaint made by Shri Jagdish Nehra was filed by the Superintendent of Police in view of the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, who was deputed to enquire into the matter.
In our opinion, before respondent No. 4 made the said complaint as the basis for his adverse observation against the petitioner, it was absolutely necessary for him to find out as to what was the fate of the complaint.
Respondent No. 4 did not even bother to find out as to what had happened to the complaint and yet he has branded the petitioner as a corrupt officer.
Clearly respondent No. 4 has failed to apply his mind while recording the adverse remarks in the context of the complaint received during the petitioner's posting as Station House Officer, Police Station, Rania.
17.
Second part of the remarks made by respondent No. 4 is that petitioner's reputation for honesty was not good during his posting as Station House Officer, Police Station, Ding.
As per the confidential report, the petitioner was posted as Station House Officer, Police Station, Ding, from 21.9.1992.
It can, thus, be said that during the year 1991-92, the petitioner had remained posted at Police Station, Ding, for a period just over two months.
Respondent No. 4 might have been justified in casting aspersion on the reputation of the petitioner during this period of latter's posting as Station House Officer, Police Station, Ding.
However, that was possible only when he had some definite information regarding the reputation of the petitioner.
Admittedly, no written complaint exists on the record, which could substantiate the observation of respondent No. 4 and there is no record to show that alleged oral complaints made against the petitioner during his posting at Ding were got enquired into by respondent No. 4 and were found to be correct.
Thus, no material exists on record to justify the adverse remarks made by respondent No. 4 regarding the integrity of the petitioner.
It is, therefore, logical to hold that remarks made by respondent No. 4 are baseless.
18.
In this regard, we may once again mention that the Government's instructions, which have been reproduced hereinabove, clearly enjoin upon the officer making adverse remarks regarding integrity to give reasons as to why he suspects the integrity of the reporter to be doubtful.
In this case no extraordinary circumstances have been brought to our notice by the respondents as to why this requirement has not been complied with by respondent No. 4.
We are, therefore, constrained to observe that respondent No. 4 has recorded wholly vague and roundabout adverse remarks in a casual manner casting aspersion on the integrity of the petitioner.
This action of respondent No. 4 if looked in the context of the fact that the immediate reporting officer has given very good remarks regarding the integrity, performance and conduct of the petitioner, will have to be described as patently arbitrary.
Failure of respondent No. 4 to indicate that he had at any point of time pointed out to the petitioner that there were complaints against his integrity and he should make improvement in that direction further fortifies the conclusion that the remarks made by respondent No. 4 are baseless.
As we have already observed that instructions issued by the Government for preparation of the confidential reports do not have the force of law but wholesale violation thereof may lead to an inference that action of the reporting officer/controlling officer is arbitrary.
We may add that once the Government has issued instructions though administrative in character, all officers, howsoever high they may be, are bound to substantially comply with such instructions.
Merely because an officer happens to occupy a high position will not entitle him to ignore the administrative instructions issued by the Government.
What respondent No. 4 has done in the instant case is illustrative of the total violation of these instructions by him.
This is yet another reason that why the remarks made by respondent No. 4 should be held to be arbitrary and unjustified.
19.
Above all, it has to be noted that the petitioner has made a specific allegation against respondent No. 4 in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the writ petition.
He has stated that in FIR No. 30 of 1992, he had seized a truck and recovered 160 bags of poppy-husk.
Respondent No. 4, who was the then Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar, was interested in the matter and he had directed the petitioner to give a favourable report so that the truck may be released on sapurdari.
The petitioner refused to do so because the truck was required for further investigation.
Refusal of the petitioner annoyed respondent No. 4, who firstly transferred the petitioner from Ding to Bhiwani and then used his authority as controlling officer to tarnish his confidential report.
Though reply has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 4 jointly, the aforesaid allegations of the petitioner have been met with a bald denial.
No affidavit of respondent No. 4 has been filed.
Shri L D Narwal, who filed the affidavit in reply to the writ petition as well as in reply to the replication, has not stated that he had contacted respondent No. 4 in order to find out whether the allegations were correct or not.
Therefore, his affidavit denying the allegations made by the petitioner is inconsequential.
Respondent No. 4 has been impleaded as a party by name.
However, he has not chosen to file an affidavit.
(The last lines in para 19 commencing from ``Therefore the allegation ...... against the petitioner'' stand deleted from the judgment of High Court vide orders of Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 1041995 in Special Leave Application (Civil) No. 6510 of 1995 dated 1041995 (State of Haryana v. Amrik Singh).
This judgment is also reported immediately after this judgment at page 784 [Ed.].
)[Therefore, the allegation made by the petitioner that respondent No. 4 was interested in the release of the truck, seized by the petitioner with 160 bags of poppy-husk, has remained uncontroverted.
These uncontroverted allegations are sufficient for holding that respondent No. 4 has made the adverse remarks in the confidential reports of the petitioner due to personal annoyance and the ill- will and are, therefore, malicious.
Clearly the objectivity with which respondent No. 4 ought to have acted while recording his remarks as controlling officer was totally lost and he had acted with bias against the petitioner.]
[The last lines in para 19 commencing from ``Therefore the allegation ...... against the petitioner'' stand deleted from the judgment of High Court vide orders of Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 1041995 in Special Leave Application (Civil) No. 6510 of 1995 dated 1041995 (State of Haryana v. Amrik Singh).
This judgment is also reported immediately after this judgment at page 784 [Ed.].
Ed.]  20.
We may now examine the legality of the decision of respondent No. 2 of the representations made by the petitioner.
Annexure P-10 is the communication by which the petitioner has been informed that his representations have been considered in the light of the comments sent by respondent No. 4 and the adverse remarks have been fully established.
This communication further shows that there were several complaints against the petitioner from the general public and respectable of the area while he was posted at Police Station, Rania and Police Station, Ding, and, therefore, respondent No. 4 did not find any ground to disagree with the comments of the recording officer.
Instructions issued by the Government of Haryana do not contemplate communication of the reasons in support of a decision on the representation made by an officer against the adverse remarks.
In Union of India v. E G Nambudiri, 1991(2) SCT 142 (SC) : AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1216, the Supreme Court has held that an order communicating decision on representation against the adverse remarks is not rendered illegal merely because it does not contain reason.
At the same time, the apex Court has held that the administrative authority is not at liberty to pass orders without there being any reasons for the same and if the order communicating to the Government servant rejection of his representation does not contain any reasons, it is always open to the competent authority to place such reasons before the Court, which may have led to the rejection of the representation.
What has happened in the instant case is that on the representation made by the petitioner, respondent No. 4 - submitted his comments and on the basis of those comments, respondent No. 2 rejected the representation made by the petitioner.
Interestingly, in his comments on the representation made by the petitioner, respondent No. 4 has gone far beyond the remarks made by him in the confidential report of the petitioner.
In his comments, respondent No. 4 has described the petitioner as a thoroughly corrupt Sub Inspector and he has also tried to implicate family of the petitioner by alleging that links of maternal uncle of the representationist were of undesirable nature and that his father had along with one constable of districts Hisar and Sirsa harboured terrorists.
From what source respondent No. 4 came to know about the family background of the petitioner has not been disclosed in Annexure R-1.
In his entire service career of 11 years, the petitioner has not been charged with the allegation of having any link with undesirable elements.
Therefore, respondent No. 4 has acted in a most arbitrary manner while trying to malign the petitioner by raising the bogey of alleged connection of the petitioner's family with terrorists.
Surely, respondent No. 4 was aware of the fact that once he links the petitioner's family with terrorists, an opinion against the petitioner is bound to be formed.
It is indeed unfortunate that respondent No. 4 should have resorted to such tactics in his zeal to justify the adverse remarks.
He has once again referred to the complaints of Shri Jagdish Nehra and Shri Lachhman Dass Arora.
Regarding Shri Jagdish Nehra's complaint, we have already mentioned that on investigation, it was found to be without substance.
Complaint made by Shri Lachhman Dass Arora does not exist on the record of the Government.
It is really surprising that an officer of the rank of Deputy Inspector General of Police does not get any enquiry made into the complaint made by a Minister of the Government and yet uses the so-called complaint to record adverse entries.
It is also not understandable as to why respondent No. 4, who was the controlling officer, did not take any action against the petitioner if he found that the petitioner was thoroughly a corrupt officer.
Indirectly he has tried to cast serious aspersion on the reporting officer, who was none other than the then Superintendent of Police, Sirsa.
The said reporting officer has given very good rating to the petitioner on all counts, including integrity.
The remarks made by respondent No. 4 would suggest that the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, was giving high rating of integrity to a corrupt officer.
The implicit suggestion made by respondent No. 4 leaves much to be desired.
In our opinion, the consideration of representations made by respondent No. 2 was greatly influenced by the comments of respondent No. 4 and once we find that the comments made by respondent No. 4 are extraneous, it has to be held that the decision taken by respondent No. 2 is also vitiated.
21.
For the reasons aforesaid, we allow the writ petition and quash the adverse remarks made in the annual confidential report of the petitioner for the period between 1651991 and 3131992.
Rejection of the representation of the petitioner vide Annexure P-10 is also declared illegal and is hereby quashed.
Petition allowed.