MM Kumar, J - The petitioners who are legal heir of deceased Smt. Neelam Khanduja have filed the instant petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant them the benefits of Haryana Government Employees Group Insurance Scheme, 1985 (for brevity, `Group Insurance Scheme'), Annexure P-2.
An employee who becomes member of the `Group Insurance Scheme' is entitled to payment of Rs. 20,000/-.
2.
Facts in brief are that deceased Smt. Neelam Khanduja was working as Headmistress in Government Primary School, Kishanpura, Block Thanesar I, District Kurukshetra.
On 2081985, the respondent-State published `Group Insurance Scheme' in the official gazette in exercise of powers under Article 309 of the Constitution Clause 3 of the Group Insurance Scheme which is relevant for deciding the controversy reads as under :  "(3).
Application of Group Insurance Scheme A member of the service shall subscribe to the Group Insurance Scheme set out above in the Schedule and shall be eligible to the benefits of the Scheme in accordance herewith : Provided that a member of the service who was appointed before the commencement of these rules may exercise option not to be governed by the Group Insurance Scheme.
The option should be exercised by 30th September, 1985.
Those employees who do not exercise their option in the prescribed form 3, shall be deemed to have become member of the Scheme from the date the scheme comes into force.
The option once exercised (or not exercised) shall be final."
3.
According to clause 3 of the Group Insurance Scheme, a member of the service is to subscribe to the `Group Insurance Scheme' as set out in the schedule.
The proviso further shows that a member of the service who was appointed before commencement of the scheme could exercise option not to become member of the scheme.
The option was to be furnished by 3091985.
The employees who fail to be the members of the Group Insurance Scheme or fail to give option, they were to be considered as member of the Group Insurance Scheme from the date of commencement of the scheme i.e. 141986.
Smt. Neelam Khanduja having not exercised the option is claimed to have become member of the Group Insurance Scheme in pursuance to above referred clause 3 of the scheme.
The subscription of Rs. 20/- was to be deducted w.e.f.
April, 1986 and for the month of April, 1986 the subscription in respect of Smt. Neelam Khanduja was deducted.
However, she had withdrawn her option to become member of the Group Insurance Scheme in May, 1986 with a request to the respondents not to deduct instalment from her salary.
It is claimed that by subsequent instructions dated 2081985, the date of option was extended upto 3091985.
On 3051986 another letter was issued by the respondent-State for wider publicity of the scheme and as per the instructions issued vide letter dated 3051986 the date for exercising option was extended to 3061986.
Unfortunately Smt. Neelam Khanduja died on 2781986 in an accident.
4.
On the last date of hearing, Mr. HN Khanduja petitioner in person has pointed out that a note in the service book of Smt. Neelam Khanduja would show that she has exercised option on 1461986 and, therefore, she became member of the Group Insurance Scheme.
The Court directed the production of service book which has been produced today in Court to show that there is a written note dated 1461986 pasted in the service book showing that Smt. Neelam Khanduja has intimated that she wanted to become member of the Group Insurance Scheme.
5.
Mr. HN Khanduja petitioner has submitted that once Smt. Neelam Khanduja had exercised option in April, 1986, then the option should have been considered as final and her subsequent withdrawal of the option in May, 1986 could not have been acted upon.
The learned counsel has also referred to a pasted communication on the service book dated 1461986 showing that Smt. Neelam Khanduja had exercised option in pursuance to the instructions, Annexure P-6 dated 3051986 extending the date of option to 3061986.
However, he has not been able to satisfy the query raised by the Court as to why no deduction of instalment of Rs. 20/- from the salary of Smt. Neelam Khanduja was made for subsequent months of June, July and August.
Mr. Khanduja states that it is the fault of the official concerned and the petitioners cannot suffer on that account.
6.
Mr. SS Brar, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has argued that Mr. Khanduja has been working as a Block Education Officer in the respondent- department and the note dated 1461986 pasted in the service book is not of any help to his case because firstly the note has been pasted at a page on which the entries are of the year 1981.
Moreover, neither the note contains any endorsement nor any entry in the service book has been made on the basis of the pasted written note.
Such a note, therefore, cannot constitute a basis for concluding that Smt. Khanduja had opted for the `Group Insurance Scheme' and became its member.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that note dated 1461986 with regard to exercise of option alleged to have been recorded by Smt. Neelam Khanduja cannot constitute basis for recording a finding that Smt. Neelam Khanduja had become member of the `Group Insurance Scheme' because no instalment of Rs. 20/- has been deducted on or after June, 1986.
Moreover the so-called written note of option by Smt. Khanduja is found pasted on a page concerning the year 1981.
Mr. HN Khanduja himself has been working as Block Education Officer in the respondent-department.
The absence of deductions of instalments from the salary of Smt. Neelam Khanduja amply proves that this note has been pasted later in a huff and is an after-thought.
Moreover, on the basis of the pasted written note no endorsement nor any entry in the service book has been made authenticating that note.
In the instructions issued on 2621986, Annexure P-4 it has been made clear that the Group Insurance Scheme consists of two parts, namely, Insurance Fund and Savings Fund.
With the object of providing insurance cover to every member of the scheme, a portion from the subscription is to be credited to the Insurance Fund which was to be held in the Public Account of the respondent-State.
The balance amount of the subscription is to be credited towards Savings Fund which has been held by the respondent-State in Public Account.
So it is clear that without contribution to the Group Insurance Scheme, no common fund is created for the non-members and hence they would not be entitled to any benefit.
Therefore, no direction to the respondent-State could be issued for releasing the benefit of Group Insurance Scheme, Annexure P-2 to the petitioner.
Had Smt. Neelam Khanduja opted and become member of the Group Insurance Scheme, deductions from her salary till the date of her death i.e. 2781986 should have been made.
8.
The argument of Mr. Khanduja that instructions dated 3051986 to the effect that instructions dated 3051986, Annexure P-6 have given Smt. Neelam Khanduja a fresh right to exercise option cannot be accepted because those instructions were not available to an employee who has already exercised the option as the same was final.
In May, 1986 Smt. Neelam Khanduja had opted out of the Group Insurance Scheme and her instalment was not deducted for May, June, July and August.
Therefore, there is no merit in this submission and the same is rejected.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.