GS Singhvi, J - This appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against order dated 2811997 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing C.W.P.
No. 4937 of 1994 filed by the appellants for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus to the respondents to depute them to the Lower School Course.
2.
Appellant No. 1-Balwant Singh joined Haryana Police as Constable on 25111986 in District Hisar.
Appellant No. 2-Ramesh Kumar joined service as Constable in District Jind on 27.11.1986.
In March, 1989, they were posted as Commandos at Commando Police Lines, Karnal.
In January, 1994, they were deputed for Refresher Course at Haryana Armed Police Complex, Madhuban (Karnal).
While they were undergoing Refresher Course, B-I test was held in their respective districts for selecting suitable candidates for Lower School Course.
The appellants could not take the test because they were not informed about the date, time and schedule thereof.
As a consequence, they were not promoted as Head Constables in their respective district cadres, though they were promoted as ad hoc Head Constables in 1998-99 at Commando Police Lines, Karnal.
On coming to know about B-I test held for the members of their parent cadres, the appellants made representations dated 721994 and 921994 (marked as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition) with the request that they may be allowed to appear before the higher officers.
On 941994, they jointly represented to the Incharge, Commando Refresher Course to certify whether any information was sent to them about B-I test.
On receipt of their representation (marked as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition), the officers supervising the Commando Refresher Course recorded the following notings :-  "Sir, I had seen the record of the Commando Refresher Course and there is no TPM or PRM in regard to B-I test.
Report is submitted.
Rohtas Singh.
AMHC, Commando Ref.
Course on 931994.
CDI According to the report of MHC, I verify and certify that no information or TPM has been received in this office.
941994 Sd/-  CDI, Commando Ref.
Course, Madhuban."
3.
In the meanwhile, Superintendent of Police Commando, Haryana, Karnal, on the basis of the approval granted by Inspector General of Police, Railways and Commando, Haryana Panchkula vide his TPM No. 1421-43/A-I dated 1621994, issued order dated 23.3.1994 (Annexure P-3) for repatriation of the appellants and ten other Head Constables to their respective districts.
4.
Soon thereafter, the appellants filed the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and prayed that the respondents may be directed to depute them to the Lower School Course.
In paragraphs 10 to 12 of the writ petition, they categorically averred that they did not receive any information about B-I test held in their respective districts.
They relied on the orders passed by this Court in HC Rishi Raj v. State of Haryana, 1993(2) SCT 777 (P&H) : C.W.P.
No. 15075 of 1992 and C.W.P.
No. 9047 of 1993 - Chand Singh v. State of Haryana and pleaded that denial to them of the opportunity to appear in B-I test and undergo Lower School Course was violative of their fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
5.
In the written statement filed by Superintendent of Police, Hisar on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and 5 to 6, it was averred that petitioner No. 1 (appellant No. 1 herein) was duly informed about B-I test held at Police Lines, Hisar in the month of January, 1994 through Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal vide his office letter Nos. 19904-46/CRC dated 2121993, 20542/65 dated 2121993, 17-41 dated 3111994, 443-75/CRC dated 1011994 and 522-59 dated 1211994 (marked as Annexures R-1 to R-5), but he failed to appear in the test.
A similar written statement was filed by respondent No. 4.
He too averred that appellant No. 2 was duly informed about B-I test held at Police Lines, Jind in the month of January, 1994 through Superintendent of Police, Commando, Haryana, Madhuban vide his letter Nos. 19904-6/CRC dated 2121993, 20543-65 dated 20.12.1993, 17-41/CRC dated 311994 and 598-637/CRC dated 1311994 (marked as Annexures R-1 to R-4 and filed with the written statement of respondent No. 4).
6.
The learned Single Judge noted the rival pleadings and held that the failure of the writ petitioners (appellants herein) to controvert the averments contained in the written statements was sufficient to draw an inference that they were duly informed about B-I test.
He discarded the notings recorded by the officers supervising the Refresher Course by observing that the appellants had no explanation as to how they could get copy of the notings.
The learned Single Judge also relied on the fact that the appellants had not appeared in B-I test held earlier and dismissed the writ petition.
For the sake of reference, the relevant portions of the order passed by the learned Single Judge are reproduced below :-  "It is the admitted position that the petitioners had been deputed to the Commando Force in March, 1989.
On January 1, 1994, they had been deputed to attend a fresher course for Commandos at the police training college, Madhuban.
The B-I test was admittedly held while the petitioners were still attending the refresher course.
It is not the petitioners' case that they had asked for being repatriated to their respective districts so as to enable them to appear in the selection test.
However, they complain that they were not informed about the dates on which the test had to be held.
The respondents dispute this.
It has been categorically averred on their behalf that due intimation has been sent.
The petitioners have not controverted the averments in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents through any affidavit or replication.
In this situation it cannot be said that the claim made on behalf of the respondents is false.
Mr. Balhara pointed out that the representation submitted by the petitioners, a copy of which is at Annexure P-5, it had been duly observed that there was no intimation regarding the test.
Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the respondents had expressed certain reservations regarding the genuineness of this document.
The representation at Annexure P-5 does not appear to be addressed to any officer.
It also does not bear any date.
The fact that the petitioners had been sent back on 1421994 and 231994 respectively.
Consequently it is reasonable to assume that the representation was submitted after 231994.
Was it sent by post, to whom it was addressed, there is no answer to these questions.
Even the remarks recorded on this document by Rohtash Singh or any other person have not been endorsed to the petitioners.
How did they get a copy there is no explanation on the record.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration it is not possible to hold that the petitioners had no intimation about the date of the test.
There is another aspect of the matter that the petitioners have been in service of the department since the year 1986.
They never appeared in the B-I test held till the year 1994.
In this situation, it appears that the petitioners have suddenly shown interest in the B-I test only because they have procured an endorsement on their representation that intimation regarding the test had not been received otherwise it is not understood as to why they had not shown interest in the B-I test during the previous years."
7.
Shri IS Balhara argued that the reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge for holding that the appellants had been duly informed about B-I test conducted in their respective districts is per se erroneous and the conclusion recorded by him that they had failed to avail the opportunity to appear in B-I test is perverse and, therefore, the impugned order may be set aside.
He submitted that the alleged failure of the appellants to appear in B-I test held prior to January, 1994 had no bearing on the question whether they were duly informed by the Superintendents of Police of their respective districts about B-I test held in January, 1994 and argued that consideration of this irrelevant factor has the effect of vitiating the order of the learned Single Judge.
Shri Balhara then submitted that no evidence was produced by the respondents before the Court to show that the letters allegedly sent by the Superintendents of Police, Hisar and Jind were received by the Incharge, Commando Refresher Course and he, in turn, informed the appellants about the impending test in order to enable them to apply for being relieved to join the same and the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by relying on the bald assertions contained in the written statements that the appellants had been duly informed.
8.
Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana fairly conceded that no document was produced before the learned Single Judge to show that the communications sent by the Superintendents of Police, Hisar and Jind had been received by the Incharge, Commando Refresher Course, Karnal and he had informed the appellants about the impending B-I test.
He, however, tried to support the impugned order by arguing that the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by relying on the averments contained in the written statements that the appellants had been duly informed about B-I test.
9.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments and carefully scrutinised the record.
In our opinion, the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by holding that the appellants had been duly informed about B-I test held at Hisar and Jind.
A perusal of the averments contained in Paragraphs 10 to 12 of the writ petition and the written statements show that while the appellants had categorically averred that they did not get any information about B-I test held in January, 1994 and their assertion was fully supported by the contents of Annexure P-5, the respondents made a bald averment that information regarding B-I test had been conveyed to the appellants through Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal.
However, they did not produce any document to show that Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal had received the communications/messages sent by Superintendents of Police, Hisar and Jind and conveyed the contents thereof to the appellants either directly or through Incharge, Commando Refresher Course.
Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal, who was impleaded as respondent No. 6 and Incharge, Commando Refresher Course, Madhuban, who was impleaded as respondent No. 5 must be having the letters/communications/messages, if any, received from Superintendents of Police, Hisar and Jind regarding holding of B-I test.
They must also be in possession of the documents through which information about B-I test was given to the appellants.
However, no such record was produced before the learned Single Judge.
Incharge, Commando Refresher Course (respondent No. 5) was the best person to produce evidence showing that he had informed the appellants about B-I test being held at Hisar and Jind, but he did not produce any such evidence.
In this view of the matter, the conclusion recorded by the learned Single Judge that the appellants had been duly informed about B-I test cannot but be treated as perverse.
10.
We are further of the view that the bald averment contained in the two written statements filed by the respondents that due intimation about B-I test had been sent, could not have been relied upon by the learned Single Judge for holding that the appellants, who were then undergoing Commando Refresher Course, had been informed about the date, time and place of B-I test held at Hisar and Jind because no evidence was placed before the Court to show that the letters sent by the Superintendents of Police of the two districts were conveyed to them.
11.
As a logical corollary to the aforementioned conclusion, we hold that the appellants were not given opportunity to appear in B-I test and thereby they were denied opportunity to undergo Lower School Course.
12.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
13.
The issue which remains to be considered as to what relief, if any, can be given to the appellants.
Shri IS Balhara gave out that during the pendency of the writ petition/appeal, the appellants were allowed to undergo Lower School Course and they have successfully completed the same.
He further gave out that the appellants are continuing as ad hoc Head Constables.
This has not been controverted by the learned Assistant Advocate General.
In this view of the matter, we feel that ends of justice would be met by directing the respondents to give all service benefits to the appellants which were given to the Constables, who had passed B-I test held at Hisar on 28/29.1.1994 and at Jind on 30/3111994 and thereafter successfully passed the Lower School Course.
Ordered accordingly.
The needful be done within four months of the presentation of a copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.