GS Singhvi, J - The petitioners have generally prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint them as Assistant District Attorney Grade II against 5% quota reserved for ministerial staff under the Punjab Assistant District Attorneys Grade II (Class III) Service Rules, 1991 (for short, `the Rules').
In Civil Writ Petition No. 1152 of 1992, the petitioners have also prayed for striking down the amendment made in the Rules vide notification dated 24121991.
2.
The petitioners are presently working as Assistants/Stenographers in the offices of District Attorneys in the State of Punjab.
All of them are law graduates.
As on the dates of filing of the writ petitions they had completed more than 10 years service as Assistants and Stenographers.
They have pleaded that they are entitled to be promoted as Assistant District Attorneys against 5% quota reserved for ministerial staff in accordance with unamended Rule 7 of the Rules against the vacancies which had become available prior to 24121991 and they cannot be deprived of this right by applying amended Rule 7.
In Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1821 of 2002 filed in Civil Writ Petition No. 1258 of 1992, petitioner-Pyare Lal Thapar has averred that in all 29 posts of Assistant District Attorneys Grade II had fallen vacant before the amendment of the Rules and the eligible members of ministerial staff are entitled to be promoted against 5% of the vacancies.
3.
In their written statements, the respondents have not controverted the fact that the petitioners are law graduates and have sufficient experience which could entitle them to be considered for promotion as Assistant District Attorneys against 5% quota earmarked for ministerial staff under Rule 7 of the Rules (unamended).
However, they have resisted the claim of the petitioners by asserting that in view of amendment made vide notification dated 24121991, the post of Assistant District Attorney can be filled only by direct recruitment.
4.
Shri AK Walia, learned counsel for the petitioners relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah & others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852, AA Calton v. The Director of Education and another, AIR 1983 SC 1143, Rajinder Gandhi v. Union of India and others, 1983(3) SLR 260 and Kulbir Singh v. State of Punjab, 2002(1) SCT 615 (P&H) and argued that the petitioners have the right to be considered for promotion against 5% vacancies of Assistant District Attorneys which became available before 24121991.
This right of theirs cannot be stultified by applying amended Rule 7 against the existing vacancies.
He submitted that the amendment vide notification dated 24121991 is not retrospective and, therefore, the petitioners can not be deprived of their right to be promoted against the vacancies which had become available prior to the amendment.
Shri AK Walia also questioned the constitutionality of the amendment made in Rule 7 of the Rules by arguing that the same is liable to be struck down on the ground of violation of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India because the amendment has the effect of depriving the petitioners of their right to be considered for promotion for all times to come.
He submitted that the Assistants and Stenographers working in the offices of District Attorneys have more than sufficient experience to conduct the cases in the Courts and, therefore, there is no justification to exclude them from consideration.
Shri Walia also emphasised that if the avenues are kept open for experienced persons like the petitioners, then it would be in larger public interest.
Learned counsel then referred to letter dated 12101988 (Anneuxre P-3 in Civil Writ Petition No. 1258 of 1992) to show that the employees holding ministerial posts in other departments were induced to give up their accrued service benefits and take up appointment as Assistants in the Directorate of Prosecution and Litigation with a promise to be considered for promotion as Assistant District Attorney Grade II, Assistant District Attorneys Grade I and then as District Attorneys and argued that the respondents cannot apply the amended Rules so as to deprive the employees, like Pyare Lal Thapar of their right to be promoted on the post of Assistant District Attorney Grade II.
5.
Ms. Rita Kohli, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab fairly conceded that the petitioners possess the academic qualifications and experience necessary for promotion to the post of Assistant District Attorney but argued that the petitioners can not be considered for promotion in view of the argument made in Rule 7 of the Rules.
She submitted that the amendment made vide notification dated 24121991 would operate against the existing vacancies as well as the future vacancies.
She pointed out that all 29 vacancies of Assistant District Attorneys were filled up by issuing advertisement dated 29121991 and, therefore, no relief should now be given to the petitioners.
6.
I have given serious thought to the respective arguments and perused the record.
In my opinion, the petitioners are entitled to be considered for promotion against 5% posts of Assistant District Attorneys which were required to be filled from amongst the ministerial staff and the amendment made vide notification dated 24121991 can not adversely affect their right of consideration against the existing vacancies.
In YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others (supra) and other judgments on which reliance has been placed by Shri Walia, the Supreme Court and this Court have consistently held that the amendment made in the recruitment rules can not be applied with retrospective effect so as to deprive the eligible employees of their legitimate rights to be considered for promotion against the vacancy which had become available prior to the amendment.
The respondents have not controverted the averments contained in the writ petitions and miscellaneous applications filed by the petitioners that as many as 29 posts of Assistant District Attorneys were available prior to the amendment on 24121991.
Therefore, the petitioners are entitled to be promoted against 5% of those vacancies subject to adjudgement of their suitability.
7.
The plea of estoppel raised by petitioner-Pyare Lal Thapar also merits acceptance.
There is no dispute between the parties that while he was working as Senior Clerk in Public Health Department, Pyare Lal Thapar applied for appointment as Assistant by transfer in pursuance of memo dated 12101988 (Annexure P-3 in C.W.P.
No. 1258 of 1992), which was circulated by Legal Remembrancer and the Director, Prosecution and Litigation, Punjab.
Paragraph 2 of that letter reads as under :-  "It has been decided to fill up some posts of assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640 (Revised) by transfer from other Departments of the State Government.
Accordingly, applications of the eligible officials who are Graduates and have worked as Clerks for not less than seven years and have passed the Assistant Grade Examination alongwith the upto-date ACPS files and Bio-data were called for by 1991988 vide the Department Memo.
under reference.
It was also stated therein that the officials who are working as Assistants or are Law Graduates with the working experience as Clerks for a period of seven years and have qualified the Assistant Grade Examination will be given preference.
It was further pointed out that the Law Graduate Assistants of this Department have 5% promotion quota in the cadre of Assistant District Attorneys Grade II and after being promoted as AD-II they can look up for promotion to the post of Assistant District Attorney Grade-I and thereafter as District Attorneys on turn."
8.
As on the date of submission of application, petitioner-Pyare Lal Thapar had completed 11 years of service.
He gave up the benefit of that service because the government had promised the persons desirous of seeking appointment as Assistants by transfer that they will be eligible for promotion to the posts of Assistant District Attorneys Grade II, Assistant District Attorneys Grade I and finally as District Attorneys.
If the promise had not been made, Pyare Lal Thapar may have chosen to stay back in his parent department and avail chances of promotion.
In my view, after having induced him to forego 11 years service and join the new department, the respondents cannot turn around and say that they are not bound by the promise made in memo dated 12101988.
9.
However, I do not find any valid ground to strike down amendment dated 24121991 simply because the petitioners may lose their chance of consideration for promotion against future vacancies.
It is settled law that in exercise of his power under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Governor can amend the recruitment rules and such rules can not be struck down unless the same take away the vested rights of the employees.
The future chance of promotion can not be equated with vested right to be promoted to the particular post.
Therefore, amended Rule 7 of the Rules cannot be declared unconstitutional simply because after 24121991, the petitioners may not be entitled to be considered for promotion as Assistant District Attorneys against the future vacancies.
10.
In the result, the writ petitions are partly allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for promotion as Assistant District Attorneys against 5% quota earmarked for ministerial staff out of the total vacancies which became available prior to 24121991 and promote the suitable candidates.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed within a period of three months from the date of receipt/submission of copy of this order.
The petitioners may obtain dasti copies on payment of the fee prescribed for urgent application.
Petitions partly allowed.