GS Singhvi, J - Promotions of respondents Nos. 3 and 4 to the posts of Secretaries, Market Committees, have been challenged in this petition.
The petitioners have prayed for quashing of Annexures P-7 and P-8 and for declaring rule 8(2) read with Item No 26 of Appendix `B ' of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class-II) Service Rules, 1988, to be ultra vires to the provisions of the Constitution.
They have also prayed for a direction to the respondent-Board for grant of consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner No. 1 joined service as Fee Collector-cum-Clerk in the Market Committee, Patti, district Amritsar, after he had passed Matriculation examination.
He was promoted as Accountant in the pay scale of Rs 160 - 400 with effect from 161970.
Subsequently, he was transferred to Market Committee, Tarn Taran, district Amritsar.
Petitioner No. 2 passed the Higher Secondary Examination in 1964 and joined service as Auction Recorder in the Market Committee, Amritsar, with effect from 19.10.1968.
He was promoted as Accountant with effect from 171974.
In the joint seniority list of Head Clerks/Head Clerk-cum-Accountant/Accountants issued by the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh, on 2381984, the names of the petitioners appear at sr. Nos. 50 and 82 respectively and that of respondent No. 3 appears at Sr. No. 61.
The name of respondent No. 4 does not appear in that seniority list.
3.
The posts of Head Clerks and Accountants were in a common pay scale till the coming into force of the revised scales with effect from 111986, with effect from which date the post of Head Clerk was given the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 and the post of Accountant was given the pay scale of Rs. 1800 - 3200 with special Pay of Rs 80/- PM Upto 151988 recruitment and conditions of service of the persons appointed in the service of the various Market Committees were regulated by administrative instructions issued by the Government.
The Government had granted approval to the proposal of respondent- Board regarding recruitment to the posts of Secretaries by two methods, namely, direct recruitment and promotion.
On 251988 respondent-Board promulgated the rules of 1988 and as per rule 8(2) of these rules the posts of a Secretaries Market Committees are required to be filled 40% by direct recruitment and 60% by promotion.
These rules also provide that those Head Clerks and Accountants who possess the qualifications of BA or B.Sc.
(Agriculture) and who have 5 years minimum experience are eligible to be considered for promotions.
4.
Petitioners have stated that they were having the requisite qualifications for promotion to the posts of Secretaries, Market Committees, in view of the administrative decisions, which held field till 151988 and against the vacancies which were available upto that date a right had come to vest in the petitioners to be promoted as Secretaries, However, by introducing new qualifications in the rules of 1988, the respondent Board has deprived them of their eligibility to be considered for promotion.
By taking a reference to the order dated 26.8.1992 passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1698 of 1992 (Baldev Krishan and others v. State of Punjab and others), 1993(1) SCT 152 (P&H) the petitioners have pleaded that while accepting the writ petition of Baldev Krishan and others this Court had directed respondent-Board to make promotions against 43 vacancies on the basis of the qualifications prevalent prior to the commencement of 1988 rules.
However, in the process of making promotions, in view of the directions given by the Court on 26.8.1992 and various other orders passed in different petitions, the Board has arbitrarily and unlawfully promoted respondents Nos. 3 and 4 by orders Annexures P-7/T and P.8/T.
Petitioners' grievance is that while respondent No. 3 is junior to petitioner No. 1 in the cadre of Accountants, respondent No. 4 does not even figure in the joint seniority list and yet without considering their cases these respondents have been promoted as Secretaries.
Constitutional validity of rule 8(2) and item No. 26 of Appendix `B' has been challenged on the ground that respondent-Board has arbitrarily changed the eligibility conditions for recruitment to the posts of Secretaries, Market Committees, by the process of promotion and in this manner the right of the petitioners to be considered for promotion has been obliterated.
5.
In its written statement the Board has pleaded that each Market Committee is a separate juristic person and recruitment to various posts encadred in the services of the various Market Committees is made by the respective Market Committees is made by the respective Market Committees and, therefore, the petitioners cannot have any grievance against the promotions of respondents Nos. 3 and 4.
Some Market Committees categorised as `A ' Class or Special Class Market Committees have the posts of Head Clerks as well as Accountants, whereas the other Market Committees have only the posts of Accountants.
According to respondent No. 2 the posts of Head Clerk was always treated superior to that of an Accountant despite identity of pay scales.
A person holding the post of Accountant was entitled to be promoted as Head Clerk and on such promotion he was allowed the benefit of increment.
On 17101983 the respondent-Board clubbed the three cadres, namely, the cadres of Head Clerks, Head Clerk-cum-Account/Accountants but the decision of the Board was not approved by the Government.
Rather the Government conveyed rejection of the proposal submitted by the Board vide its order dated 15121987 (Annexure R.2/ 1).
The joint seniority list prepared by the Board was challenged in C.W.P.
No. 5039 of 1984 (Surjit Singh and others v. State of Punjab).
The petition was allowed by a learned Single Judge of this Court on 1351991 vide Annexure R2/2.
Further assertion of the respondent-Board is that respondent No. 3 was in the cadre of Head Clerks and respondent No. 4 was in the cadre of Accountants.
That respondent belongs to scheduled castes category.
It has further been stated that respondent No. 3 was promoted as Secretary from the category of Head Clerks and respondent No. 4 was promoted against the roster point reserved for the members of scheduled castes.
The Board has also pleaded that it has undertaken the exercise of promotions in view of the various orders passed by High Court in C.W.P.
No. 16422 of 1988, C.W.P.
No. 13498 of 1991 filed by respondent No. 3, and C.W.P.
No. 17223 of 1991 filed by respondent No. 4.
The Board has also stated that in compliance of the directions given by the High Court, 43 vacancies were considered for recruitment according to the executive instructions which were in force upto 151988 and 33% of 43 vacancies were filled from amongst the Head Clerks and Accountants who had 10 years' experience.
6.
In his separate reply, respondent No. 3 has claimed that he was appointed as Accountant in the Market Committee, Talwandi, with effect from 1381969 vide Annexures R.3/1 and R 3/2 and in the list containing service particulars of the Head Clerks and Accountants (Annexure R.3/4) the name of respondent No. 3 was included at Sr. No. 63 and that of petitioner No. 1 at Sr. No. 69.
Subsequently, the seniority list was changed vide Annexure P2.
Against that, the petitioner had made a representation to the Board but the same was never decided.
His case was considered for promotion in accordance with the directions given by the High Court and on having been found suitable by the Selection Committee the respondent-Board issued promotion order Annexure P.7.
Reference has also been made by respondent No3 to circular dated 2571986 showing that the Board itself was considering the objections against the joint seniority list dated 2381982.
Respondent No. 4 has pleaded that he is the senior most official belonging to the category of scheduled castes and his case was considered for promotion in accordance with the directions given by the High Court on 22111991 in C.W.P.
No. 17223 of 1991.
He has pleaded that against the reserved vacancy the petitioner has no right of consideration because he belongs to general category.
7.
A joint replication has been filed by the petitioners to the replies of all the respondents.
Therein they have questioned the right of respondent No. 4 to be considered for promotion against the post reserved for scheduled castes by pleading that persons senior to respondent No. 4 were not considered for promotion against the reserved category and the respondent-Boart has not clarified as to what were the roster points and in what manner the Board had considered the (sic) of respondent No. 4 as a member of scheduled castes.
A new plea raised by the petitioners in the replication is that they had all along enjoyed the pay scale and status of Head Clerk.
They have also pleaded that nature of duties and functions of Head Clerks and Accountants is identical and, therefore, they had a preferential right of promotion qua respondent No. 4.
Regarding the order dated 1351991 (Annexure R.2/2) passed by the High Court as well as the order Annexure A R2/1 passed by the Government, the petitioners have pleaded that they were not a parties before the Government or before the High Court and, therefore, those orders are not binding on them.
The petitioners have also produced two seniority lists of Accountants to contend that they were senior to respondents Nos. 3 and 4.
8.
The first argument of Shri Dass is that rule 8(2) of 1988 Rules read with Item No. 26 of Appendix `B' suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and discrimination inasmuch as that rule takes away the eligibility of the existing incumbents to be promoted as Secretaries.
Argument of the learned counsel is that in terms of the executive instructions which were in force till 151988 a person having the academic qualification of matriculation was eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Secretary but that eligibility has been arbitrarily taken away by virtue of the qualifications incorporated in the rules of 1988.
Shri Dass contended that the petitioners had acquired a vested right to be considered for promotion in accordance with the qualification of Matriculation and, therefore, it was not permissible to the rule-making authority to introduce a new qualification so as to render them ineligible for all times to come.
This (sic) reasons, Firstly, a look at the pleadings of the petitioners shows that they have not laid any foundation to raise the plea of discrimination or arbitrariness.
The petitioners have not shown as to what is the nature of duties required to be performed by the Secretaries of the Market Committees and that there is no relation whatsoever between the qualification of graduation in Arts or Science with Agriculture and for job requirement of the post.
In the absence of a strong foundation having been laid in the petition for assailing the constitutional validity of the rule this Court is not at all required to delve deep into the question of vires of rule 8(2) read with item No. 26 of Appendix `B' in the rules of 1988.
It has time and again been laid down by the Supreme Court that burden to prima facie establish arbitrariness or unconstitutionality of a statutory instrument is upon the petitioner and if he has not pleaded material facts or has not laid the foundation for raising the plea of discrimination, the Court is not entitled to strike down the provision on the ground of violation of Article 14 or 16.
In Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi and others v. state of UP and others, 1991(1) SCT 575 (SC) : (1991) 1 S.C.C.
212, the Supreme Court observed that though every State action must conform to the criteria of reasonableness and fairness, there is a presumption of the validity of the State action and the burden is on the person who alleges violation of Article 14 to prove the assertion.
9.
Similarly in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Pramod Bhartiya, 1993(1) SCT 138 (SC) : AIR SC 286 , the Supreme Court held that where a petitioner sought relief on the ground of violation of Article 14, primarily the burden is on the petitioner to establish the plea of (sic) no relief can be given to petitioner.
10.
Secondly, the facts which have been brought on record by the parties show that for the first time statutory rules have been framed in the year 1988 for the purpose of regulating recruitment as also the conditions of service of the persons to be appointed to various posts encadred in the rules.
Till the framing of 1988 rules, the recruitment used to be made as per the executive instructions.
No doubt, the petitioners are justified in claiming that the vacancies which were available prior to the coming into force of the 1988 rules should be filled by appointment of persons who were eligible as per the qualifications specified in the executive instructions, but they cannot claim that an indefeasible right had come to vest in them and while framing statutory rules the respondent-Board could not have prescribed other academic qualifications for appointment by promotion.
The chances of promotion cannot be equated with a right to be promoted or even with a right to be considered for promotion.
Therefore, a mere curtailment in the avenues of promotion cannot ipso facto give rise to an inference that the action taken by the State or its instrumentalities suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or unconstitutionality.
It is a well recognised proposition of law that an employer has the right and the power to prescribe qualifications for recruitment to various posts.
This can be done by framing statutory instrument or by issuing executive instructions.
Under a particular set of statutory provisions or executive instructions the employee may have a right to be considered for promotion but once an amendment is made in the rules or executive instructions and such amendment operates prospectively, the employee cannot (sic) as per the old rules or executive instructions has been taken away.
What qualifications should be prescribed for recruitment to a particular post it is primarily the domain of the employer.
A Court of law is ill-equipped to decide as to what type of qualifications would be necessary for recruitment to particular service or cadre.
Interference by a Court in such matters can only be on the ground of patent violation of the constitutional provisions or arbitrariness.
11.
In Union of India v. Syed Mohd.
Raza Kazmi, 1992(2) SCT 495 (SC) : 1992 Supp.
(2) S.C.C.
534, the Supreme Court declared that it is for the department to decide on policies of promotion which will be consistent with the interest of all employees belonging to various cadres.
It is not for the administrative tribunal or for the Courts to interfere with this and to dictate the avenues of promotion which the department should provide for its various employees.
In Shri.
Jaghnath v. Union of India and another, 1992(3) SCT 406 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 126 bifurcation of Compositors of Government of India Presses into Grade I (Highly Skilled) and Grade II (Skilled) based on experience arising out of length of service was held to be based on a valid criteria.
In Jai Singh Dalal and others v. State of Haryana and another, 1993(2) SCT 230 (SC) : 1993 (1) S.L.R.
423, the Supreme Court held that even if a candidate is selected for appointment to a particular post, he does not have a right to be appointed and, therefore, if the Government had withdrawn the requisition sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission and had thereafter revised the eligibility criteria, petitioner cannot complain of violation of his right to be appointed.
In State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, 1974(1) S.L.R.
536; Union of India v. Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli, 1973(1) S.L.R.
1234; Roop Chand Adlakha, v. Delhi Development Authority and others; 1988 (3) Supp.
3 S.C.R. 253; and in P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and other, 1993(2) SCT 416 (SC) : 1993 (1) S.L.R.
830, the Supreme Court has held that the State consistent with the requirement of promotional posts and in the interest of efficiency of the service is entitled to make a choice of candidates for the purpose of promotion on the basis of qualifications.
In the last mentioned case the Court considered various earlier decisions and held that there could always be a classification amongst the employees belonging to one cadre for the purposes of promotion based on the requirement of qualifications.
The only condition which is required to be satisfied is that the qualification must have some reasonable nexus with the object of recruitment.
In Triloki Nath Khosa's case (supra) the Supreme Court has unequivocally recognised that academic qualifications do add to the efficiency of service.
12.
In the present case the post of Secretary is an administrative post and, therefore, if while framing the rules the Board and the Government have thought it proper to insert the requirement of qualification of graduation it cannot per se be said to be arbitrary.
In fact, the petitioners have failed to establish that the qualifications prescribed by the rule-making authority do not have any nexus with the job requirement of the post of Secretary.
13.
The second contention of Shri Dass is that while according promotion to respondent No. 3, the Board has not at all taken into consideration higher seniority of petitioner No. 1.
Learned counsel argued that in view of Annexure P2 petitioner No. 1 will be deemed to be senior to respondent No. 3 and, therefore, without considering his case that Board could not have accorded promotion to respondent No. 3.
This argument has been contested by Shri Mehta and Shri Gupta.
While Shri Mehta argued that respondent No. 3 was promoted from the category of Head Clerks and being in higher pay scale than the petitioner, respondent No. 3 was treated as senior, Shri Gupta, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3, argued that in view of Annexures R.3/1 and R 3/2 read with Annexure R 3/4 respondent No. 3 will be deemed to have been appointed as Accountant with effect from 1361989.
Shri Gupta submitted that petitioner No. 1 was promoted as Accountant with effect from 161970 and petitioner No. 2 with effect from 171974 and, therefore, they can have no claim for seniority over respondent No. 3.
14.
A bare reading of Annexures R. 3/1 and R 3/2 shows that the Market Committee, Talwandi Bhai, had in its meeting held on 1281969 decided to give charge of the post of Accountant-cum-Fee Collector.
Earlier this charge was held by Shri Baldev Singh.
Neither Annexure R. 3/1 nor Annexure R 3/2 speaks of appointment of respondent No. 3 as Accountant.
The mere giving of charge of a particular post cannot be equated with an appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion.
In so far as Annexure R 3/4 is concerned, the same will be deemed to have been superseded by Annexure P2.
Ordinarily, the Court would have declared petitioner No. 1 to be senior to respondent No. 3 in view of the contents of Annexure P2, but having regard to the peculiar facts of this case I am not inclined to record a specific finding regarding the seniority of petitioners qua respondent No. 3.
It has come on record that respondent-Board did take a decision to prepare a joint seniority list of Head Clerks/Head Clerks-cum-Accountants/Accountants.
The policy decision taken by the Board for preparation of the joint seniority list was not approved by the Government as is evident from Annexure R. 2/1.
This is also strengthen by Annexure R.2/2 by which clubbing of three cadres was held to be invalid.
It has not been shown to the Court by either of the parties that after the issue of Annexures R2/1 and R.2/2 any fresh seniority list was prepared after giving an opportunity of representation to all the affected persons.
In this situation, the only appropriate direction which deserves to be given to respondent-Board is to determine the seniority of the petitioners and respondent No. 3 as well as similarly situated persons afresh after giving them an opportunity of representation and hearing, if any representationist requests for personal hearing.
On such re-determination, the Board shall re- consider the question of promotion on the posts of Secretaries against the general category posts and take fresh decision in so far as the vacancies available upto 151988 are concerned.
15.
Coming to the challenge of the petitioners to the promotion of respondent No. 4, it is necessary to take note of the fact that the petitioners have not come forward with a case that they belong to the reserved category and therefore, they have any preferential right for consideration of promotion qua other candidates.
As against this, respondent No. 4 belongs to scheduled caste and he has specifically pleaded that being a member of scheduled caste he has been promoted as per the reservation policy of the Government which has been adopted by the Board.
Though learned counsel for the petitioners made strenuous efforts to persuade the Court to hold that promotion of respondent No. 4 is contrary to Articles 14 and 16 because persons senior to him in the category of Scheduled Castes candidates being left out, I am not inclined to accept this argument for the simple reason that the petitioners can have no lis qua respondent No. 4 and they can have no right to be considered for promotion against the reserve vacancy.
Whether any person senior to respondent No. 4 was left out from the zone of consideration at the time of issue of Annexure P.8 or not is a matter on which such a person could have possibly made a grievance.
However, the petitioners who are admittedly the members of general category have no locus standi to challenge the promotion of respondent No. 4.
16.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed.
Order Annexure P7 is quashed with a direction to the respondent-Board to re-determine the seniority of the petitioners and respondent No. 3 as it would have been in the year 1988.
In the process of re-determination of seniority the Board shall give notice to the petitioners, respondent No. 3 and other persons and consider their representations, if any.
If the petitioners, respondent No. 3 or any other affected person requests for personal hearing, the Board should hear such a person.
If after such a re-determination of seniority the Board comes to the conclusion that respondent No. 3 is senior to the petitioners, his promotion to the post of Secretary shall remain undisturbed.
However, if the Board comes to the conclusion that the petitioners are senior to respondent No. 3, a fresh consideration for promotion to the post of Secretary should be made in respect of the vacancies which were available upto 151988.
The petitioners or any other person found suitable on the basis of reconsideration shall be given retrospective promotion as Secretary with all consequential benefits.
While undertaking consideration for promotion in pursuance of this direction, the Board shall keep in mind the direction given by a Division Bench on 621992 in C.W.P.
No. 11234 of 1991.
17.
The exercise for determination of fresh seniority list and consideration of promotion shall be undertaken and completed within a period of four months during which the present position of respondent No. 3 shall remain undisturbed.
18.
The prayer of the petitioners for declaring rule 8(2) read with item No. 26 of Appendix `B' of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class-II) Service Rules, 1988 as unconstitutional is rejected.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.