Surya Kant, J - The petitioner has approached this Court seeking a writ of mandamus to command the respondents to count his entire service rendered as a Master against aided post in two different Government aided privately managed schools for the purpose of granting post-retiral benefits, including pension.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Master on 2571968 in MDAS Higher Secondary School at Moga which was a privately managed school but was receiving grant-in-aid from the Government of Punjab.
The petitioner became subscriber of contributory Provident Fund Scheme with effect from 141970 and his provident fund account bearing No. 846520 was opened in the Post Office at Moga.
The petitioner resigned from the afore-mentioned School and was relieved on 30121971 (AN) on account of his selection as a Master in HM Higher Secondary School, a government aided private school, at Ferozepur.
The petitioner joined the new school on December 31, 1971 (F.N.)
and on attaining the age of superannuation, he got retired on May 14, 1990.
3.
It is not disputed that the service conditions of the petitioners were being governed by the provisions of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1979 Act') and the Rules framed thereunder known as the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 (for short, `the 1981 Rules').
The afore-mentioned Act and the Rules came into force much after the appointment of the petitioner in HM Higher Secondary School, Ferozepur.
4.
It seems that after the petitioner retired on attaining the age of superannuation, the Government of Punjab formulated and notified the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools Retirement Benefit Scheme in the year, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as the Pension Scheme) for the employees serving in government aided private schools, which came into force retrospectively w.e.f.
February 5, 1987.
Clause 6 of the Pension Scheme deals with the "qualifying service" and according to sub-clause (3) thereof, the service rendered in one or more privately managed recognised aided schools under the "same management" shall count for the retirement benefits.
Sub- clauses (5) thereof further provides that the services rendered on an aided post in "another privately managed recognised school" in the State of Punjab, shall also count for retirement benefits, provided that the Contributory Provident Fund Account of the employee in the previous school continued as such in the subsequent school to which he is transferred or appointed and there is no break in service.
5.
The petitioner, having opted for the benefits under the Pension Scheme, mentioned above, is aggrieved of the fact that the authorities in the Government of Punjab have refused to take into account the service rendered by him in MDAS Higher Secondary School at Moga and pension has been granted to him only on the strength of the period of service rendered in HM Higher Secondary School at Ferozepur.
The petitioner represented for getting counted the service rendered by him in MDAS Higher Secondary School at Moga but the same having not been taken into account, he approached this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4835 of 1994 which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on April 21, 1994 with a direction to the respondents to consider and decide his representation by passing a speaking order.
Pursuant thereto, the claim of the petitioner was considered but the same had been rejected vide order dated August 24, 1994 (Annexure P-3) on the following grounds, extracted from the afore-mentioned order :-  (i) he resigned from his previous post of Master by giving 24 hours' notice and joined the new post for which he had not applied through the Principal of MDAS Higher Secondary School, Moga; (ii) he was treated as a fresh appointee in the HM Higher Secondary School at Ferozepur and his new Contributory Provident Fund Account was opened on August 1, 1973, i.e. after a gap of one year and seven months; (iii) as per Rule 9(2) of the 1981 Rules, he could seek appointment in another privately managed recognised aided school by applying through his previous employer and the petitioner having not followed this procedure, his both the services cannot be tagged together for the purpose of grant of retiral benefits.
6.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner on the same grounds as are incorporated in the impugned order dated August 24, 1994 (Annexure P-3).
8.
In order to appreciate the stand taken by the respondents for not counting the service rendered by the petitioner in MDAS Higher Secondary School at Moga, namely, that he did not apply for the fresh appointment at Ferozepur through his previous employer at Moga, I am of the view that the provisions of the 1979 Act and the 1981 Rules framed thereunder are primarily meant for protecting and regulating the service conditions of the employees of the government aided private schools.
As a cardinal rule of interpretation, an effort should always be made to interpret the Act and the Rules to achieve the object for which the legislature stepped into this field.
The provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder, therefore, cannot be interpreted in a manner which may defeat the legislative object by negating the protection of conditions of service of the employees of Govt. aided private schools.
Keeping in view these principles, in my view Rule 9(2) of the 1981 Rules, upon which reliance has been placed by the respondents, cannot be construed to mean that the appointment of a teacher in another aided school will be rendered illegal for the purpose of grant of pension merely because he did not apply for the second post in another school through his previous employer.
The object of this Rules is that the first employer is not taken by surprise if an employee intends to resign from his service so as to take up another assignment.
In the absence of any such objection by the previous employer on record, the State Government cannot be permitted to take shelter behind this technicality.
Moreover, the petitioner was appointed in HM Higher Secondary School at Ferozepur in the year 1971 and at that time, neither the 1979 Act nor the 1981 Rules framed thereunder were in force.
In the absence of retrospective applicability of these provisions, the respondents cannot be permitted to press into this objection.
9.
Coming to the next objection raised on behalf of the respondent that the petitioner opened a new C.P.F.
Account on his appointment at Ferozepur and thus proviso to sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 of the Pension Scheme having not been complied with, the service rendered by him at Moga does not form part of the qualifying service, I do not find any substance in this objection as well.
Firstly, the Scheme has come into force with effect from the year 1987.
This conditions did not exist at the time when the petitioner joined the School at Ferozepur on 31121971.
Moreover, from the documents on record, namely, letter dated January 27, 1992 (Annexure P-7) issued by the District Education Officer, Faridkot, the competent authority has already asked the Manager of the School at Moga for the transfer of C.P.F.
Account of the petitioner from the post office at Moga to Punjab National Bank at Ferozepur.
In the light of this permission granted by the District Education Officer, Faridkot, I am of the considered view that there is a substantial compliance of proviso to sub- clause (5) of Clause 6 of the Pension Scheme.
10.
Coming to the last objection, I find from the plain reading of sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 of the Pension Scheme that the service rendered by an employee on an aided post even in another privately managed recognised school in the State of Punjab has to be counted for retiral benefits.
Since the requirement of proviso to sub-clause (5) of Clause 6 has already been held to have been complied with, I find no reason as to why the service rendered by the petitioner in the School at Moga cannot be taken into account for the purpose of retiral benefits.
Keeping in view the object of the Pension Scheme and the intention of the competent authority to extend its benefit retrospectively so as to bring even those employees who retired on or before 521987 within its ambit, clause 6 of the Pension Scheme needs to be interpreted liberally.
It cannot be over-looked that the petitioner was appointed against a government aided post whether it was in the School at Moga or Ferozepur.
There is absolutely no adverse or incriminating material disqualifying him from claiming retiral benefits due to him.
The petitioner served in both the schools without any break.
He had no occasion to follow or meticulously comply with the provisions of 1981 Rules or the Pension Scheme as both were non- existent at the relevant time.
That being so, the objections raised by the authorities in the State Government are totally hyper-technical, without any legal basis and against equity.
11.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 2481994 (Annexure P-3) is quashed and the respondents are directed to release the pension and other retiral benefits due to the petitioner after taking into account the entire service including the service rendered by him as Master in the School at Moga.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
12.
Needless to say that the petitioner never refused to pay the amount lying in his C.F.P.
account and it was the authorities who refused to accept this amount, therefore, the petitioner will not be burdened with any penalty whatsoever for deposit thereof at this stage.
No order as costs.
Petition allowed.