MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India prays for setting aside order dated 2412004 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Gurgaon, dismissing the application of the petitioner, in which prayer for amendment of the plaint was made.
It is admitted position that the suit was filed for declaration and permanent injunction against defendant-respondent restraining them from proceeding with the departmental enquiry and not to terminate her services without following the due procedure of law.
The charge-sheet dated 2122003 and enquiry initiated on that basis was dropped and the services of the plaintiff-petitioner have been terminated vide order dated 1762003 on the basis of different set of allegations i.e. plaintiff-petitioner is guilty of gross misconduct in filing false and criminal complaint against the officers of the company.
On account of the fact that a fresh cause of action has arisen in favour of the plaintiff-petitioner, the application for amendment has been declined by the learned Civil Judge by placing reliance on numerous judgments of the Supreme Court including M/s Ganesh Trading Co v. Moji Ram, AIR 1978 SC 484 and Shikharchand Jain v. Digambar Jain Praband Karini Sabha and others, AIR 1974 SC 1178 and score of other judgments.
2.
Mr. Sanjay Vij, learned counsel for the plaintiff-petitioner has argued that amendment should have been allowed in the pending suit and no fresh suit could be forced to be filed by the Court below.
According to the learned counsel, the filing of a new suit by the plaintiff-petitioner would result into unnecessary expenses and waste of time whereas the amendment would have facilitated the process of law.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel and perusing the order recorded by the learned Civil Judge, I am of the considered view that this petition is liable to be dismissed because after the filing of the suit based on charge sheet dated 2122003, the charge sheet itself has been dropped and the services of the plaintiff-petitioner have been terminated on the basis of an order dated 1762003, which is based on entirely new facts and allegations.
This order brings into existence a new cause of action.
No prejudice is caused to the plaintiff-petitioner.
Even otherwise, there is no legal infirmity in the well recorded order of the learned Civil Judge which is fully supported by the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases in M/s Ganesh Trading Co (supra) and Shikharachand Jain (supra).
Therefore, I do not find any merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed