JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The petitioner claims promotion from Class IV service to the post of Clerk in Class III service.
Since the claim of the petitioner was not being considered, she approached this Court by filing the instant writ petition.
2.
On the issuance of notice of motion, written statement has been filed.
In paragraph 6 of the preliminary objections, it is averred by the respondents that the petitioner would be promoted as and when her turn in the seniority list matures, if she has passed the Punjabi type-writing test.
So far as denial of promotion on the basis of seniority is concerned, the same cannot be interfered with.
However, insofar as the issue, whether the petitioner is required to qualify the type-writing test before considering her claim for promotion is concerned, the matter has been considered by this Court in Ramesh Chand and others v. The Director, Department of Rural Development and Panchayats Punjab and another, 2005(1) S.C.T.
24, (C.W.P.
No. 5401 of 2003, decided on 4.8.2003), wherein it was concluded that in the Department of Rural Development and Panchayats, Punjab, there was no provision requiring an individual to qualify the Punjabi type-writting test before his claim could be considered for promotion to the post of Clerk.
3.
In the present case also, in the absence of any statutory provision to the contrary, the Punjab Civil Services (General & Common Conditions) Rules, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1994 Rules'), would be relevant to determine the contriversy in hand.
Under the 1994 Rules, the rule-making authority laid down the requirement of qualifying the type-writing test in Punjabi with a minimum speed of 30 words per minute within one year of the date of the direct recruitment.
The 1994 Rules did not lay down such a pre-condition/stipulation for appointment by promotion to the post of Clerk.
The inference, that is liable to be drawn from the conditions delineated under the 1994 Rules, is, that while qualifying the type-writing test in Punjabi is a condition for direct recruitment, it is not a pre-condition for promotion.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents has, however, relied upon the order dated 27101998, to assert that by exercise of administrative authority the State Government has made it mandatory for all those seeking promotion from Class IV service to the post of Clerk, must also qualify the type-writing test in Punjabi.
It is not possible for us to accept the instant contention of the learned counsel for the respondents.
The order dated 27101998, relied upon, is only a proposal at the hands of the authorities to amend the statutory Rules so as to lay down as a pre-condition for promotion to the post of Clerk, the passing of the type-writing test in Punjabi.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents that the 1994 Rules have not been till date amended so as to prescribe the Punjabi type-writing test as a condition precedent for promotion to the post of Clerk.
In view of the above, the determination rendered by this Court in Ramesh Chand's case (supra) will squarely apply to the controversy in hand.
5.
Accordingly, the instant petition is allowed.
The action of the authorities in requiring members of Class-IV service to possess Punjabi type-writing test as a pre-condition for promotion to the post of Clerk is held to be illegal.
The claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Clerk shall now be considered by re-determining her eligibility without insisting upon the earlier pre-condition of having to pass the type-writing test in Punjabi.
In case the petitioner is otherwise qualified, her claim shall be considered for promotion to the post of Clerk without any further delay.
If she is found suitable, she shall be promoted to the post of Clerk, with effect from the date, persons junior to her were promoted as such.
The aforesaid exercise be carried out and completed within three months from today.
Petition allowed.