Viney Mittal, J (Oral) - The petitioner has approached this court through the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The challenge is to the orders Annexures P/4 and P/7 whereby the claim of the petitioner for regularisation with effect from December 31, 1979 has been rejected.
The petitioner has averred that he was initially appointed as a Stenographer on adhoc basis through the Employment Exchange with the Director, Public Relations, Haryana with effect from September 22, 1976.
He worked in that capacity upto December 12, 1978.
Subsequently, the petitioner was again appointed as a Clerk-cum-typist on temporary basis for a period of six months in the office of Director, Employment, Haryana, Chandigarh.
This time also the appointment of the petitioner was through the Employment Exchange.
This employment took effect from March 22/24, 1979.
Later on, the services of the petitioner were regularised with effect from September 15, 1982.
The petitioner has approached this Court with a claim that in fact his services were liable to be regularised with effect from December 31, 1979.
2.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
In the written statement, the respondents have maintained that there was a gap of more than three months which could not be condoned.
3.
Shri SS Ahlawat, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Tek Chand v. State of Haryana, 2002(1) SCT 308 (P&H) : 2001(3) PLR 1.
On that basis it has been contended by the learned counsel that in fact since the absence of the petitioner for a period of three months was attributable to the management, therefore, his case was fully covered with the ratio of the full Bench judgment in Tek Chand's case (supra).
4.
In fact Shri Ahlawat has argued that the present writ petition be disposed of with a liberty to the petitioner to approach the respondents throuçh a representation making the claim made by him in the present writ petition on the basis of the law laid down in Tek Chand's case (supra).
Shri RD Sharma, the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has no objection if the writ petition is disposed of with a liberty to the petitioner to approach the department.
5.
Accordingly, the present writ petition is disposed of with a liberty to the petitioner to file a detailed representation on the basis of the law laid down in Tek Chand's case (supra).
If such a representation is filed by the petitioner within a period of three months from the date a certified copy is received, then the same shall be decided by the competent authority within a further period of four months by passing a speaking order.
If the claim of the petitioner is accepted by the competent authority, then the petitioner shall also be entitled to the consequential benefits thereof.
The writ petition stands disposed of with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.