Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioner has sought a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to appear in BCA Part-III Classes.
2.
The petitioner was admitted in Bachelor of Computer Application in Khalsa College, Patiala.
The petitioner took the final examination for BCA Part-I in March, 2001 under Roll No. 890.
He got reappear in the subject of Statistics.
The petitioner appeared in September, 2001 to clear the reappear subject of Statistics.
3.
The petitioner got regular admission in BCA Part-II in August, 2001.
The petitioner appeared in final examination of BCA Part-II in April, 2002 under roll No. 840.
He also appeared for reappear subject of BCA Part-I, but still the petitioner could not clear the subject of Statistics.
However, the petitioner got reappear in BCA Part-II in two subjects i.e.
Mathematics Discrete and Mathematics Foundation.
4.
The petitioner was admitted to BCA Part-III by the Khalsa College, Patiala, on the undertaking that the admission may be rejected, if the petitioner is not able to clear the reappear paper of BCA Part-I in September, 2002, he alone will be responsible.
However, if he clears the subject in September, 2002, he will be awarded Roll Number for BCA Part- III.
5.
The petitioner appeared in September, 2002 in respect of reappear subject of Statistics of BCA Part-I and also reappeared in two subjects of BCA Part-II.
The petitioner passed in all the three subjects i.e. of BCA Part-I & II, the result of which was declared in January, 2003.
6.
The dispute arose when the petitioner was to appear for the final examination of BCA Part-III.
The Roll Number of the petitioner was not given as he has not qualified BCA Part-I & II, one academic year prior to the conduct of BCA Part-III examination.
7.
In pursuance of the interim order passed by this Court, the petitioner was permitted to appear for BCA Part-III examination on 21st April, 2003.
On 2nd July, 2003, University was directed to clear the result of BCA Part-II provisionally and subject to further orders of the Court.
8.
Subsequently, the petitioner has appeared for supplementary examination in BCA Part-III as well by virtue of interim order passed by this Court on 9th October, 2003.
9.
In the written statement, the University had relied upon ordinance framed for BCA under +3 Scheme.
The relevant clause of Part-III examination reads as under :-  "The examination in Part-I, Part-II and Part-III shall be open to a person who satisfied the requirements at A and B as given below :- "A"  For Part-I Examination xxx For Part-II Examination xxx For Part-III Examination  (i) has passed the BCA Part-I examination, and (ii) has passed one academic year previously BCA Part-II examination of this University or any other statutory University.
OR  has been declared to reappear in not more than three papers in BCA Part-II examination of this University or any other statutory University but such a candidate shall have to clear the reappear paper in the supplementary examination of the same year or simultaneously with BCA Part-III examination."
10.
At the time of hearing of petitioner, the learned counsel for the respondent stated that such regulation has been amended and it has been cleared that the candidate who passes Part-I examination in supplementary examination in a special chance cannot appear in the next subsequent examination of BCA Part-III.
Such amendment was carried out in the present academic year.
11.
According to learned counsel for the respondent, the case of the petitioner is to be governed by first option of Clause (ii) and not the second one, wherein the petitioner has to pass BCA Part-II one academic year previously.
However, according to learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner was admitted in BCA Part-III, subject to his passing supplementary examination of BCA Part-I in special chance provided to him in September 2002.
The petitioner having cleared such supplementary examination, he satisfies the conditions of the regulation reproduced above which contemplate that the candidates who have reappear in the examination in BCA Part-II, in not more than 3 papers can appear in BCA Part-III examination.
12.
A reading of the regulation reproduced above shows that two conditions are required to be satisfied by a candidate; one he has to pass BCA Part-I examination and that either has passed prior to one academic year previously BCA Part-II or has been declared to reappear in not more than 3 papers in BCA Part-II examination of the University.
In April, 2003, when the petitioner appeared in BCA Part-II, he had passed Part-I examination, in a special chance given to him in September, 2002.
In respect of the second condition, the petitioner could take examination of BCA Part-III, even if he has reappear in not more than 3 papers in BCA Part-II in terms of second option.
Admittedly, the petitioner has qualified BCA Part-II prior to the examination in April, 2003.
13.
In fact, the University has clarified the regulation in the current academic year by amendment in the regulations, that the special chance cannot permit the candidate to appear or the supplementary examination in Part-III.
But in respect of the petitioner, such conditions cannot be made applicable as he has appeared in the examination prior to the amendment.
In view of the above, it is apparent that the petitioner satisfies the regulations reproduced above as he has passed BCA Part-I examination and he could take out the examination BCA Part-III, even if he has reappear in not more than three papers.
14.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed, declaring the petitioner eligible to appear in the BCA-III examination in April 2003.
The respondents are directed to declare the result of BCA Part-III.
The University will declare the result of the petitioner within a week from the date of receipt of this order.
Copy of the order be given DASTI on payment.
Petition allowed.