KC Gupta, J - This is a writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of certiorari/mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction commanding the respondents to grant salary to the petitioners at the minimum of their regular pay scale plus all usual allowances and also arrears of salary as such for a period of three years prior to the filing of the writ petition.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are that the petitioners had been working as Clerks, Drivers, Electricians and Peons in the Nagar Panchayat, Sardulgarh since June, 1999 on daily wages basis.
They had been performing same duties as are being performed by the regular employees working on the corresponding posts.
The petitioners had been requesting and representing before the authorities for the grant of salary at the minimum of the regular pay scale plus all usual allowances but the authorities had failed to grant this relief.
3.
Respondent No. 1 filed written statement stating that the petitioners were working on contract basis.
However, respondent No. 2 filed separate written statement, stating that the Local Government, Punjab, vide its letter dated 3031999 had granted approval to the Nagar Panchayat for keeping employees in the Committee on daily wages at DC rates.
Thus, according to respondent No. 2, the petitioners were employed at DC rates on daily wages.
4.
I have heard Mr. KL Arora, Advocate, for the petitioners, Mr. SS Behl, Addl.
AG, Punjab, for respondent No. 1, Mr. Arvinder Singh, Advocate, for respondent No. 2 and carefully gone through the file.
5.
Known precept for achieving any constitutional goal enshrined in our Constitution is that State should formulate its policy and methodology in providing employment to its people which would falled in comity to the object of defined goal.
The Constitution places a fundamental duty on the State to fulfil its obligations arising from fundamental rights read in conjunction with the directive principles of State policy, in favour of the people of the democratic welfare State.
The State is to provide employment to its people but due adherence to the standards of equality, social dignity and respect for employer-employee relationship.
The State and its instrumentalities are ideopraxists to attain the object of constitutional mandate of socio-welfare policy, including the employment.
This obligation of the State attains wider dimensions when it has to deal with the persons employed by it on casual or daily wage basis for years together.
Such persons serve the State on dictated terms to ensure their existence and do work continuously for number of years uninterruptedly without any benefit or assurance of continuity of their service in that department.
6.
Fairness in State action must not only be done but must also appear to have been done.
"Whether the employees who have served the State and people at large, for years together to the satisfaction of all concerned and possess requisite qualifications can claim relief of regularisation of their services and equal pay for equal work" are the precise questions that fall for determination for the Court in this writ petition.
7.
The petitioners in this writ petition, who are working with the Nagar Panchayat as Clerks, Drivers, Electricians and Peons since June 1999, have claimed the relief of regularisation of their service on their respective posts and further for grant of equal pay for equal work i.e. minimum of the regular pay scale with all allowances.
8.
Counsel for respondent No. 1 contended that the Deputy Commissioner had suspended the resolution dated 28.9.2001 passed by the Nagar Panchayat, appointing petitioners on daily wages.
However, it has been observed by the Division Bench of this Court in Surjit Mehta and others v. The State of Haryana and other, 1992(2) RRR 287 : AIR 1993 Punjab and Haryana 150 that the Deputy Commissioner cannot suspend such a resolution.
Further, Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3294 of 2002 titled Ms. Maninder Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(3) S.C.T.
655, decided on 1552003, after considering the case law, held that the petitioners in that case were entitled to the minimum of pay scale with dearness allowance only.
The Division Bench further directed the State Government to implement its policy of regularisation dated 2312001 and consider the cases of all the petitioners for regularisation of their services in accordance with rules without unnecessarily emphasising on the objection of the State that no vacancies were available at this stage.
9.
Therefore, the present writ petition is accepted in terms of abovesaid writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 3294 of 2002 decided on 1552003 and the respondents are directed to grant minimum of pay scale with dearness allowance only to the petitioners.
The State Government is further directed to implement its policy of regularisation dated 2312001 and consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of their services in accordance with rules and without unnecessarily emphasising the objection of the State that no vacancies are available at this stage.
Petition allowed.