Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated 12.11.2002, annexure P-1 attached with the writ petition.
2.
The Treasury Officer, Jagadhri District Yamuna Nager vide order dated 12.11.2002 made the following order on the representation of the petitioner itself :  "Returned in original to Smt. Kiran Kumari the Applicant with the remarks that there is no provision to grant pension on re-marriage under the rules.
The pension granted from 25198 to December 1998 may be deposited."
3.
It is not necessary for us to notice the detailed facts raised in the present petition.
The facts are hardly in dispute.
The petitioner is the wife of the deceased Madan Gopal Sharma and also has a daughter, namely, Himanshi.
However, after the death of her husband, she remarried with the younger brother of the deceased.
According to the respondents, she is not entitled to the family pension of deceased because of her remarriage.
The respondents have placed reliance upon Rule 616 D(1)(3)(C) of Civil Service Rules, Volume II, in support of their contention.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
The objection raised by the respondents is found to be without any merit.
It may be noticed, at the very outset that the Rule 6.16 D was ordered to be deleted vide notification dated 26th June 1983 and no other rule has been brought to our notice which was substituted for the said rule.
If that be the position, the reliance placed by the respondent State is totally misconceived and is erroneous.
5.
Firstly there is no rule which prohibits grant of family pension to the widow of the deceased who has remarried and particularly in the same family.
The object of the rule is not to deny benefit of family pension to the dependent of the deceased, but, obviously provides an exception to that concept by postulating a situation where the widow remarried independently and her economic dependence upon the deceased is disintegrated, from the need of the family.
In the present case, both such situations exists.
Admittedly, the daughter of the deceased is living with the petitioner, who has remarried with the younger brother of the deceased.
The economic dependence of the family, thus, continues in its entirety and ingredient of an exception seems to be satisfied in the present case.
6.
Furthermore, we may refer to judgment of this Court in the case of Kamaljit Kaur v. Union of India and others, 1998(1) SCT 312 (P&H) : 1997(3) PLR 441, wherein the Court while dealing with the regulations 216 and 219 of the Service Pension and Gratuity Regulations in somewhat similar circumstances granted relief to the petitioner and held as under :  "Petitioner, widow of Malkit Singh, married with the brother of the deceased.
This fact is admitted in the written statement.
In such a situation the relevant Rule that applies to the case in hand is Rule 219 of Section 2 of Service Pension and Gratuity.
That Rule states that "A relative specified in regulation 216 shall be eligible for the grant of family pension."
Widow is one mentioned in Regulation 216.
Thus, it is beyond controversy that widow is entitled to pension under Rule 219.
That Rule further states that if the widow re-marries her deceased husband's brother and continues to live a common life with and/or contributes to the support of the other living eligible heirs she continues to be entitled to family pension.
In this case petitioner re-married deceased's direct brother.
She is maintaining the son born to her through the deceased thus petitioner continues to have a right to get the family pension.
That family pension was denied to her from May, 1994.
The said action on the part of the respondents was illegal.
So, respondents are directed to pay the entire arrears of pension due to the petitioner within a month from today.
If the entire arrears are not paid within one month, as stated above, that entire arrears will carry interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of the expiry of one month till the date of actual payment.
We direct the respondents to continue to disburse the family pension due to petitioner regularly month by month.
Petition is allowed as indicated above.
Since respondents have raised all cantankerous contentions in the written statement filed in this case, we feel that it is a fit case where they are to be mulcted with costs.
Respondents are directed to pay the costs of the petition including Advocate's fee of Rs.
2000/-."
7.
We have perused the judgement of the Court and find no reason to differ with the reasoning given by their Lordships in the above judgments.
8.
For the reasons aforestated we allow this petition and quash the noting in Annexure P-1 recorded by the Treasury Officer.
Further, we direct the respondents to pay jointly the family pension to the widow and minor, in accordance with the rules.
Parties are left with no costs.
Petition allowed.