Hemant Gupta, J - This appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against judgment dated 752002 passed by the learned Single Judge whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant claiming an appropriate writ, order or direction directing the respondents to give employment to him on compassionate ground was dismissed.
2.
Kamal Dev, husband of the appellant was employed in the respondent Punjab State Electricity Board (for short the Board) as Class IV employee w.e.f.
2471985 in the work-charged capacity.
He died in harness on 1.8.1990 i.e. after completing 5 years continuous service under the respondents.
The appellant requested for employment on compassionate ground vide request dated 3081990.
However, she failed to get a favourable response.
3.
The appellant has relied upon letter dated 331980 appended to the writ petition as Annexure P2, to the effect that for the purpose of providing employment under the priority scheme, officials having worked for 5 years in a workcharged capacity shall be considered at par with employment on regular establishment for giving the benefit of employment to the dependents in case such an employee dies in the service of the Board.
The appellant, thus, claimed that in view of the said policy decision of the Board, she is entitled to be considered for appointment on compassionate ground as her husband had completed continuous service of 5 years as workcharged employee.
4.
The Board filed written statement wherein it was stated that Kamal Dev was appointed as workcharged T-Mate on 2691986 and he had only 3 years 7 months and 7 days service to his credit at the time of his death and thus, not covered under its policy.
It is further sated that the Board is generally following the Punjab Government policies in such matters.
There is no provision for providing employment on priority basis to a dependent member of the deceased of workcharged employee.
The Board while adopting the said policy has also decided vide memo No. 17894/18974/ENG-7(1) 99 dated 331980 that for the purpose of providing employment under the priority purpose, official having worked for five years in a workcharged capacity shall be considered at par with regular establishment for giving the benefit of the employment to the dependents in case such an employee dies in the service of the Board.
Since late Kamal Dev, husband of the appellant has less than 5 years of service, her case is not covered under the policy of the Board.
5.
The appellant filed rejoinder and appended Punjab Government circular dated 2441986 in respect of employment on priority basis.
The said circular was circulated vide Endst.
No. 104305/4815 Reg ADP-66 dated 1061986 of the Secretary, P.S.E.B.
Patiala.
It is the said policy decision which has been adopted by the Board as mentioned in the written statement.
The Board filed a counter-affidavit of the Deputy Secretary, Establishment-II to the said replication wherein it has been stated that the Punjab Govt. circular dated 1841973 was a circular for regular employees.
The said circular was adopted by the Board for its regular employees vide letter dated 2441974.
The Punjab Government subsequent circular dated 2441986 was adopted by the Board in continuation of earlier circular as far as the regular employees are concerned.
This circular does not deal with the workcharged employees.
6.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition holding that circular dated 2441986 was never adopted by the Board.
It was further held that such instructions are not applicable to the petitioner (now appellant), whose husband was a work-charged employee.
7.
Before adverting to the merits of the controversy, it would be beneficial to reproduce para No. 5 of the written statement filed by the Board which reads as under :  "5.
Para 5 of the writ petition is admitted to the extent that the P.S.E.B.
generally following Punjab Government Policy in such matters and as per Punjab Government Policy, there is no provision for providing employment on priority basis to a dependent member of the deceased workcharged employee.
As per Punjab Government policy, only employment on priority basis to a dependent member of the deceased regular Punjab Government Employee is considered.
The Board while adopting the said policy has also decided vide memo No. 17894/18974/ENG-7(1) 99 dated 331980 Annexure P2 that for the purpose of providing employment under the priority purpose official having worked for five years in a workcharged capacity shall be considered at par with regular establishment for giving the benefit of the employment to the dependents in case such an employee dies in the service of the Board.
Accordingly, late Kamal Dev husband of the petitioner had less than five years service at the time of his death in the workcharged capacity as already stated in para 3 above, hence her case is not covered under the policy of the Board (Annexure P2)."
8.
The Punjab Government policy which is being followed by the Board was appended to by the appellant as Annexure P.7.
Such policy was issued by the Punjab Government in view of the fact that the earlier instructions dated 1841973 were issued long ago and many changes have taken place since then, in relation to the matter of absorption in State service of various categories of persons placed in difficult/unfortunate circumstances such as surplus employees, disabled ex-servicemen, member of family of deceased government employee etc.
Relevant extract of the said policy reads as under :  "Circulated vide secretary, P.S.E.B., Patiala Endst.
No. 104305/4815 Reg ADP- 66 dated 1061986 in continuation of endst No. 30141/3097/ENG-197/LC-674 dated 241974 - published in First supplement to the Manual of Instruction on service matter Vol. II (1.1.1985 to 31.12.1989) at page 160 onwards.
Copy of Punjab Government circular letter No. 18/14/86-5PP (1703) 5964 dated 24th April, 1986, from the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, addressed to all Heads of Departments, etc/etc.
Subject : Priority list for various categories of persons for employment in the State Service - Rehabilitation of Disabled ex-servicemen and widows/dependents of the deceased Government employees and Defence Service Personnel killed or disabled severely in action etc. etc.
I am directed to invite your attention to Punjab Government Circular letter No. 80 (GOI)-SII(3)-73 12092 dated the 18th April, 1973 on the subject noted above and to say that keeping in view the fact that the instructions contained therein were issued long ago and many changes have taken place since then, in relation to the matter of absorption in State Service of various categories of persons placed in difficult/unfortunate circumstances such as surplus employees, disabled ex-servicemen, members of family of deceased Government employees, Defence Service Personnel killed or severely disabled in service, Physically handicapped persons, members of family of a person killed as a result of terrorist action in the State and members of a family who lost their bread winner in riots in Delhi and other places in India between October 31 to November 7, 1984, it has become necessary to outline the up-to-date position in connection therewith.
Being considerate to the need for providing relief to such persons and also for giving higher priority in respect of the families where the bread winner has been killed as a result of terrorist action or due to riots in Delhi and other places in India and with a view to expediting the process of rehabilitation of such families, Government have considered this matter in the light of the broad policy followed by the Government of India in this regard and have decided that the following priority list be adopted for a recruitment to the State Service of Class-III and IV.
Priority Number Categories x x x x 4.
A member of the family of the deceased Government employee, or a Government employee, who is retired from service on medical grounds."
9.
The learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the policy instructions circulated by the Board on 1061986 are, in fact, in supersession of earlier policy instructions issued from time to time as is evident from the opening paragraph of the circular itself.
Therefore, the said policy instructions are comprehensive enough to take into consideration the cases of employment on priority basis of all categories of employees and is not merely restricted to the regular employees.
In addition thereto, the learned counsel for the appellant has drawn the attention of the Court to Annexure A6 wherein the deceased husband of the appellant is shown to be appointed as daily wage labourer on 1161985 and who was subsequently appointed as workcharged T-mate on 2691986.
It was, thus, contended that the deceased had completed more than 5 years of continuous service and, thus, covered under the policy instructions Annexure P2 dated 331980 as well.
10.
Mr. MS Khaira, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent-Board has submitted the employment on compassionate ground is contemplated to provide immediate relief to the destitute family.
The husband of the appellant has died in the year 1990 and now it is too late in the day for the consideration of her case for employment on compassionate grounds.
Learned counsel also supported the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge.
11.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective arguments.
The Board has circulated the policy of the State Government dated 2441986 in respect of priority list for various categories of persons for employment in the State Service.
There is no document to show that at the time of adopting the policy the Board has modified the same while making applicable to its employees.
The deceased husband of the appellant though initially appointed on daily wages, but was appointed as work charged T-mate on 2691986.
It is, thus, apparent that the deceased husband of the appellant has not worked for 5 years in workcharged capacity.
But the question is whether such circular of the Board dated 331980 in respect of the consideration of dependents of workcharged employees on compassionate ground is applicable and operative even after the revised policy of the State Government dated 2441986 as adopted and circulated by the Board on 1061986.
12.
We are of the opinion that the policy of the State Government dated 2441986 having been circulated by the Board on 1061986 after its adoption the previous policy instructions stand superseded.
The revised policy has been issued in respect of persons placed in difficult unfortunate circumstances such as surplus employees, disabled ex-servicemen, members of family of deceased Government employee.
In policy circulated by the Board Annexure P-7, no distinction on the basis of nature of employment, i.e. temporary, permanent, ad-hoc or workcharged basis.
The deceased was in the employment of the Board at the time of his death, therefore, the appellant as member of the family of the deceased employee of the Board is entitled to be considered for appointment on priority basis.
A member of the family of the deceased government employee is at priority No. 4 of the priority list mentioned above.
Thus, the appellant being the widow of the deceased employee of the Board is entitled to be considered for appointment as per priority list to be maintained in terms of revised policy.
13.
The stand of the Board before the learned Single Judge that the government policy has not been adopted by the Board is not borne out from the record.
Para No. 5 of the written statement leaves no doubt that the Govt. Policy instructions in respect of compassionate priority employment has been adopted by the Board.
Such circular has been attached with the replication as Annexure P.7.
Therefore, the argument raised before the learned Single Judge that the circular of the State Government has not been adopted by the Board is factually not correct.
Therefore, we hold that the action of the respondents in not considering the claim of the appellant for employment on compassionate ground is not tenable.
The respondents were duty-bound to consider the claim of the appellant for appointment on priority basis as per the policy instructions dated 26.4.1986 circulated by the Board on 1061986.
14.
The argument raised by Shri Khaira that the appellant cannot be granted relief at this stage as her husband died in the year 1990 and more than 13 years have passed, is liable to be rejected outrightly.
The appellant has not only made representations from time to time but also invoked the jurisdiction of this Court in November, 1993.
Lis remained pending before this Court.
The rights of the parties have to be adjudicated upon keeping in view the facts when the proceedings for redressal of grievances were initiated.
Therefore, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondent need not detain us any longer.
15.
Consequently, we allow the present Letters Patent Appeal.
Order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and writ petition filed by the appellant is allowed with the direction to the respondents to consider her claim for compassionate appointment in accordance with the policy contained in Annexure P.7 and decide the same within three months from the date of presentation of the copy of this order by passing a speaking order.
Appeal allowed.