Hemant Gupta, J - The plaintiff is aggrieved against the judgment and decree passed by the courts below whereby her suit for declaration challenging the change in the seniority was dismissed.
2.
The plaintiff was appointed as J.B.T.
Teacher on 791961 in Patiala Division.
Vide Circular dated 23.4.1963 options were invited from the teacheresses for transfer to the other District and Divisions, copy of said Circular is Ex.DW Plaintiff-appellant was transferred to Ambala Division vide order dated 30111963 and she joined her duties in Ambala Division on 1121963.
The Department also framed Rules Ex. D.1 wherein it was made clear that seniority of teachers who are transferred from one Division to another Division at their requests is to be fixed at tail.
It is the stand of the respondents that since the plaintiff was transferred to Ambala Division on her request, therefore, her seniority is to be fixed at tail.
She is junior to another Harminder Kaur who was working in those days in Ambala Division.
In the gradation List published in 1973 particulars of the present plaintiff were wrongly shown in place of said Harminder Kaur.
Said clerical mistake has been rectified by the Department and the revised seniority list has been issued in the year 1976 wherein the name of the plaintiff is mentioned at Sr. No. 201-A.
The learned trial court dismissed the suit holding that the order passed by the defendants is that of rectification of mistake which does not affect the rights of the plaintiff.
It also held that the right to sue accrued to the plaintiff in the year 1976 but the suit has been filed on 13.2.1980, therefore, it is beyond the period of limitation.
The first appellate court maintained the finding of the learned trial court on the issue of limitation to hold that the change in the seniority list could be effected only after giving an opportunity of hearing, but in view of the findings on the issue of limitation the appeal was dismissed.
3.
In the present appeal, the learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the transfer of the plaintiff from Patiala Division to Ambala Division was in public interest and not on her own request.
Therefore, the plaintiff cannot be put at tail at the seniority list of the teacheresses.
It is contended that there is no evidence on record produced by the defendants that the transfer of the plaintiff from Patiala Division to Ambala Division was on her request.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
I am unable to accept the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
The appellant has not produced the order of transfer whereby she was transferred from Patiala Division to Ambala Division to show that she was transferred in public interest.
On the other hand the defendants have produced Circular dated 23.4.1963 wherein options were invited from the teacheresses for transfer from one division to another division.
The appellant was transferred on 30111963.
The plaintiff has joined at Ambala.
There is nothing on record to show that the plaintiff objected to such transfer from one division to another.
In the absence of any such objection to the transfer order, it is difficult at this stage to accept that the transfer of the plaintiff from Patiala Division to Ambala Division was not as per her request.
It may be noticed that the suit challenging the seniority was filed in the year 1980 ie after 17 years of the transfer and that too after reorganisations of the States in the year 1966.
The plaintiff cannot feign ignorance about the Rules Ex.D.1 that the teachers who are transferred from one district to another will rank at the tail of the seniority list.
If by clerical mistake the name of the plaintiff was reflected at Sr. No. 53 on account of similarity of name with another teacheress who was admittedly appointed much earlier in time and was posted at different place, the plaintiff cannot take the benefit of such clerical mistake (sic) has been corrected in the year 1976.
The plaintiff has not produced any other fact to prove that her seniority was wrongly fixed in the year 1976.
In the absence of any right, the defendants were well within their right to correct the clerical error.
5.
Apart from the above, both the courts have returned a concurrent finding of fact that the suit of the plaintiff is beyond the period of limitation.
Plaintiff has admitted while appearing as a witness that she came to know about her seniority in the year 1976.
The suit had been filed in the year 1980.
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that in the year 1976 the knowledge was based upon oral information and there was no notice ever given to the appellant.
The fact remains that the plaintiff has admitted that she came to know about the change in the seniority in the year 1976 itself.
In view of the said knowledge, the suit was required to be filed within a period of 3 years.
Having failed to do so it has been rightly held by the courts below that the suit of the plaintiff is beyond limitation.
No ground is made out to call for interference in the second appeal.
Dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.