VK Bali, J (Oral) - Claim of the petitioner, Tarsem Nath Kaushal, for pay parity with persons holding the post of Science Officer has been rejected.
The present writ petition has been filed against the order dated July 6, 2001, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench.
2.
It has been the case of the petitioner that he joined on the post of Programme Executive selected by the Union Public Service Commission through advertisement.
The pay scale of Lecturer in Department of Civil Supplies was Rs. 650-1200 and was revised to Rs. 2200-4000 instead of Rs. 2000-3500 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986, as per 4th Central Pay Commission report.
The posts of Assistant Professor in Legal Meteorology Group B Doctors in various Ministries, Dental Surgeons and Public Officer in the Ministry of External Affairs are getting higher pay scales.
Assistant Station Director is the next higher post of the petitioner, which is a Group A post and carries the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
The petitioner has pleaded that he holds the degree of M.Sc.
and with the post of another discipline in a common class, he was entitled to at least the pay scale admissible to the post of Science Officer, whose qualification for the said post were same as that of the petitioner.
3.
In the reply that was filed on behalf of the respondents in contesting the claim of the petitioner, it was inter alia pleaded that the petitioner was selected on the post of Programme Executive (Science Discipline) with a definite pay scale and he accepted it on his own volition with the terms and conditions as attached to the appointment letter.
He was entrusted with the duties and responsibilities of his post only.
Pay scales are fixed on the recommendations of the Pay Commissioner set up by the Central Government from time to time and there was no need of a separate pay scale for the post as distinguished from other programmers.
4.
On examining the material before it and hearing learned counsel for the parties, the Tribunal held as follows :-  "Applicant had applied for and accepted the post with the pay scale fixed.
If he or a person belonging to his category are aggrieved, they could make a petition when pay commissioners are appointed for evaluation of duties and responsibilities for grant of pay scales.
It is settled law that the Courts/Tribunals are not proper forums for evaluation of these factors.
The claim made by the applicant would thus fall outside our jurisdiction as per his claim of higher pay scale for the post he is serving.
We do not find any ground made out for issuing any direction to the Respondents regarding integrating his post with other posts having higher pay scale or for separating his post from the integrated class of programme Executives and to change the nomenclature as prayed for by the appellant."
5.
Shri IS Sidhu, the learned counsel for the petitioner, vehemently contends that the whole case has been decided as if Central Administrative Tribunal had no jurisdiction to deal with the claim of the petitioner pertaining to higher pay scale, which will be equivalent to the pay scale admissible to Science Officer.
It is no doubt true that the Tribunal in the judgment extracted above has made use of words "falls outside the jurisdiction" but that has been made in the context of the earlier part of the judgment, wherein it was observed that such matters normally are to be dealt with by the Pay Commissions.
The only contention of the learned counsel that the whole matter has been decided as if the Tribunal had no jurisdiction in the matter has thus to be rejected.
6.
Only because the two posts, i.e., the one on which the petitioner is working, namely, Programme Executive (Science), Punjabi Dialect, and the post of Science Officer for eligibility purposes have same qualifications, in our view, would not be enough to give the same pay scale to the petitioner as is being given to the person holding the post of Science Officer.
It is too well settled by now that a number of things like responsibility in the job held by the incumbent, duties to be discharged by them and other factors are taken into consideration while considering the pay scale of a particular post.
7.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India and another v. PV Hariharan and another, 1997(1) SCT 649 (SC) : 1997(1) Supreme Court Service Law Judgments 598, held that pay scales are what are prescribed for each post by the government, which is very often done on the basis of recommendations of a Pay Commission or a similar expert body.
Classification of posts has nothing to do with fixation of pay scales.
It only classifies posts into several grounds based upon the pay scales already fixed.
It has further been observed that classification and prescribing pay scales for several posts are two different and distinct functions.
8.
Before we part with this judgment we would like to mention that on a specific question put to the learned counsel for the petitioner that as to whether before the 4th Pay Commission fixed the pay scales of various categories of posts, as to whether the two posts, i.e., one held by the petitioner and that of Science Officer were having the same pay scales, the answer is in the negative.
That being so, even prior to the revision of the pay scales, for the post on which the petitioner is working, the pay scales were less than the one which was being given to the person holding the job of Science Officer.
Finding no merit in this writ petition, the same is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.