MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution challenges order dated 1131999 upholding the punishment of stoppage of one increment on the petitioner on the basis of charge sheet issued to him vide letter dated 951973.
On 951973, a charge sheet was issued to the petitioner along with memorandum of charges and statement of allegations.
In the statement of charges, it was alleged that the petitioner has not been performing his duties properly, he remains absent from duties, he delays the payment of suppliers and disobey the orders of his superiors.
it is worthwhile to notice that no list of witnesses or list of documents was furnished, which is necessary for holding an enquiry for inflicting major penalty under Rule 8.
Although the charge sheet was issued under Rules 8 and 10 but the aforementioned lists were missing.
The petitioner filed his reply on 861973 vide Annexure P-3.
The respondents passed an order by stopping one increment without cumulative effect.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed an appeal Annexure P-4 to the Chief Engineer and his appeal was dismissed on 2461980.
His further revision before the Government also failed and the same has been dismissed by the impugned order dated 1131999 (Annexure P-8).
Feeling aggrieved the petitioner has approached this Court by filing the instant writ petition.
2.
The stand taken by the respondent-State in the written statement is that no enquiry was contemplated by the charge sheet for imposition of major penalty and according to the provisions of Rule 10(b) holding of an enquiry in the manner laid down in sub-rules (3) to (23) of Rule 8, is in discretion of the respondent.
It can hold enquiry or impose a minor punishment.
3.
Mr. WR Dua, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case of RK Goel v. State of Haryana through Collector Rohtak and another, 1992(1) S.C.T.
66 : (1991-2) PLR 352 and also a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Dr. KG Tewari v. State of Haryana, 2002(3) RSJ 296 : 2002(2) SCT 915 (P&H) to argue that once a charge sheet has been issued for imposition of a major penalty then even for imposing the minor penalty, a regular enquiry contemplated by Rule 8 is required to be held.
According to the learned counsel, the charge sheet Annexure P-1 must be considered to have been issued under Rule 8 for the imposition of major penalty and, therefore, the order Annexure P-3 passed for imposing the minor penalty is against the law laid down in the aforementioned judgments.
4.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned Addl.
AG Punjab, however, has argued that the charge sheet Annexure P-1 does not satisfy various requirements necessary for initiating an enquiry for the purpose of imposition of major penalty as contemplated by clauses (a) and (b) of sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 inasmuch as a list of documents by which the article of charges are proposed to be sustained or the list of witnesses by whom those charges are required to be proved is missing.
The learned counsel has also pointed out that the charges in the charge sheet are general in nature and charge sheet has been issued under Rule 10 also.
No specific misconduct has been pointed out showing that it was not a charge sheet for imposition of major penalty.
In sum and substance, the argument is that although the charge sheet mentions rule 8 but still it is a charge sheet issued under Rule 10, which also has been mentioned.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at some length and perusing the documents, I am of the considered view that the charge sheet Annexure P-1 cannot be considered to be a charge sheet issued under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
A perusal of Annexure P-1 does not disclose that imposition of major penalty has been contemplated which usually is the feature in such like charge sheet nor the list of witnesses and the documents were accompanying the statement of charges.
Similarly, the charges are general in nature alleging some slackness, insubordination, absence and delay in payment etc.
The charge sheet necessarily was issued and considered under Rule 10 of the Rules.
Therefore, it does not call for holding of any regular enquiry.
The reply filed by the petitioner Annexure P-2 has been duly considered and the order Annexure P-3 was passed thereafter.
Therefore, the judgment of the Full Bench in KG Tewari's case (supra) would not govern the issue raised in the writ petition.
For the reasons aforementioned, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.