Jasbir Singh, J - Petitioners have filed this writ petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer to issue a writ of certiorari, mandamus or suitable writ, direction or order and they be declared entitled to the grant of selection grade as per policy decision Annexure P-1 with effect from December 8, 1981.
They have further prayed that arrears be paid to them along with interest.
2.
Briefly stated, case of the petitioner is that at the time of filing this writ petition, petitioner No. 1 was working as Addressograph in the Department of Printing and Stationery, Punjab.
He joined as a Packer on July 12, 1963 and was confirmed on that post on April 1, 1966.
Thereafter, he was promoted to the post of Addressograph on September 15, 1971 and was confirmed on that post on June 1, 1975.
Petitioner No. 2 originally joined the Department as a Mazdoor on March 18, 1957.
He was then promoted as Packer on September 25, 1961.
After his confirmation on that post, he was promoted as Gestetner Operator on February 20, 1969 and was confirmed on that post on June 1, 1975.
Petitioners have further stated that in the respondent-Department, there existed only one post of Addressograph and one post of Gestetner Operator and no further promotion was available.
Above mentioned posts were in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600.
Cadre of Gestetner Operator and Addressographer consists of only one post each.
State of Punjab vide letter dated June 7, 1977 issued instructions regarding determination of number of posts for grant of selection grade.
Those instructions provided that selection grade was to be sanctioned to 20% of the posts in a particular cadre and that in case 20% of the cadre strength comes to a fraction of 05 or more, it was to be treated as one post and where it comes to less than 05, it was to be ignored.
Thereafter on representations made, matter was reconsidered by the Government and letter dated December 8, 1991 (Annexure P-1) was issued vide which it was decided that the selection grade at the rate of 20% would be admissible subject to the minimum of one post.
By referring to above mentioned letter, it was stated that even in a cadre comprising only of one or two posts, selection grade was made admissible to one post.
It is averred that in view of subsequent instructions issued in the year 1981, both the petitioners had became entitled to selection grade in the scale of Rs. 510-800 with effect from December, 1981.
They made various representations to the respondent to grant them the selection grade.
They were informed by the respondent- Department that their matter had been taken up with the Government and was under consideration.
When no relief was granted to them, they again made representations to the respondent.
They were informed that the matter was under consideration and whatever decision would be taken by the Government, the petitioners would be intimated of the same.
After waiting for some time, the petitioners sent a reminder on June 5, 1986 (Annexure P-5).
In reply thereto, they were informed vide letter dated July 30, 1986 (Annexure P-6) that the cases regarding grant of selection grade to those individuals working against solitary post have now been recommended to the Third Pay Commission, which had already been set up.
Petitioners then filed this writ petition by averring that the action on the part of the Government was totally unreasonable and against instructions issued from time to time, especially Annexures P-1 and P7/A as they are entitled to the grant of selection grade, which was granted by the Government to other similarly situated employees.
3.
Upon notice, respondent appeared and filed a written-statement, wherein facts regarding entry of the petitioners in service, their promotions etc. were admitted.
However, it has been stated that since the Second Pay Commission had not made any specific recommendation regarding of selection grade to the posts of Addressographer and Gestetner, the petitioners were not automatically entitled to get that benefit on the basis of instructions referred to above.
Their case was considered and sent for recommendation/approval and since in the meantime, Third Pay Commission was constituted, it was thought proper to refer the matter for consideration of the Third Pay Commission.
This policy decision was made applicable not only to the petitioners but all other posts, similarly situated, in other Departments also.
4.
Shri Balram Gupta, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners, vehemently contended that as per policy decisions (Annexure P-1, P7/A and R1), the petitioners were entitled to the grant of selection grade, which had unjustifiably been declined to them.
By referring to orders Annexures P-7 and P7/A, he submitted that in the case of Drivers and Steno-typists, selection grade was awarded even to the incumbents holding isolated post, after completion of eight years of service, in the junior scale.
Shri Gupta further contended that the petitioners were entitled to get benefit of selection grade with effect from December 8, 1981, when instructions Annexure P-1 were issued.
They had been agitating the matter and making representations to the department and there was no occasion to refer the matter and await the decision of the Third Pay Commission.
They were entitled to get benefit on the basis of recommendations of Second Pay Commission and subsequent instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
He prayed that Annexure P-6 be quashed and the respondents be declared entitled to the payment of selection grade.
5.
This prayer has vehemently been opposed by Shri GPS Nagra, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab.
He submitted that as a policy decision, all those cases involving single post cadre were referred to the Third Pay Commission for decision.
He contended that since no specific provisions/recommendations were made by the Second Pay Commission for grant of selection grade to the posts of Gestetner Operator and Addressographer, the petitioners were not automatically entitled to the grant of selection grade.
However, since in the meantime Third Pay Commission was constituted the matter was referred to it for its opinion/recommendation.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties, this Court is of the opinion that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is apparent from the records that on the basis of recommendations made by the Second Pay Commission, State of Punjab issued instructions from time to time regarding grant of selection grade to its employees.
Initially, it was provided that number of selection grade posts, at each level, should not exceed 20% of the strength of the basic cadre, for which the selection grade posts are to be sanctioned.
Vide letter dated June 7, 1977, it was envisaged that where number of selection grade posts comes to 05 or more, it should be taken as one post and where the fraction works out to be less than 05, it should be ignored.
It was further provided that in case of a cadre consisting of two posts, no selection grade post would be admissible.
This matter was reconsidered and vide letter dated December 8, 1981 (Annexure P-1), it was decided by the Government that selection grade at the rate of 20% would be admissible subject to the minimum of one post.
It ws further clarified that in a cadre comprising even one or two posts, the selection grade would be admissible to one post.
Thereafter consolidated instructions regarding grant of selection grade were issued by the Government vide letter dated October 29, 1984 (Annexure R-1).
This letter contains summary of all the guide-lines issue earlier regarding grant of selection grade and reads as under :-  "1.
No. 8/30/78-FR(5)/1845, dated the 3rd March, 1980.
(i) Selection grades will be provided in cases where the number of higher posts (all levels taken together) to which employees in a particular case can seek promotion is less than half the strength of that cadre or where there is no promotion post at all, available to a cadre or service : (ii) The number of selection grade posts at each level should not exceed 20% of the strength of the basic scale for which the selection grade posts are to be sanctioned.
For the purpose of calculating the number of selection grade posts, all posts including temporary posts, which have been in existence for three years, should be taken into account; and  (iii) Selection grade will not be admissible to an officer unless he has completed 15 years service.
The service should either be in the basic scale where appointment to the basic scale is from the point of fresh entry into service or as the sum total of the employees's service in the basic scale and in the one scale next below.
(2) No. 8/30/78-FR(5)3369, dated the 5th April, 1980.
The observations of the 2nd Punjab Pay Commission as contained in paragraphs 911 to 913 of its report (Extract at Appendix-I), particularly the observations relating to levels of `promotions' available in the respective cadres, should be kept in view.
(3) No. 8/30/78-FR(5), dated the 19th November, 1980.
Specific sanction determining the number of selection grade posts in each case should be issued by the Administrative Department concerned in consultation with the Department of Finance.
(4) No. 7/84/81-5FR/10191, dated the 8th December 1981.
Selection grade @ 20% would be admissible subject to the minimum of one post.
Thus, in a cadre comprising even one or two posts the selection grade would be admissible to one post."
7.
Shri Nagra, on getting instructions from Shri Manjeet Singh, Assistant in the Department of Printing and Stationery, Punjab, stated that these are the final instructions regarding grant of selection grade to employees of the Government.
After reading above mentioned instructions, this Court feels that there was no necessity to send case of the petitioners for recommendations of the Third Pay Commission.
It should have been taken note of and considered on the basis of instructions issued by the Government as referred to above.
Admittedly, petitioners claim grant of selection grade on the basis of recommendations made by the Second Pay Commission and also on the ground that similarly situated persons, who were getting the same pay scale/grade, i.e. 400-600 were granted benefit of selection grade in the scale of Rs. 510-800.
To strengthen this argument, Shri Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, referred to the documents Annexure P-7 and P7/A, vide which selection grade was granted to Drivers, Clerks and Steno-typist.
8.
This Court feels that the case of the petitioners was not dealt with by the competent authority in a proper manner.
There was no justification to send their case to the Third Pay Commission.
Their case was required to be decided on the basis of existing instructions, which were prevalent at that time.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and impugned order/letter dated July 30, 1986 (Annexure P-6) is quashed.
Keeping in view facts and circumstances of the case, competent authority, i.e., respondent is directed to decide as to whether the petitioners are entitled to the grant of selection grade on the basis of then existing instructions as found mentioned in letter dated October 29, 1984 (Annexure R-1).
The respondent is directed to consider case of the petitioners and pass an appropriate order within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.