AK Rajan, J - In both the writ petitions the first respondent is the Kovilpatti Municipality.
2.
In WP No. 19660 of 1994, wife of the first petitioner got superannuated on June 30, 1977 and subsequently she died on August 9, 1987.
In WP No. 19661 of 1994, the father of the petitioners died on January 23, 1983.
Till that period, the gratuity amount payable to them was not paid.
Therefore, the legal representatives of both the employees filed applications before the competent authorities for payment of gratuity.
The Assistant Commissioner of Labour by Order dated December 4, 1992 directed the Commissioner, Kovilpatti Municipality to pay the gratuity.
The Commissioner, Kovilpatti paid the gratuity amount, but, however, the interest for the delayed payment of gratuity was not paid.
The petitioners filed an appeal before the Deputy Commissioner of Labour and by order dated December 13, 1993, refused to grant the interest for the delayed payment.
Hence, these writ petitions are filed asking the interest amount alone.
3.
No counter was filed by the respondents.
4.
In the impugned order, it is stated that Section 7(3-A) was introduced only on August 23, 1987 and according to that interest is payable for the delayed payment.
Since the amendment was only prospective the petitioner is not entitled for interest for the delayed payment.
That is why payment of interest was rejected.
5.
Counsel for the petitioners relied upon a decision reported in State of Kerala v. M Padmanabhan Nair, 1985 LIC 664, wherein the Supreme Court has held that in case of non-payment of interest where the gratuity and pension were not paid in time the authorities are liable to that amount with interest as it is not a gratis or bounty.
The Supreme Cow held that under the circumstances, the Government is liable to pay the amount with interest at the market rate.
This judgment was much prior to the amendment made to the Gratuity Act.
Therefore, even otherwise as per Section 7(3-A) of the Act, interest was payable for non-payment of gratuity in time.
There is no explanation as to why the gratuity was not paid to the person who died in 1977 till the year 1983.
Similarly, a person was not paid gratuity amount for more than ten years.
It is not proper and the authorities are expected to act without delay when especially the matter relates to gratuity and utmost care should be taken and order should be passed without any delay whatsoever.
Therefore, the petitioners are entitled for interest for the delay in payment from the date of death of the employee.
With regard to payment of interest, the Supreme Court observed that interest should be paid on the basis of the market rate whereas the Act says the interest should be paid as prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India for long-term loan.
6.
Taking into consideration of both the provisions this Court is of the view that the interest is payable at the rate of 9 per cent from the respective due dates.
Writ petitions are ordered accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.