Swatanter Kumar, J - Notice to show cause as to why petition be not admitted.
Mr. Raghbir Chaudhary, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana accepts notice on behalf of respondents.
2.
In view of the course of action we propose to adopt, it is not necessary for the State of file reply.
The demand notice dated 25.3.2002 was served by the workman upon appropriate government with a prayer to make reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
That reference was declined vide order dated 2082002, which reads as under :  "It is to inform you that Govt. does not deem it appropriate to send your case to the Labour Court because after inquiry, it came to the notice that the office of the Deputy Commissioner does not come in the definition of the industry under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and neither you come in definition of workman.
Therefore, your demand notice is hereby rejected."
3.
The only contention raised before us is that the appropriate government has exceeded its jurisdiction in determining the dispute on merits and coming to the conclusion that the respondent department was not an industry within the meaning of provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
This ex-facie is determination of dispute on merits, which squarely falls outside the jurisdiction and domain of the Government.
Reliance in this regard can be placed on a Full Bench Judgment of this Court in Radhey Shyam and another v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(2) SCT 1 (P&H) : 1998(2) Punjab Law Reporter 1 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh and another v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1565.
4.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this petition, set aside order dated 2982002, Annexure P5, with a further direction to respondents to pass appropriate order in accordance with law under Section 10(1)(c) read with Section 20A of the Industrial Disputes Act within a period of 4 months from the date certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
Petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.