Swatanter Kumar, J - Swaran Singh petitioner has approached the Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction quashing Annexure P/1 order dated 532002 passed by the Judicial Staff Officer (Admn.
), Addl.
Director General of Police-cum-Commandant General Home Guards and Director Civil Defence, Punjab, Chandigarh.
Primary grievance of the petitioner is that the impugned order is contrary to the statutory provisions contained in Rule 423 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
It is also contended that the said order is violative of principles of natural justice and accepted canons of service jurisprudence.
The petitioner joined as Constable Radio Telephony Operator in the Punjab Police on 2641963 and was duly allotted constabulary number.
This cadre was abolished on creation of Border Security Force under the Central Rule.
As a result thereto, the petitioner was discharged vide discharge certificate dated 531968 from service.
He remained out of service till 371980, when he was re-appointed in Punjab Home Guards as Wireless Operator in Civil Defence.
The appointment to the petitioner was given because of his good report in the previous service.
As per the appointment letter, the terms and conditions of service of the petitioner were to be governed by the Punjab Home Guard Rules, 1963 and Punjab Civil Service Rules.
Under Rule 10 of the Punjab Home Guard Rules, 1963, it is stated that enlisting of the members in this force will be given to the trained policemen.
The petitioner claimed benefit of the previous service which were duly verified at the time of enrollment.
2.
On 871992, the petitioner moved a representation with request to the respondents to take into consideration the previous service for the purposes of pension.
On 3091999, the petitioner retired from service after rendering 20 years of service as Wireless Operator in the Home Guards.
Again representation dated 11.10.2000 was filed by the petitioner.
He even moved another representation on 3112002.
The respondents vide their letter dated 532002 rejected the representation of the petitioner and the said order has been impugned in this writ petition.
3.
The respondents filed reply to the writ petition of the petitioner.
However, the material facts have not been disputed.
According to the respondents, the appointment of the petitioner was not a reappointment in the Punjab Home Guards and Civil Defence Department, but it was a fresh appointment on 371980.
The rules do not permit grant of any benefit of previous service to the petitioner and in any case, there has been more than 12 years break which cannot be condoned.
It is further averred that the representation has rightly been rejected by the Additional Director General of Police-cum-Commandant General Punjab Home Guards, and as such the writ should be dismissed.
4.
In order to resolve the controversy reference to the relevant rules in regard to grant of previous service can be appropriately referred to.
Rule 423 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules reads as under :-  "4.23.
In the absence of a specific indication to the contrary in the service record, an interruption between two spells of service rendered under the State Government shall be treated as automatically condoned, and the pre- interruption service shall be treated as qualifying service for pension purposes, except where the interruption has been caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service or due to participation in a strike, but the period of interruption itself shall, under no circumstances, be reckoned as qualifying service for pension purposes."
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the State while referring to the said rule contended that 12 years of break cannot be condoned and in any case the service of the petitioner had been terminated on 8.1.1968 and as such the employee would not be entitled to the benefit of the said rule at all.
6.
A bare reading of the above rule shows that an interruption between two spells of service rendered under the State Government shall be treated as automatically condoned.
However, this benefit will not accrue to an employee in whose service career the interruption is caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service.
The petitioner has been member of two different departments of the State of Punjab.
Earlier he was working in the Department of Police and subsequently in the Department of Home Guards and Civil Defence.
There is no dispute to the fact that both these departments are part of the State Administration.
In our view it will not be correct to say that service of the petitioner were terminated on 8.3.1968 which tantamounts to resignation, dismissal or removal from service.
The language of the rule is suggestive that termination should be punitive or for a misconduct of the employee.
Here the cadre itself was abolished and consequently discharge certificate was issued to the petitioner on 581968.
Column No. 9 of the discharge certificate specifically indicates what was the cause for discharge.
It stated "due to abolition of R.T. cadre from the Punjab Police wireless Section w.e.f.
8.3.1968."
7.
It is not necessary for us to disclose this aspect of the matter at any greater length.
In the case of Bidhi Chand v. State of Punjab, 1999(1) SCT 481 (P&H) CWP No. 13702 of 1997, decided on 24.9.1998, while interpreting the same rule, somewhat similar view was taken by the Court as expressed by us.
The State preferred an appeal against the said view in L.P.A. No. 90 of 1990, State of Punjab and others v. Bidhi Chand, which was also dismissed vide judgment dated 19.5.1999 of the Letters Patent Bench by observing as under :-  "The respondent was also served with a notice of termination and his services were accordingly terminated w.e.f.
1.10.1967 though he actually worked till 19.4.1968 under the orders of the court.
It is, therefore, apparent from the above that the services of the respondent did not come to end because of his resignation or removal or dismissal from service.
Rather he was discharged from the Police Department on his expressing unwillingness for being transferred to the Border Security Force.
Thus, in view of the rule ibid, the service rendered by him on previous occasion i.e. from 711961 to 1.10.1967 deserved to be treated as qualifying service for purposes of computation of pension and this is what has been allowed by the learned Single Judge by the order under appeal.
We see no error of law in the conclusion arrived at by the learned Single Judge in that behalf.
This contention of the learned counsel is devoid of any merit."
8.
In view of the position explained above, it is difficult for us to sustain the view taken by the authorities in the impugned order dated 532002.
The respondents were not justified in declining the representation of the petitioner and not counting the service rendered by him in the Department of Punjab Police for pensionary benefits.
Once the ingredients of the rule afore-referred are satisfied, the only embargo provided in the rule is with regard to counting of the period of break for such benefits.
This period must and has to be excluded.
However, the period can be condoned upon an applicant satisfying the essential conditions spelled out in the said rules.
9.
For the reasons aforesaid, we quash the order dated 532002, Annexure P.1 to the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for refixation of benefit of pension while granting him benefit of service rendered by him in the facts and circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.