Binod Kumar Roy, CJ.
- The Petitioner, who claims to be a resident of House No. 6, Police Colony, Mani Majra, Union Territory of Chandigarh, has come up with a prayer to command the respondents to prepare the selection list on merits for the general category and to include his name in the selection list.
2.
His case is as follows :-  He passed Matriculation Examination from the CBSE with Roll No. 21411447 in the Examinations held in March, 1997 through Government Senior Secondary School, Mani Majra, wherein he got a compartment in the subject of English language, which he cleared with Roll No. 214458 in the examinations held in 1998.
Respondent No. 3 the Deputy Inspector General, CRPF, Group Centre, Pinjore (Haryana), advertised 830 posts of constables/G.D.
vide advertisements dated 1662002 and 2622002; as per the break up of the afore-mentioned posts, 318 were meant for the State of Haryana and 12 for the Chandigarh.
Pursuant to the advertisements afore-mentioned, he applied for recruitment to the post of constable meant for Chandigarh in General Category attaching the attested copies of all the requisite documents including the Character Certificate, Residence Certificate, Matriculation Certificate and the Senior Secondary Examination Certificate.
He was issued a call letter dated 19102002 with Roll No. 9819 to appear in the physical test and ground test on 30112002.
He appeared in the interview/test with all relevant documents.
After perusal of the documents his physical measurement was conducted by the recruitment board/competent authority of the CRPF on 30112002.
At the time of his physical measurement, the following criteria for selection was adopted :- Height 168 cm, Weight 50 KG, Chest 7883 cms.
He cleared all the tests and was the serial No. 2 in the race.
As he fulfilled all the requisite qualifications and had cleared the physical test and ground test, and was found fit for the recruitment as constable in the CRPF against the general category.
The recruitment board/competent authority issued him a letter to appear in the written test to be held on 5122002.
He appeared in the said test on 5122002, the result of which was declared on 10122002 on public address system by calling out the names of those candidates, who had failed.
His name did not figure, meaning thereby that he had passed the written test.
He was verbally told by the concerned officer to come for medical examination and interview on 1012003.
He attended the medical check up on 1012003.
For six vacancies for general category candidates, in the medical examination only six candidates were cleared including him, meaning thereby that he was found medically fit.
He and five other candidates were called for interview on the same day.
In the interview, no question was asked and only the forms were checked up by the officers, during which he was told that he is not being selected, as he had passed his Senior Secondary Examination from Sonepat.
He came to know that the respondents are going to issue selection list on 1512003 by excluding his name despite the fact that he had cleared all the tests and fulfilled all the requisite requirements.
In doing so, the action of respondents No. 5 and 6 is illegal, arbitrary, unjust, unwarranted and therefore, not legally sustainable and since there is no equally efficacious and speedy remedy, hence this writ petition.
3.
The respondents in their written statement assert as follow :-  The petitioner is a resident of Haryana and not of the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
He has passed the Senior Secondary Certificate Examination held in March 1999 from CRZ Senior Secondary School, Sonepat (Haryana).
At the interview, it was revealed by him that he is pursuing his higher studies and is studying in BA Part-III in a college at Sonepat.
It is not possible for a person to study as a regular student in school/college which is 200 kms away from his declared residence and cannot travel to and fro daily.
Thus he cannot be treated as a bonafide resident of the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
The petitioner was called for medical examination and interview on 1012003 and after conduct of the medical examination, interview of fit candidates was conducted, during which all documents were checked.
During the checking of the documents, it was found that the petitioner had passed the Senior Secondary Certificate Examination held by the Board of School Education, Haryana during March, 1999 as a regular student and that he is studying inn BA in a college at Sonepat (Haryana).
This issue was discussed by the PO and all members of the recruitment board in detail and it became clear to the board that the petitioner had managed to get Residence Certificate of the Union Territory of Chandigarh by furnishing false information to the competent authority and his candidature was rejected.
Itt is thus, prayed that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
The Submissions :-  4.
Shri Som Nath Saini, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, contended as follows :-  There is presumption of correctness attached with the Residence Certificate granted by the Sub Divisional Magistrate (E), Chandigarh in view of illustration (e) attached with section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 inasmuch as it was granted by the competent authority.
The authorities had failed to consider that had the petitioner been, in fact, a resident of the State of Haryana, of which Chandigarh is the Capital and the number of vacancies for the State of Haryana for men being 316 out of 318, he would have naturally showed him to be a resident of Haryana and thereby enhanced his chances for selection as compared to Chandigarh, for which only 12 vacancies were earmarked.
The findings recorded orally are based on mere surmises and conjectures and are not supported by any tangible nature or circumstances.
Even before this Court no document has been shown that the petitioner, in fact, was a resident of the State of Haryana and not of the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
He also highlighted that the relevant submission made, by him in paragraphs 5 to 8 of the writ petition have not been denied.
The denial of he petitioner's claim that he is a resident of Mani Majra, which is situated within the Union Territory of Chandigarh, is not at all bonafide.
Thus, the petitioner is entitled to the reliefs claimed for by this Court.
5.
Ms. Ranjana Shahi, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, contended as follows :-  The recruitment board has correctly appreciated the school certificate furnished by the petitioner in regard to his residence and it has correctly come to a conclusion that the petitioner was not a bonafide resident of Chandigarh and thereby, the writ petition be dismissed.
Our Findings :-  6.
The Residence Certificate dated 1382001 granted by the Sub Divisional Magistrate (E), Chandigarh has been brought on record as Annexure R-2 by he respondents.
It shows, inter-alia, that the SDM has certified to the effect that the petitioner is a resident of House No. 6, Police Colony, Sector Mani Majra, Chandigarh and that he has been residing in the Union Territory of Chandigarh for the last/since 1031997.
It further shows that it is based on the report of the Tehsildar of the Union Territory of Chandigarh also.
61 Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 reads as follows :-  "The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case."
Illustration (e) attached with the aforementioned section reads as follows :-  "That judicial and official acts have been regularly performed."
62 The question is as to whether the presumption of correctness and regularity attached with the aforementioned certificate of the petitioner stands rebuted before us ?
Our Answer is "No".
63 The respondents have also brought on record the Senior Secondary Certificate granted by the Board of School Education, Haryana, pertaining to the petitioner, as Annexure R-1.
This certificate does not at all show that the petitioner was not residing a Mani Majra in the Union Territory of Chandigarh or that was residing some where else in the State of Haryana.
A million dollar question that arises before us is as to what advantage the petitioner could have derived by falsely showing himself to be resident of Union Territory of Chandigarh as compared to Haryana which is of great significance in view of the patent fact that only 12 posts stands ear-marked for the Union Territory of Chandigarh, whereas for the State of Haryana, the number of posts earmarked 316.
A person will naturally like to take chances amongst higher number of vacancies and not with lessor number of vacancies.
In the instant case, only 12 posts were ear-marked for the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
Apparently, the view taken by the authorities is based on surmises and conjectures.
In this fast age of transport, it is easily possible to attain educational career from a distance.
There was no legal flaw in having education by temporarily residing in Haryana also.
7.
In the aforementioned view of the matter, the action of the respondents has to be declared arbitrary.
We declare accordingly.
8.
It appears that the training was for six month period, out of which nearly four months have elapsed.
Admittedly, the petitioner is not at fault.
The fault lies with he authorities.
The Constitution of India gives to the Petitioner fundamental rights under Article 16 for consideration of his appointment.
This has been arbitrarily negatived by the authorities in view of the above findings recorded by us.
9.
We are, thus, of the view that the petitioner is entitled to the reliefs claimed for.
10.
We direct the respondents to declare the petitioner successful and permit him to take part in the going on training or if it is not practically possible, then permit him to undergo a separate training programme or even to undergo training with the next batch, if it is contemplated.
11.
With the aforementioned directions, we allow this writ petition.
12.
Let a copy of this order be handed over to Ms. Shahi for communication to and follow up action by the Respondents.
Petition allowed.