TS Doabia, J - This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner contends that the cadre of Research Assistant to which he was appointed is a diminishing cadre and as such he is seeking parity with Lecturers employed in the same institution Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Gwallior (hereinafter referred to as 'College').
The petition arises out of the following facts.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as Research Assistant on 20th February, 1984.
The letter of appointment has been placed on the record as Annexure R/1.
He continued to work for quite some time on this post.
However, in the year 1988 one Shri Qureshi who was working as an Assistant was appointed as Lecturer.
This gave rise to the filing of the present petition.
The contention of the petitioner was that if respondent No. 3 was to be appointed as lecturer then he should also be accorded the same treatment.
For this he placed reliance upon the concept of equal pay for equal work.
3.
It may be seen that while working as Research Assistant he submitted a representation copy of this is Annexure P/17.
According to him, he should be given the same pay scale as is being given to the lecturers.
He sought sustenance to his claim from some recommendations made by the University Grants Commission.
It is the further case of the petitioner that the respondent college authorities of their own had taken note of the disparity and on the basis of the factual position made recommendations in his favour from time to time.
In this regard he referred to Annexure P/5.
He also placed reliance on the report of the Review Committee of the college vide which recommendations were made that the post of Research Assistant be done away with and the staff working as Research Assistant should be given the same pay scale as Lecturers.
The petitioner has placed reliance on a letter written by the University Grants Commission.
Copy whereof is Annexure P/4 in which it was pointed out that the qualifications of the research staff are the same as those of the members of the faculty who are doing the teaching job.
Reliance has again been placed for claiming parity with the benefits attached to the post of a lecturer on the ground that the petitioner had been performing the same duties as those of the teachers.
The petitioner has placed reliance on Annexure P/10A in which this aspect was considered by the Dean of the college and the matter was referred to the Sports Authority of India.
In the above recommendation it was pointed out that Research Assistants working in the college should be treated as Scientific Staff and suggested the same action as suggested by the University Grants Commission be taken and recommended giving them benefits of lecturer post.
It was accordingly argued that the research assistants should also be given the same scales as those of the lecturers.
Annexure P/42 is another document on which reliance has been placed.
4.
The petitioner has further pleaded that earlier there were posts of Coaches.
The educational qualifications for getting the job of Coaches was much lower but these coaches have been accorded the status of lecturer.
It is argued that when there was review of the grading system in the college then all grades should have been given a fresh look and even the case of research assistants who were placed on a higher pedestal as coaches should have been examined.
According to the petitioner, this was not done as the cadre of lecturer has become a diminishing cadre and as matter of fact in majority of colleges under the Sports Authority of India, the post of Research Assistant does not exist.
5.
The further contention of the petitioner is that the recommendations of the Review Committee was also accepted by the Board of Governors of Sports Authority of India and this was apparent from letter dated 12th February, 1987.
The petitioner has also placed reliance on a number of documents to show that he has been taking teaching classes.
He has placed reliance on the time table and the schedule of teaching which was given to him.
For this reliance is being placed on Annexure P/7, P/8, P/9, P/11, P/18-C to 18-N. Annexure P/18 is a chart prepared of work done by him as a Research Assistant.
According to the petitioner this is same as was done by other lecturers.
Annexure P/24 is another document which indicates that the petitioner has been making internal assessment in the same manner as done by lecturers.
According to him he has been taking internal classes.
The petitioner states that he was assigned the task of taking tests.
Reliance has been placed on Annexure P/24F and P/25 A & B The petitioner states that he has also been performing the duties of a coach.
Annexures P/26, P/27, P/28, P/29, P/31, P/32, P/33, P/34, P/35 and P/38 have been relied upon for this purpose.
The petitioner contends that when the coaches have been granted parity with lecturers then there is no reason to deny this relief to the petitioner.
6.
The petitioner has further submitted that his assessment was done as teaching staff and he has placed reliance on Annexures P/44 to P/48.
According to the petitioner a lecturer is supposed to teach 10 hours in a week.
He is given 4 hours for preparation, 10 hours for research.
The petitioner submits that he has been devoting more work hours while performing the duty of a lecturer.
7.
As noticed above the learned counsel for the petitioner has laid great stress on the fact that the coaches with lesser qualification have been given higher grade of lecturers and there is no justification to not to accord the same treatment to the petitioner.
With a view to supplement this argument the petitioner's counsel has again referred to the recommendations of the Review Committee.
These recommendations made from time to time were implemented with regard to research assistants.
The plea of the college authorities that the approval of the Government of India is required is said to be a plea taken to defeat the legitimate claim of the petitioner.
According to him, this is without any merit.
He states that this plea was also taken earlier before this Court when on this petition an order was passed by this Court on 14th September, 1990.
So far as the approval of the Board of Governors is concerned, it is admitted that such approval does exist.
Reference has been made to this in para 6 of the additional return.
8.
Plea akin to mala fide in the law has also been urged.
According to the petitioner, the post of Research Assistant has been retained in this college only.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the respondent college is not an authority within the meaning of the Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
10.
On merits the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is that the question as to whether a particular post falls within a particular pay-scale or not is a matter which is exclusively within the domain of the college and is not to be subjected to judicial review.
For this he has placed reliance on State of UP v. JP Chaurasia and others, AIR 1989 SC 19, Mullikarjuna Rao and others, etc. etc. v. State of AP and others, etc. etc., AIR 1990 SC 1251 has been relied upon with a view to contend that the concept of equal pay for equal work is not attracted to this case.
It is also contended that at the time when the petitioner joined the services the qualifications for the post of Research Assistant and the Lecturers were different.
The petitioner accordingly is not within his rights to claim any parity.
He has also contended that the Pay Commission gave its report in the year 1987.
The copy of the same is Annexure R/2.
As the Pandey Pay Commission has thought it to fit provide different pay scale to the post of Research Assistant, this Court should not sit over judgment as an appellate authority.
The matter having been examined by expert committee should be treated as final.
He has stated that the grades given by the University Grants Commission are not applicable for the purposes of this college as the college is not getting any assistance from the University Grants Commission, the college being 100 per cent financed by the Union Government.
11.
It is also pointed out that the post of Research Assistant not only exists at Gwalior but it exists at Trivandrum also.
12.
It is also argued that the petitioner has not been assigned any teaching assignment for the last three years.
This assertion is, however, disputed by the petitioner.
13.
From the narration of the facts given above, the contentions which have been raised by the petitioner may be summarised :  (i) that, the qualifications for the post of Research Assistant and the Lecturer are the same; (ii) that, for the post of coach, even though the qualifications required were lesser yet these coaches have been equated as lecturers; (iii) that, the college authorities have taken a decision in favour of giving the same scales; somehow or the other this has not been implemented; (iv) that, when the case was referred to the Pay Commission, the case of Research Assistant was not made subject-matter of revision; and (v) that, the cadre of Research Assistant is diminishing cadre and it exists only in Gwalior and Trivandrum; and  (vi) that, the petitioner has been performing the same duties as performed by the lecturers, and, therefore, he cannot be denied the same scales.
14.
As noticed above, the stand of the respondents is simple.
According to them, the post of search Assistant falls in a different cadre and there is no parity between the work done by a Research Assistant and a Lecturer.
The positive assertion made by the petitioner that he has been performing the duties of a Lecturer have not been denied.
A plea has been taken that for the last 2 to 3 years the petitioner has not been performing the duties of a Lecturer.
It may further be seen that the details of the work done by the petitioner has not been denied.
15.
The objection taken that the respondent institution in question is not an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India may be seen.
16.
In the case of Ajay Hasia etc. v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi, AIR 1981 SC 487, six tests were laid down with a view to find out whether an authority would be an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India or not.
These tests laid down in the above case may now be noticed :  "(1) One thing is clear that if the entire share capital of the Corporation is held by the Government it will go a long way towards indicating that the Corporation is an instrumentality or agency of Government; (2) Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the Corporation, it would afford some indication of the Corporation being impregnated with governmental character; (3) It may also be a relevant factor .... whether the corporation enjoys monopoly status which is the State conferred or State protected; (4) Existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that the corporation is a State agency or instrumentality; (5) If the function of the corporation is of public importance and closely related to Governmental functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of Government; and (6) Specifically, if a department of Government is transferred to a corporation it would be a strong factor supportive of this inference of the corporation being an instrumentality or agency of Government."
17.
In this case almost all the tests enumerated above are attracted.
As such the respondent college is to be treated as an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
18.
Reference may be made to the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Sheela Barse v. The Secretary, Children Aid Society and others, AIR 1987 SC 656.
In this case, the Children's Aid Society, Bombay registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 was held to be a body covered by the term "State" as contained in Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
This society received grants from the State and was looking after the interest of the children.
Para 12 of the judgment is relevant and may be noticed :  "We agree with the appellant that the respondent Society should have been treated as a State within the meaning of Art. 12 as it is undoubtedly an instrumentality of the State on the basis of the test laid down by this Court.
The respondent-Society has, therefore, to regulate its activities not only in accordance with the statutory requirements but also act in a manner satisfying the requirements of the Constitutional provisions in Arts.
21 and 24 as also the Directive Principles of the State Policy."
18A.
In view of the tests laid down in the case of Ajay Hasia (supra) and Sheela Barse (supra), the respondent-institution is held to be an authority for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution and is amenable to writ jurisdiction.
19.
Now the question with regard to equal pay for equal work may be examined.
20.
The principle of equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by our Constitution to a fundamental right.
When Article 39(d) is read it does indicate that Constitutional aim is that State shall not deny to any citizen equality before law.
Equality clause as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution would become meaningless to a vast majority of people who look forward to the protective umberalla of Articles 14, 19 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
21.
Article 14 of the Constitution strikes at the arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment.
It is attracted where equals are treated differently without any reasonable basis.
The principle underlying the guarantee is that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike both in privileges conferred and liabilities imposed.
Equal laws must be applied equally and there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject-matter of either administrative action or of legislation, their position is substantially the same.
Article 14 forbids class legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation or administrative mandate.
The classification must, however, be founded on an intelligible basis which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group and that difference must have a rational nexus with the object to be achieved by the differentiation made in the statute or order in question.
In other words, there ought to be casual connection between the basis of classification and the object of the classification.
The question of discrimination cannot be decided in isolation.
In addition to the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', the pay structure should reflect many other social values.
22.
The principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is not abstract one.
It is open to the State to prescribe different scale of pay for different cadres, having regard to nature, duties, responsibilities and educational qualifications.
Different grades are laid down in service with varying qualification for entry into particular grade.
Higher qualification and experience based on length of service are valid considerations for prescribing different pay scales for different cadres.
The application of doctrine arises where employees are equal in every respect, in educational qualifications, duties, functions and measure of responsibilities and yet they are denied equality in pay.
If the classification for prescribing different scales of pay is founded on reasonable nexus the principle will not apply.
But if the classification is founded on unreal and unreasonable basis it would violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', must have its way.
23.
The Supreme Court in the case of Kishori Mohan Lal Bakshi v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 1113 and State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh, AIR 1963 SC 913 held that the abstract principle of Equal pay for Equal work has nothing to do with equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India However, in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879, the Supreme Court taking note of the Preamble to Constitution of International Labour Organisation which recognised the concept of "equal remuneration for work of equal value" came to a conclusion that the concept of equal pay for equal work is deductible from Articles 14, 16 and 39(c).
This concept assumed concrete shape when in Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 344 the Court observed that although the doctrine of equal pay for equal work does not come within Art. 14 of the Constitution as an abstract doctrine, but if any classification is made relating to the pay-scales and such classification is unreasonable and/or if unequal pay is based on no classification, then Art. 14 will at once be attracted.
In other words, where unequal pay has brought about a discrimination within the meaning of Art. 14 of the Constitution, it will be a case of 'equal pay for equal work', as envisaged by Art. 14 of the Constitution.
In short, so long as it is not a case of discrimination under Art. 14 of the Constitution, the abstract doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work', as envisaged by Art. 39(d) of the Constitution, has no manner of application, nor is it enforceable in view of Art. 37 of the Constitution.
24.
PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 541, was held to be a case of glaring example of discriminatory treatment accorded to old experienced and highly qualified hands with an evil eye and unequal hand.
It was held that the guarantee of equality in all its pervasive character must enable the Court to remove discrimination and restore fair play in action.
The case of the petitioners for being put in the revised scale of Rs. 1100-1600 from the date on which newly-created posts of Professors in sister disciplines in IVRI and other institutes were created and filled in revised scale was held to be unanswerable and claim of the petitioners was held to be such which must be conceded.
25.
Differentiation sought to be justified on ground of dissimilarity of responsibility, confidentiality and relationship with public may have some rational nexus.
This was so held in Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 1291.
This is not the position in this case.
26.
The ratio in the case of Purshottam Lal v. Union of India, AIR 1973 SC 1088 wherein it was held that implementation of the revised pay scale in a particular category of servants from a date later than that recommended by the Pay Commission and thus non-implementation of its report only in respect of those persons amounts to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution may be attracted to this case.
The Constitution Bench in Laljee Dubey bv.
Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 252, again reiterated the same principle.
27.
In P Savita v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1124 the Supreme Court was dealing with Senior Draughtsmen doing the same work and discharging the similar functions and duties.
They were classified into two groups, on the basis of seniority with two different pay scales.
It was held that it was not permissible.
28.
In Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 and later in Dhirendra Chameli v. State of UP, (1986)1 SCC 637, Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD, AIR 1986 SC 584, Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2049, Jaipal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1504 and P Savita v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1124, the Supreme Court implemented the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'.
The Court granted relief on the principle of equal pay on the basis of same or similar work performed by two class of employees under the same employer even though the two class of employees did not constitute the same service.
In all the aforesaid cases relief was granted only after it was found that discrimination was practised in giving different scales of pay in violation of the equality clause enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
29.
In view of the above decisions one can say that where two class of employees perform identical or similar duties and carry out the same functions with the same measures of responsibility having same academic qualifications, they would be entitled to equal pay.
If the State denies them equality in pay, its action would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, and the Court will strike down the discrimination and grant relief to the aggrieved employee but before such relief is granted the Court must consider and analyse the rationale behind the State action in prescribing two different scales of pay.
If on an analysis of the relevant posts, the Court finds that the classification made by the State in giving differential treatment to the two class of employees is founded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the classification must be upheld.
Principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is applicable among equals, it cannot be applied to unequals.
Relief to an aggrieved person seeking to enforce the principles of 'equal pay for equal work' can be granted only after it is demonstrated before the Court that invidious discrimination is practised by the State in prescribing two different scales for the two class of employees without there being any reasonable classification for the same.
If the aggrieved employees fail to demonstrate discrimination, the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be enforced by Court in abstract.
The question what scale should be provided to a particular class of service must be left to the Executive and only when discrimination is practised amongst the equals, the Court should intervene to undo the wrong and to ensure equality among the similarly placed employees.
The Court, however, cannot prescribe equal scales of pay for different class of employees.
30.
Thus, even though the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is not expressly declared by our Constitution to be a fundamental right it is definitely a constitutional goal.
There is no doubt that principle of equal pay for equal work is no longer an abstract utopian mirage yet there must be intrinsic reliable cogent evidence to show that the two posts regarding which parity is sought are identical and carry the same degree of responsibility.
Once this is shown then equality clause will step in and equal protection of law would become a reality.
Thus the fundamental principle is that Article 14 forbids class legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation which classification must satisfy the twin tests of classification being founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
31.
Even though the cumulative effect of Articles 14 and 16 is to ensure that the employees with the same status, experience and seniority and doing similar work in the same cadre receive equal treatment yet it must be established as a factual reality.
It may be seen that Article 16 is a specific application of the general principle of equality contained in Article 14.
The object of the two articles is to ensure equality of opportunity in matters relating to public offices.
32.
Thus as per the law laid down by the Supreme Court of India the following principles emerge in the matter of grant of equal pay for equal work :  (i) The claim for equal pay for equal work is not to be decided as an abstract doctrine.
Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association of India v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 334; (ii) Aggrieved employee must demonstrate discrimination.
V Markendeya v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1989 SC 1308; (iii) Equality claim would be attracted where classification is unreasonable or is not based on any principle.
PK Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India and Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 334; (iv) Equal pay must depend upon the nature of work done.
It cannot be judged by the mere volume of work.
Differentiation despite similarity of functional work but due to dissimilarity of the responsibility confidentiality is not discriminatory.
Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 1291; (v) Payment of higher salary on the basis of higher qualification is permissible, Dr. C Cirijambal v. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, AIR SC 1537; (vi) Employees working in one institution cannot claim parity with other institutions.
All India Sainik Schools Employees Association v. The Defence Minister-cum-Chairman, Board of Governors, Sainik School Society, New Delhi, AIR 1989 SC 88; (vii) In the matter of revision of pay scales two groups were formed not on the basis of merit-cum-seniority but on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness though they were performing the same duties would be bad.
P Savita v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1124 and Delhi Veterinary Association v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1211; and (viii) Part-time employees doing work for same or more work hours are to get the same pay as regular employees.
Vijay Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1992(3) SCT 371 (P&H) : AIR 1994 SC 265.
33.
The petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment given by the Supreme Court in Writ Petition No. 9555 of 1983 decided on 25th April, 1985 (Bindeshwari Prasad Singh v. State of Rajasthan).
In this case, a question arose whether research assistants of Udaipur University were entitled to the same pay-scale as admissible to the University Lecturers.
Distinction was sought to be made between the two on the ground that the Research Assistants stand on different footings and that they have different qualifications and have entirely different duties.
In spite of this, the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court came to the conclusion that research assistants of Udaipur University are entitled to the same scale as recommended for lecturers.
Again another decision given by the Rajasthan High Court that is in the case of State of Rajasthan v. Dr. Nihal Singh, in Civil Appeal No. 265 of 1980 decided on 26th October, 1981, a Special Leave Petition was preferred in the Supreme Court of India.
The Special Leave Petition was dismissed and the judgment given by the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court was affirmed.
A review petition was preferred.
This review petition No. 401 of 1983 arising out of the Special Leave Petition No. 1732 of 1982 was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 8th of November, 1984.
34.
Later on in Bindeshwari Prasad Singh and ors. v. State of Rajasthan, Writ Petition No. 9555 of 1983 decided by the Supreme Court on 25th April, 1985 an argument was raised that grant of same scales for lecturers and Research Assistants may create some complications as research assistants would seek amalgamation with lecturers and this may create confusion.
On this limited issue, the Supreme Court observed that the research assistants and the lecturers need not be brought on a common seniority but so far as the grant of same pay scale is concerned, the same was upheld.
The relevant observations are as under :  "...The main plank of the submission was that the decision of the Rajasthan High Court as affirmed by this Court is likely to create inconvenience inasmuch as the Research Assistants and the Lecturers who form entirely separate and distinct cadres would have to be either amalgamated and might create confusion in the matter of further promotions, once they are put on per in the matter of pay scale.
We feel that there is some substance in the submission.
We propose to steer clear of this position.
However, the earlier judgment had nothing to do with amalgamation of cadres, a common seniority list or a feeder source for further promotions.
Research Assistants and Lecturers are separate and distinct cadres.
The only thing common is the scale.
However, in order to obviate any future difficulty in this behalf, we direct that the Research Assistants and the Lecturers will form separate cadres and they need not be brought on a common seniority list only on the ground that both enjoy the same pay scale as recommended by the University Grants Commission.
This would protect the University in respect of any of its apprehensions.
Rule is made absolute to the extent herein indicated in the matter of scale alone.
Any other prayer is neither deemed to be accepted nor rejected.
They are kept open to be dealt with in any appropriate proceedings.
The petitioners may take any appropriate proceedings before the authority they consider proper for relief, if so advised.
With these observations, we make the rule absolute in all the writ petitions in respect of pay scale only."
(Emphasis supplied) Thus, with regard to the pay scales no interference was made by the Supreme Court vis-a-vis the decision given by the Rajasthan High Court.
This judgment squarely covers the case of the petitioner.
35.
Apart from the above, it may be seen that the cadre of research assistant is a diminishing cadre and these posts exists only at Gwalior and Trivandrum.
As such, the claim made by the petitioner for equal pay for equal work was fully justified.
36.
The other decisions relied upon by the petitioner may also be noted.
37.
One such decision is Pankaj Kumar v. University of Allahabad and another, 1993 E.S.C.
137.
Following the view expressed by the Supreme Court which decision in turn upheld the decision of the Rajasthan High Court, Allahabad High Court came to the conclusion that research assistants are entitled to seek parity with lecturers.
It was held that the concept of equal pay for equal work would be attracted and the University was directed to give the benefit of same pay scales as was being given to the lecturers.
38.
State of Bihar v. Bihar State Workshop Superintendents Federation, 1993(4) SCT 456 (SC) : 1993(2) E.S.C.
255 has also been relied upon by the petitioner.
In this case, the working superintendents were performing teaching job as well.
The educational qualifications were the same.
As such, a direction was given to grant the working superintendents the same scales as being paid to the associate professors.
39.
The decision given by the Supreme Court in Gopal Krishna Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 1992(3) SCT 726 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 81 also supports the pleadings on behalf of the petitioner.
40.
The position which emerges is as under :  (i) that, the qualification for the post of research assistants and lecturers are the same; (ii) that, coaches with lesser qualification have been given the same pay scale as those of the lecturers; (iii) that, the petitioner has been performing the same duties as are being performed by the lecturers; and (iv) that, the cadre of research assistants is a diminishing cadre and it exists only is two colleges; i.e., at Gwalior and Trivandrum looked after by the Sports Authority of India.
41.
In view of the above, there is no justification to deny the scale of lecturers to the petitioner.
It is accordingly held that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefit of the concept of equal pay for equal work.
This petition is accordingly allowed with no order as to the costs.
Petition allowed.