Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as Inspector, Weights and Measures in the Punjab Industries Department.
He retired from service on March 31, 1998.
While the petitioner was in service, a criminal case was registered against him.
Resultantly, he was not promoted to the post of Assistant Controller, Weights & Measures.
After his acquittal, the petitioner requested the respondents to consider his claim for promotion with effect from the date persons junior to him had been promoted.
The respondents failed to do the needful.
He approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 6772 of 2000.
This petition was disposed of by a Bench of this Court vide order dated May 26, 2000 with the direction that the respondents shall consider and decide the petitioner's claim within a period of 4 months.
In pursuance of the direction given by the Bench, the respondents passed an order dated October 3, 2000.
The petitioner was promoted as Assistant Controller, Weights and Measures with effect from February 14, 1996.
However, it was further ordered that since the promotion is notional, the petitioner "will not be entitled to any arrears....." The petitioner has now filed the present writ petition with the prayer that the respondents by directed to release the arrears.
2.
Notice of motion was issued.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter-alia averred that the petitioner's case for promotion was "kept pending and his junior Shri Balwant Singh was promoted" on account of pendency of the criminal case against him.
It has, however, been admitted that the petitioner was acquitted vide order dated December 18, 1998.
It is also not disputed that on the basis of the petitioner's record of service, he has been promoted with effect from the date a person junior to him had been promoted.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
It is not disputed that the petitioner's claim for promotion was kept pending on account of the criminal case which had been registered against him.
After the petitioner's acquittal, his claim for promotion has been actually considered.
He has been found suitable for promotion.
By the impugned order itself, the petitioner has been actually granted promotion as Assistant Controller of Weights and Measures with effect from February 14, 1996.
The short issue is - Can the respondents deny him the arrears of salary on account of difference in pay of the two posts ?
4.
Mr. Dharamvir Sharma contends that the petitioner had not performed the duties of the post of Assistant Controller.
Thus, he is not entitled to the payment arrears of salary.
5.
The petitioner was not at fault in any manner whatsoever.
The respondents had kept his case pending on account of the criminal case, which had been registered against him.
On his acquittal, the respondents have considered the petitioner's claim and found him suitable for promotion.
Since, the petitioner had been denied the higher post for no fault on his part, it would be unfair to deny him the arrears of salary for the period from February 14, 1996 to March 21, 1998, when he had retired.
On his promotion his pay in the higher post has to be fixed and arrears of salary have to be paid to him.
Even the retiral benefits will have to be revised accordingly.
The view that we are taking support from a Division Bench decision of this Court in Sudarshan Kumar v. State of Haryana and another, 1997(2) SCT 278 (P&H) : 1997(2) RSJ 416.
6.
In fact, there is a catena of decisions supporting this view.
7.
No other point has been raised.
8.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the petitioner's pay shall be fixed in the scale sanctioned for the post of Assistant Controller, Weights and Measures.
The arrears of salary shall be worked out and paid to the petitioner.
The retiral benefits shall also be accordingly revised and released.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of supply of certified copy of this order.
In case of failure to do so, the petitioner shall be entitled to full amount along with interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of release.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the parties left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.