Satish Kumar Mittal, J - Dr Om Parkash Sharma, deceased (now represented through legal representatives) had filed the instant petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing his termination order dated 1691985 (Annexure P-4) with a further prayer to take him back in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Medical Officer in H.C.M.S-II on ad hoc basis by the Director, Health Services, Haryana (respondent No. 2) vide his order dated 4111978.
The petitioner joined his services as such on 2121978 at Rural Dispensary Puthi Mangalkhan, District Hisar.
The petitioner continuously worked on the said post on ad hoc basis.
Vide letter dated 21.10.1981, the ad hoc service of the petitioner was got approved by the Government from the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short, the Commission) who recommended that the ad hoc service of the petitioner may continue till the regular appointees of the Commission join the duty on the post held by him.
Thereafter, the petitioner continuously worked on ad hoc basis on the aforesaid post, as no regular appointment was made on those posts by the Commission.
3.
On 1691985, the services of the petitioner were ordered to be terminated vide letter Annexure P-4.
The petitioner has challenged his termination in the instant writ petition on the ground that he was serving with the respondents for the last more than seven years and his services were illegally and arbitrarily terminated by the respondent in spite of the fact that no regular appointment was made by the Commission.
It has also been pleaded that the services of the petitioner were terminated discriminately since large number of ad hoc appointees who were junior to the petitioner, were retained in service.
Therefore, the action of the respondents is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Hence, a prayer was made that termination order dated 1691985 be set aside and the petitioner be taken back in service with all consequential benefits.
4.
In the written statement, the respondents contested the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner was working only on ad hoc basis and his services were terminated in terms and conditions of his appointment letter dated 4111978, which provide that service of the petitioner could be terminated by the respondents on 24 hours notice.
It has been specifically pleaded in the written statement that service of the petitioner were not terminated as a punishment.
It has also not been denied that any recommendee of the Commission on regular appointment was available.
It has also not been disputed that the persons junior to the petitioner were retained in service.
It has been stated that the petitioner remained willfully absent from duty during the months of April and May, 1985.
However, the services of the petitioner were not terminated as a punishment but the same were terminated in view of the service conditions mentioned in his appointment letter, as stated above.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record of the case.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner was initially appointed on ad hoc appointment on ad hoc basis for six months but he was allowed to continue on the post after the expiry of six months.
Subsequently, his ad hoc appointment was got approved by the Government from the Commission, which recommended that the ad hoc appointment may continue till the regular recommendees of the Commission join the duty on those posts.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the respondents have also not denied that while terminating the services of the petitioner, the persons junior to him were kept in service.
In view of the afore-stated facts, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that termination of the petitioner was wholly illegal, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and the petitioner was legally entitled to continue on the post till the regularly selected candidates became available.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of this Court in Rajni Bala v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) AIJ 394 and Balwan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1996(4) SCT 653 (P&H) : 1997(1) SLR 624.
7.
On the other hand, learned Assistant Advocate General for the respondents submitted that the petitioner was working only on ad hoc basis and his services were rightly terminated by giving a notice of 24 hours, as per the condition of his appointment letter.
He further submitted that services of the petitioner were terminated because he was absent from duty for some time and it was not necessary for the respondents to hold an enquiry against the alleged misconduct.
In support his contention, learned counsel for the respondents relied upon a decision of the Apex Court in State of UP and another v. Smt. Kamla Devi and another, 1996(4) SCT 720 (SC) : 1996(3) RSJ 250, wherein it was held that in case an ad hoc employee remains absent from duty then it is not necessary for the Government to conduct regular enquiry, and his services can be terminated without any such regular enquiry.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were rightly terminated by the respondents.
8.
I have considered the respective submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
I am of the opinion that the ad hoc services of the petitioner were illegally terminated by the respondents vide order dated 1691985.
Admittedly, the ad hoc services of the petitioner were not terminated as a punishment.
As per the stand taken by the respondents in the Written Statement, the services of the petitioner were terminated in view of the condition of his appointment letter.
It is also not disputed that the ad hoc services of the petitioner were got approved by the respondents from the Commission vide letter dated 21.10.1981, which had recommended that the services of the petitioner may continue till the time the regular appointee/selectee of the Commission join the duty on the post held by the petitioner.
When the services of the petitioner were terminated, no such regular appointee was available as no recommendation by that time was made by the Commission.
It has also not been disputed that when services of the petitioner were terminated, the many juniors of the petitioner were retained in service.
Therefore, looking to these aspects of the matter, the termination of the services of the petitioner was wholly illegal, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, in view of the law laid down by this Court in Rajni Bala's case (supra) and Balwan Singh's case (supra).
9.
Learned counsel for the respondent tried to justify the termination of the petitioner on the plea that his services were terminated because he was absent from duty for some time.
In this regard, the petitioner has stated in the petition that the respondents did not make payment of his salary for the months of April and May, 1985, and because of that reason, the petitioner was forced to proceed on leave of the kind due on account of his hard financial position.
For that he had made an application for leave for the period of two months.
In this regard, he wrote a detailed letter dated 2061985 (Annexure P-2) to the respondents and sent a reminder also on 1071985.
The petitioner has mentioned the aforesaid fact in para 4 of his petition.
Though the respondents have denied the aforesaid averments made by the petitioner in para 4 of its reply, but their reply is evasive.
It has been pleaded by the respondents that since the petitioner remained absent from duty for some time in the months of April and May, 1985, therefore, the petitioner was not allowed to draw pay for those months as the said period was ordered to be treated as without pay.
But no such order has been annexed with the reply.
Be that as it may, it is not the case of the respondents that the services of the petitioner were terminated by the impugned order on the ground that he was absent from duty.
Therefore, the respondents cannot justify the termination order of the petitioner on the ground that he was absent from duty.
10.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1691985 (Annexure P-4) is set aside.
Since the petitioner-Dr. Om Parkash Sharma had expired on 1361988 during the pendency of this writ petition, therefore, the legal representatives of the petitioner, namely, Rajbala, Anju, Neelam, Nitasa, Sudha and Tarnum, shall be entitled for the salary and other benefits as available to the petitioner from the date of termination of his services to the date of his death.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.