GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is a practising lawyer in District Courts at Kurukshetra and claims to be an active member of Women Wing of B.J.P.
Kurukshetra, has filed this petition for quashing clause 6129 of Admission Brochure-cum-Application Form CET - 1997 issued by Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar (for short, the University) for admission to Bachelor of Engineering (for short, B Engg.)
course imparted by Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology (for short, `the Institute') and also for quashing the Prospectus/Information Brochure published by the Institute for the session 1997-98 in so far as it pertains to tuition fee deposit and other dues.
She has further prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of prohibition restraining the respondents from charging more than Rs. 3,000/- pa as tuition fee and dues from the students of B Engg.
course.
Still further, she has prayed for issuance of a mandamus to the Institute to refund the excess fee, if any, charged from the students.
2.
The petitioner has averred that in terms of the direction given by the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan JP and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, 1993(2) SCT 512 SC : AIR 1993 SC 486, the Government of Punjab has laid down the fee structure regarding aided and unaided engineering colleges but in complete disregard of the policy circulars, Annexure P-1 dated 261993 and Annexure P-2 dated 1591993, the Institute is charging huge fee from the students seeking admission in B Engg.
Course.
She has further averred that as against the fee of Rs. 3,000/- prescribed by the State of Punjab, the Institute is charging Rs. 20,000/- pa as tuition fee and in this manner, the students are being fleeced and their parents are being subjected to harassment.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been averred that the Institute has been charging enhanced fee since 1994-95 and it has been allowed to do so in accordance with the policy of the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resources Development.
According to respondent No. 1, the policy of the Government of India is to allow private educational institutions to generate their own resources and, therefore, no illegality has been committed by the institute by charging higher fee.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Institute through its Registrar, it has been averred that the Institute was declared as a Deemed University w.e.f.
30121985 and, therefore, the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan's case (supra) cannot be applied in its case in the matter of charging of fee etc.
In paragraphs 2 and 3 of the written statement of the Institute, the following averments have been made to justify charging of higher fee :-  "2(a).
That the erstwhile Thapar College was an affiliated college receiving grant-in-aid from Punjab Government to the tune of 95% till 30121985 for all the courses, activities and posts in position as existed on the date.
The Institute became a Deemed University w.e.f.
30121985.
The Punjab Government while recommending the case to the Central Government for the grant of Deemed University status for the Institute had put the condition that the State Government liability will be frozen to the block amount of Rs. 4000 lacs (which was the financial liability of the State Government for the year 1985-86) to be given annually to the Institute.
From the years 1986-87 to 1989-90 the Punjab Government gave block grant of Rs. 4000 lacs every year which resulted in the accumulation of huge deficit.
The Institute represented to the Punjab Government that the condition of giving a fixed block grant was not justified and requested that the State Government should at least finance the level of activities which were in existence prior to the attainment of Deemed University status meaning thereby that instead of giving a fixed amount, the State Government may consider to give financial assistance at the rate of 95% of the net deficit for courses, activities and posts in position which existed as on 30121985.
The Punjab Government agreed to the payment of grant-in-aid for the maintenance expenditure covering 95% of the net deficit of the Institute w.e.f.
1.4.1990 for the courses, activities and posts in position as on 30121985.
SINCE THAT DATE ONWARDS, THE STATE GOVERNMENT IS GIVING THE GRANT-IN-AID TO THE INSTITUTE ON THE BASIS OF COURSES, ACTIVITIES AND POSTS IN POSITION WHICH EXISTED AS ON 30121985 ONLY.
After the institute became a Deemed University, a few new courses/programmes have been started i.e. BE Computer Engineering, BE Chemical Engineering and MSc.
Materials Science (Co-operative).
These fresh courses are not at all supported by any grant-in-aid either by the Punjab Government or by any other funding agency.
The entire expenditure on these new courses/programmes is being met by the Institute from its own resources.
Apart from this, the moment the Institute became a Deemed University it had to create a complete establishment/administrative section for the purpose of conducting examinations which includes paper setting, paper evaluation, maintaining the marks/award lists etc.
The process also includes the preparation and award of degrees.
It necessitated the establishment of a complete administrative set up, from the post of Registrar/Deputy Registrar downward.
The expenditure on the said establishment is being fully met by the Institute through its own generated resources.
Besides this, from 1985 onward, the State of Punjab does not give any grant towards developmental activities i.e. no plan funds.
This expenditure has also to be met by the Institute from amongst its own generated resources.
(b) The factual position is that for the year 1996-97, the total budget of the Institute was Rs. 43272 lacs out of which grant-in-aid of the Punjab Government was only Rs. 14840 lacs i.e. about 30%.
Besides this, it is relevant to mention here that the operating expenditure provided by the State Government is only Rs. 550/- per student per annum which was fixed more than 20 years back whereas the actual present operating expenditure per student per year at Thaper Institute is Rs. 5764/- per student per year.
Apart from this, the cost of education of a student at the institute in 1993- 94 was working out to be Rs. 38000/- per student per year which for the year 1996-97 came out to be Rs. 43,090/- per student per year.
The tuition fee being charged is, therefore, far less than the total cost of the education of a student in the Institute.
3.
That as a result of what has been mentioned herein above, the institute every year suffered a deficit.
The deficit was to be covered either by funds generated through tuition fee and neither was the State Government giving any additional grant.
As a consequence of this, there was a huge uncovered unmet deficit of Rs. 20192 lacs and the Institute approached the Government of India and the University Grants Commission (UGC) for one time grant in aid to cover the deficit accumulated w.e.f.
1986-97 to 1992-93.
The UGC on the advice of the Ministry of Human Resources Development constituted a committee to visit the Institute to make an assessment and make recommendations on the matter.
The UGC noted that the answering-respondent was a good institute and accordingly a grant of Rs. 9940 lac was given to the Institute by the Ministry of Human Resource Development through the UGC to partially wipe out the deficit.
This fact is clear from a perusal of a letter written by the UGC dated 4595.
A copy of this letter is attached as Annexure R-3/1 to this written statement.
It may be mentioned that at the time when the one time assistance was given by the UGC to overcome the existing deficit accumulated w.e.f.
1986-87 to 1992-93, the Institute was asked to furnish an undertaking to the UGC which inter-alia stated that the Institute was taking steps to meet the running expenditure from the session 1993-94 by self-generating resources including enhancing students tuition fee to the extent of 40% of the total budget.
A copy of the undertaking given to the UGC by the Institute is attached as Annexure R-3/2 to this written statement.
It may also be mentioned here as a fact that financial position of the Institution was not good and that the Institute was consistently facing deficit is evidenced by two letters written one by the Chief Minister, Punjab in November, 1997 asking for Central Government support and other written by the then Minister for Human Resource Development which are attached as Annexure R-3/3 and R-3/4 to this written statement.
It may be mentioned that it is clear form a perusal of the letter Annexure R-3/4 that the Central Government relying upon the report of the UGC on the basis of a committee set up by the UGC had recommended to the State Government that the additional income generated by the Institute through tuition fee should not be deducted from the maintenance grant but the Institute should be permitted to retain that amount as self generated resource.
A copy of the letter dt. 5.2.1994 written by the UGC to the Institute also stating that the resources generated by it can be retained by the Institute and would not be adjusted in the grant is attached as Annexure R-3/5 to this written statement.
It is on this basis that the Punjab Government has finally issued a notification on 26.6.1996 allowing the respondent institute to retain the additional resources generated by it during the year 1996-97 and onwards.
A copy of this notification is attached as Annexure R-3/6 to this written statement.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
In our opinion, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed because -  (a) the policy instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide Annexures P-1 and P-2 are applicable to engineering colleges and not the University or a deemed University.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot seek a mandamus for enforcing the fee structure laid down by the Government for admission in the BEngg.
Course run by the Institute.
(b) the judgment of Supreme Court in Unnikrishnan's case (supra) has been virtually over-ruled by the recent decision of 11 Judges Bench in TMA Foundation and others v. State of Karnataka, 2003(1) SCT 236 (SC) : JT 2000(9) SC 1; and (c) the petitioner has not placed any material on record to show that she has been adversely affected by the tuition fee prescribed in the Admission Brochure-cum-Application Form issued by the University or Prospectus-cum- Information Brochure published by the Institute.
Hence, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.