GR Majithia and SK Jain, JJ.
- The PGI Medical Technologists' Association, Chandigarh (for short, the Association) has moved this Court for a mandate to the respondents to pay them interest on the delayed payment of arrears of salary following enhancement of pay scales of Technicians with effect from January 1, 1986, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (the PGIMER, for brevity) accepted the recommendations of the Central Fourth Pay Commission and allowed Central pay scales to its employees, including the technical staff vide letter contained in Endst.
No. PGI-MA-87/21164-21259, dated February 26, 1987, with effect from January 1, 1986.
The following revised grades were given to the Technical Staff :-  Designation Existing grade Revised grade Jr.
Lab.
Technician Rs.380-560 Rs.1320-2040 Sr.
Lab.
Technician Rs. 425-700 Rs. 1400-2300 Technical Asstt.
Rs. 550-900 Rs. 1640-2900 All the employees except the Technical Staff were satisfied with the revised pay scales as recommended by the 4th Central Pay Commission.
The Technical Staff was dissatisfied with the revised pay scales.
The demands of the Association were considered by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India on July 24, 1991.
The representatives of the Association joined the deliberations.
In the meeting the revised pay scales were recommended as under :-  Designation as per 4th Central Pay Commission recommendations Pay-scales recommended Jr.
Lab.
Technician Rs. 1320-2040 Rs. 1400-2300 Sr.
Lab.
Technician Rs. 1400-2300 Rs. 1640-2900 Technical Asstt.
Rs. 1640-2900 Rs. 2000-3200.
The revised pay scale were recommended w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 and the representatives of the Association accepted the same.
However, the association went back from the agreement and disclaimed to accept the revised pay scales as recommended by the Committee.
It put up a fresh charter of demands on November 27, 1991.
They went on strike from October 28, 1991 to December 20, 1991 ignoring the various appeals made by the Director, PGIMER to solve their issues.
The demands of the Association were referred by the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration to the Labour-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Union Territory, Chandigarh, under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act for adjudication, vide order contained in No.13/l/3022/HII(4)-91/24378, dated December 18, 1991.
The following dispute was referred to the Labour-cum Industrial Tribunal for adjudication :-  "(i) Whether the demands mentioned in the demand notice dated 27111991 with its Annexures made by the General Secretary, the PGI Medical Technologists Association, Chandigarh to the Director, Post-Graduate Medical Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh are genuine and justified.
If so, to what effect and to what relief the union is entitled to, if any ?
(ii) Whether orders of termination of services of nine Medical Technologist mentioned in the Annexure issued during the period of strike were illegal.
If so, to what effect and to what relief the workers are entitled to, if any ?
(iii) Whether orders of suspension of Sh. Jeet Singh, Senior Medical Technologist and Mr. Charan Singh, Junior Medical Technologist issued during the period of strike was by way of victimisation or not.
If so, to what effect and to what relief these workers are entitled to, if any ?
(iv) Whether the order of break in service of Medical Technologists, mentioned in the Annexure were illegal.
If so, to what effect and to what relief these workers are entitled to, if any ?
(v) Whether orders of deduction of earned wages from the wages of October, 1991 of Medical Technologists are illegal.
If so, to what effect and to what relief these workers are entitled to, if any ?
3.
The Labour-cum-Industrial Tribunal is seized of the dispute.
During the pendency of the dispute, the Governing Body of the PGIMER in its meeting held on February 19, 1992, recommended payment of revised pay scale to the Technical Staff working in the PGIMER w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
The petitioner's members have been paid the arrears.
4.
The only dispute raised by the Association is that a direction be issued to the authorities of the PGIMER to pay them interest on the delayed payment of arrears of salary.
The demand of the Association was considered by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India in the presence of the representatives of the Association.
The result of the deliberations was conveyed by the Director in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi to the Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh, vide letter No.V.17020/46/89-ME(PG), dated August 10, 1991, and the same is in the following terms :-  "Subject : Various demands of the Medical Technologist, of the PGIMER, CHANDIGARH recommendations regarding.
As you are aware, the various demands of the Medical Technologists of the PGIMER, Chandigarh were considered in this Ministry on 24791 by a group of officers consisting of the following :  Ministry of Health & F. W.  1.
Shri BS Lamba, Jt.
Secretary.
2.
Smt. AP Ahluwalia, Jt.
Secretary & Financial Adviser.
3.
Sh. KS Jagannathan, Under Secretary (Fin-I).
P.G.I.M.E.R.
Chandigarh :  4.
Smt. S Sidhoo, Dy.
Director (Admn.)
The representatives of the PGIMER Medical Technologists Association who presented the case were :  1.
Sh. Pankaj Kaul;  2.
Sh. Pawan Kumar;  3.
Sh. Ashwani Munjal;  4.
Sh. RK Kanchi;  5.
Sh. Mohinder Singh.
5.
After hearing the viewpoints of the representatives of the PG1 Medical Technologists, their demands were discussed at length and the following recommendations were made :-  "(a) Revision of Pay Scales for Medical Technologists :  It has been agreed to recommend the following pay scales :-  Designation Existing revised Pay scale Pay scale recommended.
Jr.
Technician Rs. 1320-2040 Rs. 1400-2300 Sr.
Technician Rs. 1400-2300 Rs. 1640-2900 Technical Rs. 1640-2900 Rs. 2000-3200.
Asstt./Optometrist.
Since the above-mentioned staff have already been given the replacement pay scale on the basis of the recommendations of the 4th Pay Commission and the Pay Committee appointed by the Governing Body of the PG1 did not recommend any change in the pay scales already given, the pay scales as recommended above can be given effect from a prospective date after getting the proposal approved by the Standing Finance Committee/Governing Body of the institute and the pay fixation in respect of the individual staff may be done under FR 23.
(b) Grant of Post-Graduate Allowance to Medical Technologists :  DDA, PGI was requested to send a self contained proposal in this regard indicating inter alia the number of Medical Technologists with MSc(MLT) qualification in the strength of the Institute.
On receipt of a self contained proposal from PGI, the matter would be taken up with Deptt.
of Personnel/Ministry of Finance.
(c) Revised pay scales for persons employed under the Research Schemes :  It was clarified that PGI has three types of research staff, viz research staff on schemes funded by PGI; (ii) staff engaged in research schemes of ICMR; and (iii) staff engaged in research schemes funded by private parties.
In the case of staff engaged on ICMR research schemes and schemes funded by private parties, the staff are paid at the rates indicated by the ICMR or the donor agencies as the case may be.
As regards (i) above, it was pointed out that these research staff were in the pre-revised central pay scales.
However, since the revised pay scales are not applicable to the casual employees, they have not been given the revised pay scales w.e.f.
1.
186.
6.
After detailed discussions, it was suggested that the research staff who are engaged in schemes funded by PGI may be granted appropriate replacement scales of pay as recommended by the IVth Pay Commission.
They would, however, get the pay fixation benefits as admissible to regular employees.
Their pay may be fixed at the minimum of the replacement scales and whenever there is a drop in emoluments, the difference may be treated either as personal pay, absorbable in future increases of pay, or by grant of advance increments which should not be more than five from the minimum of the scale.
It was also felt that in future it would be advisable to employ such research staff only on payment of a lump-sum amount as is done by ICMR.
(d) Revision of pay scales in respect of Jr. Technicians/Sr.
Technicians who are drawing pay in Punjab Govt. pay scales.
The Medical Technologists pointed out that in respect of some of the Technicians who have been drawing pay in the Punjab Government pay scale, the SFC of the PGI granted ad hoc Punjab Government Pay Scales, since there were no identical posts at that time under the Punjab Government.
These ad hoc pay scales were at that time comparable to the posts of Asstt./Superintendent etc.
However, it was mentioned that the Punjab Government have created identical posts and these posts carry pay scale which are lower than those given by SFC to PGI employees.
In view of this, the pay scales now granted by the Punjab Government can be allowed to these posts or, alternatively, these posts can continue in the same ad hoc pay scales already fixed by the SFC.
In the light of the above, you are requested to place the proposals before the SFC/Governing Body of the Institute, wherever necessary."
This issues with the approval of Secretary (H)."
7.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare recommended that proposal be placed before the Governing Body of the Institute.
As observed earlier, before the Governing Body could take a final decision, the Association backed out from the agreement and went on strike.
The Association submitted a fresh charter of demands.
The Chandigarh Administration referred the demands contained in the demand notice dated November 27, 1991 submitted by the Association to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Chandigarh for adjudication and the dispute is pending adjudication.
8.
The petitioner-Association had not accepted the recommendations of the 4th Central Pay Commission and did not accept even the revised pay scales offered by the PGIMER.
The PGIMER of its own has released payment of the revised pay scales of the members of the petitioner-Association and the same have been accepted.
9.
The question whether the members of the petitioner-Association are entitled to the scales of pay other than the ones allowed by the Institute is under adjudication by the Labour Court.
The Labour Court is also examining whether the demand of the petitioner-Association is genuine.
The conduct of the petitioner for going on strike has also to be adjudicated upon by the Labour Court while answering the reference.
The Labour Court while answering the reference can allow consequential reliefs.
The demand for grant of interest on the delayed payment of arrears of pay at this stage is premature.
10.
Apart from this, to obtain a writ or order in the nature of mandamus, the petitioner must show that it has a legal right to the performance of a legal duty (as distinguished from discretion) by a party against whom mandamus is sought.
The legal duty must be one which is imposed by either the Constitution of India or by a statute, common law or by rules or orders having the force of law.
The apex Court in Manu Subrat Jain etc. v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1976 SC 276, held thus -  "It is elementary though it is to be restated that no one can ask for a mandamus without a legal right.
There must be a judicially enforceable right as a legally protected right before one suffering a legal grievance can ask for a mandamus.
A person can be said to be aggrieved only when a person is denied a legal right by some one who has a legal duty to do something to abstain from doing something.
(See Halsbury's Laws of England 4th Ed. Vol. 1, Paragraph 122); State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander, (1974) 1 SCR 165 : (AIR 1973 SC 2216); Jasbhai Motibhai Desai v. Roshan Kumar Haji Bashir Ahmed, (1976) 3 SCR 58 : (AIR 1976 SC 578) and Ferris Extraordinary Legal Remedies paragraph 198)."
The petitioner's counsel even could not remotely suggest that the respondents were under legal duty to pay them interest on the delayed payment as claimed by them.
Even otherwise, the conduct of the petitioner disentitles them for invoking the equitable jurisdiction of this Court.
The petitioner's Association after having arrived at a settlement with the officers of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare backed out from the agreement and went on strike to compel the authorities of the PGIMER to accept their demands.
By their conduct, they caused hardship and miseries to the patients who come to the Institute for specialised treatment which, in many cases, is not available in ordinary medical hospitals.
11.
In fairness to the learned counsel for the petitioner, a brief referred to the authorities quoted by him at the Bar is necessary and these are :-  (1) Union of India v. Justice SS Sandhawalia (Retd.)
etc., JT 1994 (1) SC 62 : 1994(2) SCT 239 (SC).
(2) AK Kapoor, HSE-I (Retd.)
v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(6) SLR 583 (DB).
(3) Moti Rain Gupta, Ex-Excise Inspector v. State of Haryana and another, 1991(3) SCT 5 (P&H).
12.
In Justice SS Sandhawalia's case (supra) the petitioner had moved this Court for the following reliefs :-  "(i) The full of amount of gratuity due to him was not released;  (ii) While computing the cash equivalent of leave due to him at the date of his retirement the cash equivalent of the various allowances drawn by him just before his retirement had not been included;  (iii) He was not paid the amount payable to him under Section 22-B of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954; and  (iv) His claim for reimbursement of medical charges had not been cleared."
The Union of India contested the claim in regard to his entitlement of the cash equivalent of the allowances including the benefit conferred by Section 22-B of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and the cash benefit claimed for failure of the State of Bihar to provide him with a staff car.
The Union of India conceded the demand for the grant of Rs. 1,00,000/- by way of Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity, but part of this amount was not paid for one year.
The High Court directed that the balance amount be paid with interest and the apex Court did not interfere with the discretion exercised by the High Court, although in all other respects appeal of the Union of India was accepted and the writ petition filed by Justice SS Sandhawalia was dismissed.
The High Court had allowed the payment of interest on delayed payment while allowing the principal claim.
The High Court was not called upon the answer the question whether a petitioner can maintain a writ of mandamus against the State for compelling it to pay interest on delayed payment of any amount due to the petitioner.
13.
In AK Kapoor's case (supra), the petitioner sought release if his retiral benefits.
While allowing the claim of the petitioner, the High Court found that there was a delay in making the payment of retiral benefits and ordered payment of interest on the delayed payments.
14.
In Moti Ram Gupta's case (supra), relying upon AK Kapoor's case, the Bench observed that on delayed payments of retiral benefits by the State, interest was payable.
15.
The ratio of these judgments is not attracted to the facts of the instant case as (i) there is no delay as alleged by the petitioner-Association; and (ii) the demands of the petitioner-Association are under adjudication by the Labour Court-cum-Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh and the Labour Court will be fully competent to grant any consequential relief to which the petitioner is entitled to.
16.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 2,000/- (Rupees two thousand only).