JS Khehar, J - At the time of hearing, we were informed by learned counsel that the controversy arising in CWP Nos. 14832, 14981, 15118, 14418, 16522, 15578, 15829 and 15883 of 2002 is the same.
Arguments were, therefore, collectively advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the parties relied upon the pleadings of CWP No. 14832 of 2002.
In addition thereto reliance was also placed on the written statement filed by the Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, respondent No. 2 (hereinafter referred to as `the Medical University') in CWP No. 15829 of 20002.
Through this common judgment we propose to dispose of the writ petitions referred to hereinabove, by referring to the aforesaid pleadings.
2.
Admissions to Medical/Dental Colleges located in the State of Punjab are regulated by the Medical University.
The Medical University issued a Prospectus delineating the terms and conditions for admission to the Bachelor of Medicines and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS), Bachelor or Dental Surgery (BDS), Bachelor of Ayurvedic System of Medicine & Surgery (BAMS), and Bachelor of Homoeopathic System of Medicine & Surgery (BHMS), courses, for the academic session 2002-2003.
A persual of the Prospectus reveals that admissions are to be made purely on the basis of merit i.e. on the basis of marks obtained by the candidates in the Pre-Medical Entrance Test-2002 (hereinafter referred to as the `PMET-2002').
Paragraph 6 in Part I of the Prospectus clearly stipulates that the University would prepare a list of successful candidates, in the order of merit, for the purpose of allotment of seats in the different courses/institutions.
In obedience to the aforesaid condition the Medical University prepared a merit list (copy of which has been appended to CWP No. 14832 of 2002 as Annexure P2).
There is no dispute between the rival parties about the validity of the merit list prepared by the Medical University, based on the PMET-2002.
3.
The next step after the preparation of the merit list, is the commencement of the actual process of admission.
The actual process of admission is regulated by the terms and conditions enunciated in Part II of the Prospectus.
Paragraph 3, of Part II, of the Prospectus provides that the Medical University would issue notices in leading newspapers calling upon successful candidates to apply for admission.
It also specifies that admissions would be made category-wise by the Admission Committee.
It is not a matter of dispute that the term category used in the Prospectus refers to General Category, Scheduled Castes, scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes etc. (i.e. categories for which seats have been kept apart/reserved for admission purposes).
Paragraph 3(i) of Part II of the Prospectus clarifies, that at the venue of admission, candidates, would be called in the order of merit in lots.
Paragraph 3(vii) of Part II of the Prospectus provides that candidates will be interviewed in the order of marks obtained in the PMET-2002 (in their respective category).
It is, therefore, apparent, that the sole condition regulating the admission to the courses under reference is the merit ranking of a candidate in the PEMT-2002, taken separately for each category.
4.
Having qualified the PMET-2002 examination, the petitioners were required to fill up application forms.
All the petitioners duly filled up the application forms.
Item 15 of the application form, which is the basis of the controversy in this bunch of petitions, is being extracted hereunder :-  "Preference of Courses/Institutions Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
2.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 Hemlata filled up Item 15 of the application form in the following fashion :-  Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS Govt. Medical College, Patiala.
2.
MBBS Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana.
3.
MBBS Govt. Medical College, Amritsar.
Almost all the petitioners filled the first column of Item 15 in the same fashion as petitioner No. 1 by expressing their preference for admission to the MBBS course at Sr. Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
There is, however, but nothing revolves on the aforesaid variation insofar as the present case is concerned.
One of the candidates, namely, Anita Bansal (petitioner No. 3 in CWP No. 14832 of 2002), however, left Item No. 15 of the application form blank.
5.
On the basis of the entries made in Item No. 15, of the application form, the Medical University considered the claims of the petitioners for admission only to the MBBS course.
None of the petitioners was successful in gaining admission to the MBBS course on account of the limited seats offered.
During the process of counselling for admission to the BDS course, the Medical University declined to consider the claim of the petitioners as they had not indicated any preference for admission to the BDS course while filling in Item No. 15 of the application form.
6.
A persual of the written statement filed on behalf of the Medical University, in CWP No. 15829 of 2002, reveals that candidates who had not expressly opted for admission to the BDS course while filling Item No. 15 of the application form were not considered.
When candidates who had not opted for admission to the BDS course were denied consideration, they started shouting and raising slogans.
The process of admission had to be stopped on account of the unruly behaviour of the candidates.
Their parents/guardians are stated to have joined them as well.
When the petitioners supported by their parents and guardians could not be subdued by the Chairman of the Counselling Committee, the candidates who had opted for the BDS course (while filling Item No. 15 of the application form) supported by their parents/guardians, also joined the mayhem.
The situation as depicted above was brought to the notice of the Vice Chancellor of the Medical University whereupon the Vice Chancellor, in order to restore law and order intimated the District Administration.
Police personnel eventually ousted all the applicants/students as well as their parents/guardians from the counselling hall.
The Counselling Committee thereafter considered the candidature of only such candidates who had expressed their preference of the BDS course while filling Item No. 15 of the application form.
The claim of the petitioners who had not expressed their preference for the BDS course while filling in Item No. 15 of the application form were not considered despite the fact that they had obtained higher marks in the PMET-2002.
7.
The question to be determined in the instant case is whether the petitioners who did not express BDS as one of their preference while filling in the first column of Item No. 15 of the application form, had a right to be considered for admission to the BDS course during the process of counselling ?
8.
Arguments addressed by the learned counsel on the behalf of the petitioners can be summarised as under :-  1.
The first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is, that Item No. 15 of the application form only depicts the "preference" of a candidate.
In other words by expressing "preference" a candidate does not expressly or impliedly forego his right for admission to the other courses (for which "preference" has not been expressed), in case the candidate does not make the grade for the course for which he has actually expressed his preference.
2.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is, that the respondent Medical University has misconstrued Item No. 15 of the application form, by reading the term "preference" (as) "option".
It is pointed out that while filling Item No. 15 of the application form, the candidates were not required to opt for a particular course, or to opt out of a particular course, they were merely required to indicate their "preference" for admission to courses/institutions of their choice.
3.
The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is, that item No. 15 gives a candidate the right to express three preferences, for the 4 courses (MBBS, BDS, BAMS and BHMS) offered ; likewise, it gives three preferences of choice out of 25 institutions.
Relying on Annexure `A' appended to the prospectus (at page 16 and 17 of the prospectus), learned counsel for the petitioners point out that the process of admission is in respect of 14 different institutions for the MBBS and BDS courses, and 11 different institutions for the BAMS and BHMS courses.
On the basis of the aforesaid factual position, it is contended that it would be wholly arbitrary to exclude the candidates from consideration for purposes of admission to courses/institutes which they had not depicted their "preference" while filling in Item No. 15 of the application form.
The fourth contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is, that in order to clarify the controversy in hand, the petitioners had met the Vice Chancellor of the Medical University on 392002 (whereas counselling for the BDS course commenced on 1092002).
The Vice Chancellor directed the Co- ordinator, Pre Medical Entrance Test, Dr. GS Bindra to look into the matter and take a final decision.
When the petitioners contacted the Co-ordinator, Pre Medical Entrance Test, he informed the petitioners that admission to the courses would be made in the order of merit.
In view of the aforesaid factual position, it is vehemently asserted that the Medical University also understood the prospectus in the same manner as the petitioners understood it.
The petitioners having been assured that their claim to the BDS course would be considered on the basis of the PMET-2002, they cannot be denied consideration.
5.
The last contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the Prospectus issued by the Medical University repeatedly emphasises (as has been noticed above) that admission to various courses/institutions would be made on the basis of merit determined on the basis of the marks obtained in PMET-2002.
It is, therefore, submitted that in terms of the Prospectus admissions to the various categories (General Category, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes etc.) could be regulated only on the basis of merit and on no other basis.
In this behalf, it is pointed out that the candidates granted admission to the BDS course as a consequence of the counselling conducted from 1092002 to 1292002 is clearly contrary to the mandate of the prospectus issued by the Medical University, inasmuch as the petitioners who have a higher merit have been ignored whereas candidates with lesser marks in the PMET-2002 have been admitted."
9.
Learned counsel representing the Medical University, has endeavoured to rebut the aforesaid contentions by advancing the following arguments :  1.
The first submission of the learned counsel for the Medical University is, that only such candidates who had "opted" for the BDS course while filling up Item No. 15 of the application form were eligible to be considered.
Those who had not indicated BDS as one of the "options" while filling up Item No. 15 of the application form, must be deemed to have expressed a conscious desire not to be considered for admission to the BDS course.
2.
In order to supplement the first contention, learned counsel for the Medical University has invited our attention to the instruction of the State Government dated 1052002.
The aforesaid instructions were appended to the Prospectus as Annexure `A'.
Relevant portion of paragraph 8 of the aforesaid instructions is to the following effect :- "Interview shall be compulsory for all candidates to confirm the choice of station already given in the Application Form.
However, the candidate may change the choice of station at the time of interview which will be final.
In case the choice given by the candidate at the time of interview is different from that indicated interview-cum-Admission form, the preference of station given at the interview time shall supersede his/her earlier choice.
The dates of interview will be such as may be fixed by the Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, in consultation with the Director, Research and Medical Education and Chairpersons of various selection committee and the same shall be incorporated in the Prospectus.
On the basis of the instructions dated 1052002 it is contended, that if the aforesaid paragraph of the instructions is read in conjunction with Item No. 15 of the application form, the inevitable conclusion has to be that "option" expressed by candidates while filling up the application form could not be varied, since variation is permissible only for changing choice of station.
3.
The third contention of the learned counsel for the Medical University is, that the process of admission was completed immediately after the conclusion of the counselling conducted by the Counselling Committee on 1092002.
The selected candidate have all been admitted to the BDS course.
Only 9 of the selected candidates have been arrayed as respondents (Nos. 4 to 12) in the writ petitions.
No order detrimental to the interests of other candidates (who have not been arrayed as respondents) can be passed against the candidates who are not represented before this Court.
As such, it is submitted that even if the claim of the petitioners is accepted, only the nine most meritorious petitioners can be granted admission consequent upon the adjudication of the controversy raised by the petitioners and that too only if nine of the petitioners have marks more than the marks obtained by respondents Nos. 4 to 12, in the PMET-2002.
10.
While reiterating the submissions made by the learned counsel representing the Medical University, learned counsel representing the private respondents have advanced another argument in addition to the submissions noticed above.
The same is depicted hereunder as the 4th contention advanced on behalf of the respondents :-  4.
The fourth contention advanced on behalf of the respondents is in the nature of a hypothesis.
Learned counsel desired us to presume that a candidate while filling up Item No. 15 of the application form in the first column records at S.No.
1 his preference for the BHMS course and gains admission to the said course during the process of counselling on the basis of his ranking in the PEMT-2002.
It is contended that such a candidate would clearly be ineligible for admission to a course for which he has either not opted or for which he has expressed an inferior preference.
On the basis of the aforesaid illustration it is submitted that preference indicated by candidates has a binding effect.
Therefore, it is contended that the claim of the petitioners is liable to be limited to the preferences indicated by them in the first column of Item No. 15 of the application form.
11.
In our view the first and foremost task while deciding the present controversy is to interpret Item No. 15 of the application form, so as to decide, whether the non-depiction of BDS as one of the "preferences" would be fatal for consideration of their claim for admission to the BDS course.
Item No. 15 of the application form requires a candidate to express his "preference for courses/institutions".
Before we can answer the aforesaid query, it will be necessary to properly understand the connotation of the word "preference".
Since the word "preference" has not been defined in the Prosecutes, reference will have to be made to dictionaries in order to determine its meaning.
The word `preference' is derived from the word `prefer'.
The word `prefer' has been defined in the Chambers English Dictionary (published in 1989 and reprinted in 1990) as under :-  "prefer: to set in front (obs.
): to put forward, offer, submit, present, for acceptiance or consideration (arch.
or law): to promote: to advance ; to hold in higher estimation ; to choose or select before others ; to like better (with to, or rather than ; not with than alone) ; pr.p.
preferring ; preferred, n. preferability, adj.
preferable (obs.
preferable) to be preferred : having priority - adv.
preferably by choice: in preference.-n. preference ; the act of choosing, favouring or liking one above another ; estimation above; another the state of being preferred ; that which is preferred ; priority ; an advantage given to one over another ; a card game resembling auction bride."
In Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1976 edition) the word `prefer' has been defined as under :-  "prefer: to bear before, put before, prefer, to bear, carry - more at BEAR, to promote or advance to a rank or position ; to help bring about ; to have a preference for ; choose ; like better ; value more highly ; to live abroad ; to give (a creditor) priority ; pay (a creditor) before or rather than another ; to put or set forward or before someone ; Offer, Present, Recommend Introduce ; to bring or lay (as a charge, complaint, or indictment) against a person (preferred charges against him) ; to bring forward or lay before one for consideration, decision, or action ; Propose (the young man seems to be preferring some request which the elder one is indisposed to grant.
- Ambrose Bierce) ; to show preference for (one of two or more card suits bid by one's partner) ; preferability ; Preferableness'.
"preference: the act of preferring or the state of being preferred ; choice or estimation above another ; higher valuation or desirability...." According to Black's Law Dictionary (Seventh Edition, published in 1999), the word `preference' means:  "preference.
1.
The act of favouring one person or thing over another ; the person or thing so favoured.
2.
Priority of payment given to one or more creditors by a debtor ; a creditor's right to receive such priority.
3.
Bankruptcy.
PREFERENTIAL TRANSFER........." A collective persual of the words "prefer/preference" leaves no manner of doubt in our mind that by making a "preference" an individual expresses a superior choice in favour of one over other choice/choices ; he values one higher than another/others ; he gives priority to one over another/others.
Therefore, by making a "preference" an individual cannot be stated to have limited his choice to the "preference" expressed by him.
In our opinion, while giving effect to the "preference" indicated by a candidate while filling up Item No. 15, of the application form, the authorities have confused the word `preference' with `option'.
The word `option' has been defined, inter alia, in the Chambers English Dictionary (published in 1989 and reprinted in 1990) as under :-  "option : an act of choosing ; the power or right of choosing ; a thing that may be chosen ; an alternative for choice....." In Webster's Third New International Dictionary the word `option' has been defined as under :-  "option : [option free choice - more are OPINE1 1 : an act of choosing: exercise of the power of choice (at the student's and with professor's permission - Loyolan Univ.
Bullo.)
(hard to make one's between such alternatives) 2.
Obs: expression of a desire : WISH 3: the power of right to choose (as between alternatives) : freedom of choice..." The word `option' has also been described in A Dictionary of Law (published by the Oxford University Press in 1994, Third Edition) inter alia, in the following manner :-  "Option : n. A right to do or not to do something..." It is obvious from the connotation of the word `option' that when an individual makes an option, he makes a choice in favour of one to the exclusion of another/others, or in other words he accepted one to the other exclusion of the rest.
If the word `option' had been used in Item No. 15 of the application form, in place of the word "preference", it may have been open to the respondent Medical University to restrict consideration only to candidates who had "opted" for a particular course, and thereby to have deemed consideration to courses which had not been mentioned while filling up the application form.
12.
In our view even paragraph 8-A of the instructions dated 1052002 (Appended as Annexure `A' with the Prospectus issued by the Medical University) can not give a different connotation to the word `preference' used in Item No. 15 of the application form.
The word "preference" expressed in Item No. 15, itself permits candidates to disclose their superior choice, their priority, their preference for one or more courses institutions, out of the choices available.
13.
The manner in which Item No. 15 of the application form has been filled up by the petitioners has been depicted in para 2 of the short reply filed on behalf of the Medical University.
The petitioners have just qualified the 10+2 examination.
Almost all of them while depicting their choice of course have repeated MBBS as their first, second, and third choice.
A closer scrutiny of Item No. 15 of the application forms reveals that the choice of course in the said Item No. has been coupled with the choice of institutions ; that in our view, is why each of the candidates repeatedly filled in MBBS while filling up the first column, and while doing so altered the institution of preference while filing up the second column.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Medical University in CWP No. 15829 of 2002, the Medical University has placed on record photostat copies of application forms submitted by the candidates who have actually been admitted to the BDS course, consequent upon counselling held from 1092002 to 1292002.
Learned counsel for the respondent Medical University has painstakingly brought to our notice the manner in which the candidates who have been granted admission to the BDS course, had filled up Item No. 15 of the application form, in order to demonstrate that all the said candidates had clearly opted for the BDS course while filling up the first column of Item No. 15 of the application form.
We consider it appropriate to extract hereunder the manner in which some of the candidates who have been admitted to the BDS course filled in Item No. 15 of the application form filled up Anu Gupta, one of the admitted candidate, is extracted hereunder :-  Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS GMC, Amritsar.
2.
MBBS Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot.
3.
BDS Govt.
Dental College, Patiala.
Ramta Bansal, one of the admitted candidates, filled Item No. 15 of the application form in the following manner :  "15.
Preference of Courses/Institutions Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS GMC, AmritsarG.G.S.M.C.
Faridkot.
2.
BDS G.D.C.
Patiala, G.D.C., Amritsar.
3.
BDS SGRDIDS Amritsar (Free) D.I.R.D.S., Faridkot (Free)."
Jashan Jot Singh, another candidate admitted to the BDS course filled Item No. 15 of the application form in the following manner :  "15.
Preference of Courses/Institutions Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS Govt. Medical Col., Patiala.Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana.
2.
MBBS G Gobind Singh Med.
Col., Faridkot Govt. Medical Col., Amritsar 3.
BDS Govt.
Dental College, Patiala, Amritsar Namita Jain recorded the following preference while filling up Item No. 15 of the application form :  "15.
Preference of Courses/Institutions Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS D.M.C.
2.
BDS GDC, Patiala.
3.
BDS Dasmesh Dental.
Likewise Munish Kumar filled up Item No. 15 of the application form as under :-  "15.
Preference of Courses/Institutions Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS Govt. Medical Col., Patiala.
2.
MBBS Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana.
3.
BDS Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar.
Rupinder Kaur filled up Item No. 15 of the application form as under :-  "15.
Preference of Courses/Institutions Course Name (MBBS/BDS/BAMS/BHMS) Institute Name 1.
MBBS Govt. Medical Col., Patiala.
2.
BDS Govt.
Dental College, Amritsar.
3.
BDS Govt.
Dental College, Patiala.
The very fact that the candidates made a preference for one course more than one ; and the very fact that the candidates while filling up Item No. 15 made their choice of filling up the two columns of Item No. 15 in a manner as if the two were to be read in conjunction with one another.
The candidates admitted to the BDS course, while filling up the second column also - kept in mind what had been mentioned by them while filling up the first column.
In our view, they were right in doing so.
We find no variation, whatsoever, in the manner of understanding of Item No. 15 by the petitioners as also the other candidates who have been granted admission to the BDS course.
Even from the manner in which Item No. 15 of the application form has been understood by the candidates who had applied for admission to the medical courses under reference, we are satisfied that the candidates were only called upon to make a preference and by making "preference", they did not either expressly or impliedly convey that they were not desirous of being considered for admission to the course/courses in respect of which they did not record their preference.
14.
Furthermore, only three preferences have been called for in Item No. 15 of the application form.
Having appeared for the PEMT-2002, the candidates were eligible to apply for four courses, in 25 different institutions (14 for the MBBS and BDS courses and 11 for the BAMS and BHMS courses).
If the two columns of item No. 15 were to be filled up so as to the first column jointly with the second, candidates could have expressed their preference in at least 100 different combinations (4 courses x 25 institutions = 100), whereas preferences were limited to only three by Item No. 15 of the application form.
If the interpretation placed by the Medical University on Item No. 15 of the application form is accepted the candidate's right of the admissions would be limited to the 3 choices expressed by them, and would be excluded for consideration for 97 other choices available to them.
That clearly could not have been the intention of the authorities.
To our mind, therefore, it would be wholly preposterous to interpret item No. 15 of the application so as to limit the consideration of candidates to the preferences indicated by them therein.
15.
There is yet another compelling reason which supports the same conclusion, namely, that the prospectus issued by the Medical University repeatedly emphasises that admissions would be made only on one consideration i.e. merit of the candidates determined by the PMET-2002.
In the process of admission, therefore, superior merit has to be given overriding effect.
By the interpretation placed on Item No. 15 of the application from by the authorities, the aforesaid issue of paramount consideration is being given a go-by.
By the interpretation placed on item No. 15 of the application form by the Medical University, candidates with lesser marks in the PMET-2002 have stolen a march over candidates with more marks.
For the reasons recorded above, we find merit in the submissions advanced on behalf of the petitioners ; for the same reasons.
It is not possible for us to accept the first two contentions advanced by the learned counsel representing the Medical University.
16.
Reference to the opinion expressed by the Co-ordinator, Pre Medical Entrance Test, Dr. GS Bindra, in paragraph 4 of the writ petition ; as also reference made to the opinion expressed by Mr. Anupam Gupta, Advocate, in paragraph 3 of the written statement filed on behalf of the Medical University in CWP No. 14832 of 2002 need no examination.
Honest opinions expressed cannot be the basis of a legal analysis.
If we accept the pleadings in paragraph 4 of the writ petition, wherein reference has been made to the Co- ordinator, PMET, Dr. GS Bindra, the conclusion may well be that the action taken by the Medical University while finalishing admissions to the BDS course was extraneous.
On the contrary, the conclusion would be that the action taken by the Medical University was unintentional/bonafide, if reference is made to the opinion of Mr. Anupam Gupta, Advocate.
At the present juncture, while adjudicating upon this controversy, we do not consider it either necessary or expedient to express any opinion in this behalf.
We must, however, express our appreciation of the manner in which Mr. Anupam Gupta, learned counsel representing the respondent Medical University, has brought the facts, as well as various relevant provisions to our notice.
He has assisted the court in an unbiased manner, realising and pointing out repeatedly, that the outcome of the instant writ petitions would be beneficial to some and would be detrimental to an equal number.
17.
In so far as the fourth contention noticed on behalf of the respondents is concerned, the same, in our view, does not arise for consideration insofar as the instant case is concerned.
In the instant case, none of the candidates (petitioners herein) has been granted admission to a course for which they had expressed their preference while filing up Item No. 15 of the application form.
As such the fourth submission projected is clearly misconceived.
However, in our view, in case a candidate had made a preference for a particular course and was successful in gaining admission to the course for which the had made a preference, he would clearly be debarred for admission to a course for which he had made an inferior preference, or for which he had not made a preference.
18.
In view of the conclusions dawn above, we are satisfied that the petitioners were liable to be considered for admission to the BDS course and could not be excluded from consideration merely for the reasons that they did not indicate BDS as one of the preferences while filling up Item No. 15 of the application form.
Be that as it may, the third contention of the learned counsel for the Medical University (noticed above) has still to be adjudicated upon.
If the said contention is accepted, only 9 candidates (i.e. respondents Nos. 4 to 12) can be ousted so as to accommodate the petitioners.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the respondents, that no one can be condemned unheard, and as such the instant judgment would not apply to those not arrayed as party-respondents.
Insofar as the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is concerned, it is apparent that in CWP No. 14832 of 2002 this Court made an express order to the effect that admissions, if any, shall abide by the final decision of the case.
Since the aforesaid order was admittedly passed before admissions were made to the BDS course, the order passed in the instant case would govern all admissions which were made after the passing of the aforesaid interim directions.
Accordingly, in our view the relief in the instant case cannot be limited to merely the nine most meritorious petitioners.
19.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant petitions are allowed.
The claim of the petitioners for consideration for admission to the BDS course cannot be denied merely on account of the fact that they did not indicate BDS as one of the preferences while filling Item No. 15 of the application form.
Accordingly, the Medical University is directed to reconvene the process of counselling and consider the claim of the petitioners and others to the BDS course afresh on the basis of their ranking/marks in the PMET-20002 (obviously taken separately for each category).
Petitions allowed.