Viney Mittal, J - The present petitioner Vikram Singh, Head Constable has filed the petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ challenging the order dated July 11, 2000 whereby the original promotion as Head Constable granted to the petitioner with effect from January 23, 1991 has been changed and ordered to be given with effect from December 31, 1999.
The aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P-6 with the petition.
2.
Certain facts :  It is not in dispute that the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable with effect from January 23, 1991.
Subsequently, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner whereby the petitioner was sought to be reverted.
The aforesaid show cause notice was challenged by the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 14350 of 1997.
Vide order dated October 22, 1997, the aforesaid writ petition filed by the petitioner was allowed and the show cause notice was quashed.
3.
The petitioner approached this Court again through Civil Writ Petition No. 2562 of 1998.
A Division Bench of this Court allowed the writ petition and directed the respondents to determine the seniority of the petitioner as Head Constable on list C-II as per the directions contained therein.
4.
In June 2000, another show cause notice was issued to the petitioner as to why his date of regularisation be not changed from January 23, 1991 to December 31, 1999.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply to the aforesaid show cause notice.
Vide order dated July 19, 2000, the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat informed the petitioner that his reply had not been found satisfactory and, therefore, his representation had been rejected.
It was further ordered that his date of regularisation had been changed with effect from January 23, 1991 to December 31, 1999.
The aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P-6.
5.
The petitioner is now aggrieved against the order dated July 19, 2000 and has approached this Court through the present petition.
6.
A written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
The claim of the petitioner was contested.
It has been stated in the reply that the petitioner was not promoted in 10% quota of promotion but he was promoted merely on adhoc basis and, therefore, the claim of the petitioner was totally without any merit.
7.
I have heard Shri Vijay K Jindal, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana for the respondents.
8.
The main submission raised by Shri Vijay K Jindal, the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the order Annexure P-6 was totally non-speaking order.
Shri Jindal has pointed out that from the order Annexure P-6 it is clear that the same was in fact mere reproduction of the show cause notice and it was only thereafter one line had been added that "the reply of the petitioner had been considered and rejected being devoid of merit".
On that basis, Shri Jindal maintains that the aforesaid order affects the civil rights of the petitioner and being non-speaking, the order was totally against the principles of natural justice and, therefore, was liable to be set aside on this short ground.
9.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and find myself in agreement with the submissions made by Shri Jindal.
I find that the order Annexure P-6 is totally silent on the various points raised in the reply filed to the show cause notice.
It merely mentions that the reply has been taken into consideration and has been found devoid of any merit.
No reasons have been offered in the aforesaid order as to how the reply filed to the shows cause notice by the petitioner is without any basis.
Without going into the controversy on merits and sustainability of the claim of the petitioner with regard to his entitlement, I deem it appropriate to quash the order Annexure P-6 being a totally non-speaking order.
However, the respondents would be at liberty to consider the matter all over again and pass a fresh speaking order taking into consideration all the points raised by the petitioner in his reply to the aforesaid show cause notice.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and order Annexure P-6 is hereby quashed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.