SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper book.
2.
The petitioner was employed as Waterman in the Sant Hari Singh Khalsa Senior Secondary School, Jian, Chabbewal, District Hoshiarpur since 5101994.
The State of Punjab decided to take over the School on terms and conditions contained in the Gift Deed dated 1182000.
In Clause 3 of the Gift Deed, it is provided as under :-  "3.
The Government is not committed to take over the staff of the School, but the Government has the will and the right to take over only those out of the staff, who fulfil the eligibility."
3.
The petitioner was not absorbed.
She made a representation to the authority, but the representation was not decided.
Consequently, the petitioner filed the present writ petition claiming absorption.
It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that persons similarly situated as the petitioner, who were working against the unaided posts, had been absorbed by the respondents-State.
The name of the petitioner figures at Sr. No. 14 of the list of unaided staff.
It is submitted that all the other persons mentioned in the aforesaid list, have been absorbed.
The petitioner is the solitary case of non-absorption.
According to the learned counsel, this decision is wholly arbitrary and unreasonable.
The requirement of supplying water to the students still continues.
4.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents.
It has been stated that there is no requirement of a Waterman in the School as sufficient modern facility exists in the School.
It is also stated that no person junior to the petitioner has been retained in service.
Mr. Sran has submitted that on the basis of Clause 3 of the Gift Deed, it was not incumbent on the respondents- State to absorb all the employees.
5.
Mr. Daldeep Singh has relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in the case of Smt. Gurmeet Kaur v. State of Punjab and Anr. 1998(1) SCT 196 (P&H) (DB) : (Civil Writ Petition No. 10950 of 1996) decided on 1091997.
Undoubtedly in the aforesaid judgment, the petitioner was directed to be absorbed in the government service.
But the aforesaid judgment would not be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In that case, the petitioner was a teacher who was working on an unaided post.
The District Education Officer had made a report setting out the required strength of teachers.
The aforesaid report was ignored by the respondents and the petitioner therein was not absorbed.
In these circumstances, this Court had directed that since the workload was available, the petitioner be absorbed in government service.
In the present case, it has been categorically stated by the respondents in the written statement that there is no need for employing a Waterman since adequate facilities are available.
Therefore, we find that the aforesaid judgment of the Division Bench of this Court would be of no assistance to the case put forward by the petitioner.
6.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the respondents had been directed to file an affidavit stating as to whether any person had been appointed on the Class IV Post since the School has been taken over by the Government.
The necessary affidavit has been filed.
It is stated that no Class IV employee has been appointed since the School has been taken over.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the present writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.