RL Anand, J - Shri Harjinder Pal Singh-petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued quashing the order dated 29.12.1995 (Annexure P-7) passed by respondent No. 2, i.e. Vice-Chancellor, Punjabi University, Patiala, who rejected the representation of the petitioner seeking expunction of adverse remarks recorded in his ACR for the year 1992-93 as in the view of the petitioner the order is violative of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. EG Nambudiri, 1991(2) SCT 142 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1216.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as Supervisor (Sales) in the Publication Bureau of Punjabi University, Patiala on 451988.
Throughout he worked under Dr. Hazara Singh, head of the Publication Bureau of the University, who had given good reports to him since the date of the appointment except for the year 1992-93.
It is stated by the petitioner that he made a joint representation on 19101992 with Shri Chaman Lal, Supervisor (Sales) in the Publication Bureau of the University to make the posts of Supervisor (Sales) as permanent.
Dr. Hazara Singh recommended the posts of Supervisor (Sales) to be made permanent and further recommended the petitioner and Shri Chaman Lal to be confirmed against those posts.
The recommendation was made on 6.11.1992 clearly indicating that even in the opinion of Dr. Hazara Singh the conduct of the petitioner was satisfactory, but vide letter dated 1061993 the petitioner was conveyed with the adverse remarks for the year 1992-93 as follows :-  "1.
Does the employee gladly accept the extra responsibilities and show interest to learn new techniques ?
- Bad  2.
Does the employee show initiative to plan and dispose of the work of his section ?
- Bad 3.
How far the employee get the cooperation from his subordinates ?
- Bad" It is alleged by the petitioner that the defects pointed out in he ACR were not specified.
The remarks were recorded simply by the used of word `Bad' without giving any comments forming basis of the same.
The specification of defects leading to adverse remarks is required so that employee can remedy the defects and also because the reporting officer Dr. Hazara Singh has assessed the work and conduct of the petitioner as satisfactory and also recommended the confirmation of the petitioner on the post of Supervisor (Sales) on 6.11.1992, therefore, the adverse remarks are not in conformity with the recommendation made by Dr. Hazara Singh.
The petitioner made representation against the adverse remarks by stating that the reporting officer has not followed the guidelines as contained in Circular letter No. 2334-ASI-60/15760 dated 351960 issued by the Chief Secretary, Punjab Government.
This circular was adopted by the University.
The guidelines provided that the reporting officer should specifically convey the defects to the employee.
The petitioner further submits that he was asked by Dr. Hazara Singh verbally on 1721993 to contact Director, Public Instructions (Primary Schools), Punjab, Chandigarh for supply of the books published by the University for the libraries of the primary schools of Punjab.
The petitioner submitted a list of 28 books to the selection committee under the headship of the Joint Secretary, Education, Punjab.
Out of these, nine books were selected.
The petitioner in his report dated 1821993 submitted to the Publication Bureau of the University that there was possibility of purchase of at least 4315 copies of each title.
The Director, Public Instructions (Primary Schools), Punjab vide letter dated 11.3.1993 placed an order for supply of 4315 books for primary school libraries.
The non-execution of this order was the actual reason on change of opinion of the reporting officer about the work and conduct of the petitioner.
On account of this bias against the petitioner the reporting officer recorded the adverse remarks in the ACR for the year 1992-93.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that Dr. Hazara Singh on 6.11.1992 had recommended the case of the petitioner for confirmation against a permanent post of Supervisor (Sales), therefore, the adverse remarks stated above were not justified and secondly the adverse remarks have been given by Dr. Hazara Singh on account of the fact that he had presumed that the non-execution of the order is due to the fault of the petitioner.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
It was stated that the petitioner was conveyed the adverse remarks recorded in the ACR for the year 1992-93 vide letter dated 1061993.
The petitioner was aware of the reasons of the adverse remarks since he created indiscipline in the department and did not accept the orders of the Registrar dated 351993 and order No. 358-66 under protest and therefore, he did not accept the extra responsibilities with a smiling face.
It was also pleaded by the respondents that the petitioner did not implement the order of the Vice-Chancellor regarding the discount on books and other conditions directly relating to the University finances.
It was further pleaded that the petitioner was Supervisor (Sales) and he was supposed to work with Class III and Class IV employees whose cooperation was required to run the establishment which the petitioner was not getting in view of his own indiscipline.
It was also stated that the reporting officer Dr. Hazara Singh had no bias against the petitioner and he recorded the ACR as per his opinion.
Further, it was submitted that the petitioner has broken the guidelines of the University wherein it has been stated that the representation should not contain any slinging and baseless charges.
In case any officer/official uses filthy or unparliamentary language in his representation for the expunction of adverse remarks, the same will be straightaway rejected and action shall be taken against such official.
In view of these guidelines the representation of the petitioner was liable to be rejected because the representation contains slinging and baseless charges when the petitioner used the words "the reporting officer has lost his sense of judgment; he has written the remarks in confusion and the judgment of the reporting officer is very low".
The University pleaded that since the representation contained the abovesaid remarks, therefore, in view of the instructions the representation of the petitioner was liable to be rejected straightaway.
Denying other material allegations of the petitioner, it was prayed by the respondents that the present writ petition may be dismissed.
4.
The petitioner filed the re-joinder to the written statement in which he reiterated the allegations of the petition by denying those of the written statement and from the pleadings of the parties and the documents placed on the record the only point for determination is whether the petitioner is entitled to the relief as claimed for.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently submitted that the order dated 29.12.1995 (Annexure P-7) passed by respondent No. 2 rejecting the representation of the petitioner is violative of the guidelines issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in AIR 1991 SC 1216.
Dr. Hazara Singh, the officer who recorded the adverse remarks against the petitioner, did not apply his proper mind before recording the adverse remarks.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the remarks, especially against column No. 3, is not in consonance with the duties to be performed by the petitioner as the petitioner was the lowest in rank in his cadre and therefore the question of cooperation from his subordinates did not arise on the part of the petitioner.
He submitted that the ACR was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated 1061993 and on 6.12.1992 Dr. Hazara Singh had recommended the case of the petitioner along with Shri Chaman Lal for the permanent cadre of the post of Supervisor.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that the adverse remarks have been written by Dr. Hazara Singh, who has no axe to grind against the petitioner.
It was the subjective satisfaction of the reporting officer.
This very reporting officer earlier had given good reports to the petitioner according to the factual position because the petitioner had been working under him since 1988 and up to 1992 no adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner.
When the petitioner did not work properly to the satisfaction of his superiors in the year 1992-93, the reporting officer had to record the adverse remarks in the ACR of the petitioner for the year 1992-93.
There was no mala fide on the part of Dr. Hazara Singh as he was the person who recommended the case of the petitioner for confirmation against the permanent post.
6.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties we are of the considered opinion that there is no merit in this writ petition.
Recording of the ACR is the subjective satisfaction of the reporting officer.
Until and unless it is shown that the recording of the remarks was arbitrary of mala fide, we are not inclined to interfere in the same.
Admittedly, Dr. Hazara Singh was the controlling officer of the petitioner and he had made the subjective satisfaction with regard to the work and conduct of the petitioner.
It is the stand of the University that the behaviour of the petitioner with Class III and Class IV employees was not proper.
We all know that unless the establishment works as a team there cannot be success in its working.
Even the petitioner himself admits that there was non-execution of the order which actuated Dr. Hazara Singh to change his opinion regarding the work of the petitioner.
If on account of the lack of interest the work of the University has suffered or if the University has suffered financially, there was no bar on the part of the reporting officer to say that the employee does not accept the extra responsibilities.
There is nothing on the record to show that the remarks recorded by the reporting officer was arbitrary or mala fide one or that it was based on no circumstance.
7.
Faced with this difficult, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has invited our attention to the office noting dated 6121995 of the Superintendent (Establishment) who suggested for the expunction of adverse remarks of the petitioner on the ground that the adverse remarks were not based on any concrete proof.
This submission is not acceptable to us.
Firstly, this was only a suggestion by the Superintendent of the Establishment which may or may not be accepted by the senior officers.
The point which survives for determination before us is whether the remarks have been written in an arbitrary manner or in a mala fide manner or whether the representations of the petitioner has been rejected on flimsy grounds or not.
It is one of the rules of the University that while making representation the employee must not write any slinging and baseless language and he must not use filthy or unparliamentary language in the representation.
But in the present case objectionable words have been used by the petitioner when he stated that the reporting officer lost his judgment sense and he had written the remarks in confusion and that the judgment of the reporting officer was very low.
This type of language could not be eschewed or encouraged by the establishment.
Vide order dated 22.12.1995 the Deputy Registrar (Establishment) has clearly stated that since the employee used unsuitable words against the reporting officer, therefore, he should be given warning so that he may use respectable language while writing letters in future.
With all this office noting the matter came up for consideration before the Registrar of the University on 28121995 and finally the representation of the petitioner was rejected.
As we have just stated above that the sole point which survives for determination is whether the remarks written by the reporting officer is arbitrary and whether the order of rejection is against the rules.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to convince on any of the points.
Rather, we are of the opinion that the adverse remarks were neither arbitrary nor mala fide.
Therefore, we do not see any merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.