NK Sud, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Typist in the Public Relations Department of the Punjab Government on temporary basis on 1451957.
Subsequently on 1671958 he was selected for appointment on regular basis and was posted in the office of Settlement Officer, Consolidation Department.
On the re-organisation of the State of Punjab on 1111966, the petitioner was allocated to the State of Haryana and was posted at Ambala.
In October 1967, Ambala Circle of Consolidation Department was wound up and the petitioner was transferred to the office of Director, Consolidation of Holdings Haryana, Chandigarh.
While working at Chandigarh, he was transferred to Bhiwani on 1161979.
The petitioner did not join duty at Bhiwani immediately and sent leave applications on the ground that he had received injuries in an accident and was being treated at General Hospital, Sector-16, Chandigarh.
He, however, reported for duty for one day on 4.7.1979 and thereafter again applied for leave and extension thereof on medical grounds till 30.9.1979.
Since the petitioner had not joined duty immediately after the order of transfer, he was charge-sheeted on the following counts :-  "(i) He was transferred vide Directorate enforcement No. 4907-08 dated 1161979 from Chandigarh to the Settlement Officer, Consolidation of Holdings Circle Bhiwani and was further directed to join his duties at his new place of posting within two days.
He was relieved on 1161979.
He was also given the advances of pay and TA amounting to Rs. 210/- and Rs. 100/- respectively to cover the expenditure on his transfer.
Inspite of this he did not join his new place of duty upto 3779.
He joined his duties on 4779.
In the period of his absence from 12679 to 30979, he submitted medical certificate for the period from 12679 to 15679, 18679 to 21679 and 25679 to 26679.
(ii) That he had been doing type work in the lower of Chandigarh in Sector 17 and it was probably on this account that he had been absenting from his duties.
(iii) It was reported on 7679 by Shri Surinder Kumar Mittal Assistant of the Directorate Consolidation that Shri Ganesh Kumar Clerk came to office in a drunken state and begin to throw files on his table hither and thither and scolded abused him when he tried to stop him from this act.
On 14679 when Shri Surinder Kumar Mittal Assistant was going to the office in Kothi No. 19, Sector 9, Shri Ganesh Kumar clerk was standing on the road in drunken condition and asked Shri Shiv Kumar Peon to slap Mr. Surinder Kumar Mittal Assistant.
(iv) On 7679 Shri Rameshwar Kumar Gupta Assistant of Directorate Consolidation asked Shri Ganesh Clerk to type out the case concerning Public Account Committee, but he not only refused to type the case, but also threw away the case saying that he has no time.
(v) Shri Shiv Ram Peon had reported on 14679 that Shri Ganesh Kumar Clerk came to office on 13679 in drunken condition and stole a ream of paper and on his complaint to the Superintendent of this Directorate, he was caught red handed but he ran away leaving behind the ream of papers.
Later he came to office after 5 P.M. and took away the ream of papers left by him."
The petitioner furnished an explanation which was not found satisfactory and accordingly an inquiry was instituted.
The Inquiry Officer submitted the report dated 351982, a copy of which has been placed as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
The petitioner was totally absolved of allegations No. (ii) to (v).
In respect of the first charge, the Inquiry Officer observed as under :-  "The first allegation relates to the transfer of Shri Ganesh Kumar that he did not report on duty till 30.9.1979.
On the basis of available evidence there is no doubt that Shri Ganesh Kumar did not join his duty from 12679 to 30979 except 4779.
The perusal of the official record, revealed that Shri Ganesh Kumar has been sending leave applications for the entire period, but the doctor has recommended rest for only 10 days as given on the chargesheet.
Even if Shri Ganesh Kumar had been ill for the entire period from 12679 to 30979, he ought to have submitted the Medical Certificate for the entire period.
For this charge he deserves a strict warning."
On the basis of the above findings, the Inquiry Officer concluded as under :-  "Shri Ganesh Kumar is only guilty of first charge of his not getting the leave approved before availing it.
The medical certificate presented by Shri Ganesh Kumar is not complete.
On this score Shri Ganesh may be given a strong warning for his dereliction of his duty."
2.
On receipt of the inquiry report, respondent No. 2 issued a show cause notice dated 141985 in the following terms :-  "Shri Ganesh Kumar, Clerk, Office of the Settlement Officer, Consolidation of Holdings, Jui Circle, Bhiwani is hereby informed that the Enquiry Officer appointed by this Directorate vide memorandum No. SS-2/2349 dated 25381 to enquire into the charges levelled against him in the chargesheet served on him through the Settlement Officer, Consolidation of Holdings, Jui Circle, Bhiwani vide this Directorate memorandum No. S-II/9175 dated 19121979, has submitted his report, a copy of which is enclosed for his information.
2.
On careful consideration of the report, I am of the view that out of the 5 charges levelled against him, the charge of absence has been proved during the enquiry.
I agree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and am provisionally of the view that penalty of removal from service should be imposed on him.
Before the action is taken against him an opportunity is given to him of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken.
Any representation which he may like to make in this connection will be considered before the proposed action is taken.
Representation, if any, should be made in writing and submitted to this Directorate through the Settlement Officer, Consolidation of Holdings, Jui Circle, Bhiwani within 15 days from the receipt of this communication by him.
3.
The receipt of this memorandum along with its enclosure may please be acknowledged."
(Emphasis supplied)  3.
The petitioner furnished the necessary representation, whereafter the impugned order dated October 16, 1985 was passed removing the petitioner from service.
A copy of this order has been placed as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
4.
The petitioner preferred an appeal before the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, which was dismissed vide order dated 3171986, a copy of which has been placed as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
5.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that the impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 are illegal being violative of principles of equity and natural justice, as these are based upon considerations with which the petitioner was never confronted.
The main ground for awarding the extreme punishment of removal is the past record of the petitioner.
The petitioner was never notified that while awarding punishment, his past record was also to be taken into consideration.
The Counsel then pointed out that in the show cause notice dated 141985 it has been wrongly observed that the charge of absence had been proved during the inquiry.
He referred to the relevant portion of the inquiry report, already reproduced above, to show that the only conclusion arrived at by the Inquiry Officer was that the medical certificates furnished by the petitioner along with the leave applications did not cover the entire period for which leave had been applied.
In fact, in the conclusion the Inquiry Officer has clearly mentioned that the petitioner was found guilty of not getting the leave approved before availing it and that the medical certificate submitted by him was not complete.
The Inquiry Officer has not disbelieved the case of the petitioner that he was not well during that period.
This is evident from the fact that the Inquiry Officer had considered this omission to be of technical nature only and had, therefore, recommended that the petitioner be given only a strong warning for dereliction of his duty as punishment.
Referring to the order of removal Annexure P-3 Mr. Patwalia states that respondent No. 2 has been influenced by various considerations which were not even mentioned in the show cause notice issued on the basis of inquiry report.
He specifically referred to the following observations in this behalf :-  (i) "...this official in the first instance refused to receive the order of his transfer.
Later on he reluctantly received the order on 11679 at 4 P.M......" (ii) ".....on his further posting with the Assistant Consolidation Officer, Bidnoi, he again refused to join at Bidnoi......" (iii) "...that the petitioner was informed vide Directorate Memo No. EA- 2/6188 Dated 1879 that he was being treated as absent from duty with effect from 12679 and that he should join duty within two days of the receipt of the communication failing which disciplinary action will be taken against him......" 6.
Learned counsel further contended that none of the above mentioned charges had been brought against the petitioner either in the chargesheet or during the course of enquiry.
Even in the show cause notice issued to him on 141985, it did not refer to any of the above allegations.
He also contended that the order of the State Government in appeal also suffers from the same infirmity.
The Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana while passing the order in appeal had gone even a step further and relied upon the past record of the petitioner to sustain the order of removal.
He has also relied upon the comments of the Director, Consolidation of Holdings, Haryana, with which the petitioner was never confronted.
The impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 being based on such considerations are not sustainable in law as has been held in the State Bank of Mysore v. K Manche Gowda, AIR 1964 SC 506, State Bank of India & Ors. v. DC Aggarwal and another, 1993(1) SCT 225, BM Sharma v. State Bank of India & Others, 1995(4) SCT 834, Managing Director ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : JT 1993(6) SC 1, Mahipat Ex. Constable v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 337 (P&H), and Kuldip Singh v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation & another, 1996(1) RSJ 187.
7.
Mr. Sidharath Sarup, Assistant Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the State of Haryana supports the order of removal from service of the petitioner.
He refers to paras 5 and 7 of the written statement in which it has been explained that the petitioner had merely received some minor injuries in a scuffle with a senior colleague on 761979 and as such there was no need for proceeding on leave for a long period of more than two months on that account.
According to him, the petitioner did not want to comply with the order of transfer and had, therefore, applied for leave on the false pretext of illness.
He also points out the medical certificates dated 861979, 1861979 and 25.6.1979 attached by the petitioner merely required him to rest for a total period of 10 days.
However, the leave applications thereafter were not accompanied by any medical certificate to show that he was unwell or had been advised rest.
He further contends that the Punishing Authority was fully competent to take into consideration the past record of the petitioner.
He, however, fairly concedes that in none of notices, had the petitioner been notified that his past record shall be taken into consideration while awarding punishment to him.
He has also not been able to show that the comments of the Director, Consolidation of Holdings, Haryana, referred to by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana in his order dated 3171986, had ever been put to the petitioner.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after perusing the record, I am satisfied that the order Annexure P-3 removing the petitioner from service and Annexure P-2 dismissing his appeal against his removal cannot be sustained.
It has been correctly pointed out by the Counsel for the petitioner that the past conduct could not have been made the basis for awarding punishment as the petitioner had not been notified about this in the show cause notice.
Similarly, the comments of Director.
Consolidation of Holdings, Haryana, obtained at the back of the petitioner could not be a basis for rejection of his appeal.
The law is well settled on this issue.
The authorities cited by the Counsel for the petitioner fully support his case.
9.
In K Manche Godwa's case (supra) the Supreme Court has held that under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, a Government servant must have a reasonable opportunity not only to prove that he is not guilty of the charges levelled against him, but also to establish that the punishment proposed to be imposed is either uncalled for or excessive.
Such an opportunity has to be a reasonable opportunity and therefore, it is necessary that the Government servant must be told of the grounds on which an action is proposed.
If the proposed punishment is mainly based upon the previous record of the Govt. Servant and this basis is not disclosed in the notice, it would mean that the main reason for the proposed punishment is withheld from the knowledge of the Govt. Servant.
it would be no answer to suggest that every Govt. servant must have had knowledge of the fact that his past record would necessarily be taken into consideration by the Government in inflicting the punishment on him.
The punishing authority can take previous record into consideration even though the previous record is not made the subject matter of the charge as such, but for doing so, the second notice proposing punishment must specify that while awarding punishment, his previous record shall be taken into consideration.
Similar view has been expressed by this Court in Mahipat Ex. Constable's case (supra) and Kuldip Singh's case (supra).
10.
In DC Aggarwal's case (supra) the Apex Court held that disciplinary authority, while imposing punishment, cannot act on material which is neither supplied nor shown to the delinquent.
In this case, the order of punishment had been passed on the basis of a vigilance report which was obtained at the back of the petitioner without confronting him with the same.
11.
Thus the case has to be examined only in the light of the allegations levelled against the petitioner in the chargesheet, the enquiry report and the notice proposing punishment.
There were five allegations levelled against the petitioner in the chargesheet.
The Inquiry Officer found him partially guilty only in respect of one allegation.
A bare reading of the findings of the Inquiry Officer in respect of this allegation shows that he has not found the petitioner's claim of ill health during the period for which leave applications had been submitted to be false.
The only conclusion arrived at by him is that the petitioner had not submitted medical certificates for the entire leave period.
Thus the charge proved against the petitioner is merely of a technical nature.
This cannot be read as a finding that the petitioner had wilfully absented himself during that period as appears to have been concluded by respondent No. 2 in the show cause notice dated 141995 and also in the impugned order Annexure P-3.
12.
It is pertinent to mention that respondent No. 2 had accepted the findings of the Inquiry Officer and not disagreed with him.
This has been specifically mentioned by him in the show cause notice dated 141985 which was already been fully reproduced above.
Under these circumstances, I agree with the Counsel for the petitioner that the only allegation proved against the petitioner is that his leave applications were not accompanied by proper medical certificates.
This charge, in my view, is purely of a technical nature and does not warrant such a harsh penalty of removal from service.
Thus, according to me the punishment awarded to the petitioner is grossly disproportionate to the charge proved against him.
A stern warning as recommended by the Enquiry Officer would have sufficed in the facts of the present case.
13.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders Annexures P-3 and P-2 are quashed.
The matter will now go back to the respondents for giving effect to this order.
Mr. Patwalia points out that the petitioner has since died on 6111996 and his legal representatives have already been brought on record vide order dated 19.3.1997.
If the petitioner is found eligible for any consequential benefits, the same shall be paid to his legal representatives at the earliest.
No costs.
Petition allowed.