Swatanter Kumar, J - By this judgment we propose to dispose of the above five writ petitions.
As all these petitions raise a common question of law for consideration of the Court based at somewhat similar facts, it is not necessary for us to refer to facts of each case in detail.
It will suffice to refer to the case of Daya Singh and others.
2.
In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for quashing of the order Annexure P/9 to P/13 vide which penalty of stoppage of one annual increment with cumulative effect had been imposed on each of the five petitioners.
Petitioner Nos. 2 to 5 had filed an application for deletion of their names, which was permitted by the Court vide order dated 12102000.
The petitioner is working as JBT teacher under Director, Primary Education, Haryana and has unblemished service of 20 years to his credit.
The petitioner availed of the facility of LTC Certain complaints were made by some vested interests person and a charge-sheet dated 2571994 was served upon the petitioner.
It was stated in the charge-sheet that the petitioner had obtained LTC amounts wrongly and incorrectly.
Vide order dated 3011995, District Primary Education Officer, the competent authority inflicted the punishment of stoppage of one annual increment without cumulative effect.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against this order.
The appeal was dismissed.
The appellate authority i.e. the Director, Primary Education, Haryana, while dismissing the appeal held that it was not reasonable to give any higher punishment than the one awarded to the petitioner vide order dated 12.7.1996, copy of which is annexed to the petition as Annexure P/3.
However, respondent No. 3 at his own passed a fresh order on 12.7.1999 stating that upon reconsideration of the matter he was of the opinion that petitioner should be proceeded against under Rule 7 of Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1952, hereinafter referred to as the Rules, for imposition of major punishment.
The petitioner filed a reply thereto and the respondent No. 3 recalled the earlier order of 1032000 and imposed the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
The petitioner challenged the said order in the said writ petition.
3.
Written statement has been filed.
The facts are not in dispute.
it is stated that the Government of Haryana is competent to review the previous order passed by the lower authority and hence the petition should be dismissed.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners while relying upon a judgment of Division Bench of this Court in the case of Parkash Nath Saidha v. The Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Punjab, Chandigarh and others, 1972 S.L.R.
601 and Mohinder Paul v. The Secretary, Health Dept.
Punjab Government, Chandigarh and others, 2001(1) SCT 169 (P&H) : 2001(3) RSJ 95 to contend that the impugned order is hit by the principle of double jeopardy.
The impugned order could not have been passed as the petitioner had been punished once for the same charge-sheet.
5.
We find substance in the submissions made on behalf of the petitioners, which have hardly been refuted by the State.
At this stage, it may be appropriate to refer to the relevant part of the order passed by the Appellate Authority, which reads as under :-  "And whereas the matter is serious but taking a lenient view in this matter, I do not find it reasonable to give him much punishment and decision already taken by the Distt.
Primary Education Officer, Sonepat is found satisfactory and his appeal is hereby rejected."
6.
It is a settled rule of law that once a delinquent officer/official has been subjected to a departmental procedure in accordance with law and has been punished, he cannot be compelled to face another enquiry or punishment for the one and the same charge.
In the present case, even the appellate authority had held as a matter of fact that it will not be appropriate to impose any higher punishment upon the delinquent.
Once the appellate authority had affirmed the order and dismissed the appeal of the petitioners with the afore-noticed remarks, there was no jurisdiction vested in the lower authority i.e. respondent No. 3 to re-open the case and pass the impugned order of punishment.
In disciplinary proceedings power to review its own order cannot be read or construed unless such power was so vested in the authority under a specific provision.
Admittedly, there is no provision of review vested in the authority which passed the order.
The impugned order, thus, lacks inherent jurisdiction and is opposed to settled canons of service jurisprudence.
7.
We can hardly see any reason much less a valid ground for respondent No. 3 to re-open to proceedings with its own initiative.
The action of the said respondent even suffers from the voice of legal bias.
The said respondent has certainly transgressed its jurisdiction in imposing the impugned punishment on the petitioner.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow these writ petitions and quash the impugned order dated 1032000.
The petitioners in each case will also be entitled to costs of Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.