Amar Dutt, J - Bhagwan Singh Lamba has filed the present petition for grant of disability pension, which had been refused by the respondents.
2.
The facts essential for adjudication of the petitioner's claim are that when the petitioner joined the service of Indian Air Force on 391959, he was found medically fit.
He retired from the service on 141997 as Master Warrant Officer.
At the time of retirement, he was found to be suffering from Essential Hypertension 401 (V-67) and NIDIM-250 (V-67) whereas NIDIM is Non- Insul in Dependent Diabetic Mellitus.
The petitioner submits that both these diseases are byproduct of particular environment, in which he had to serve in the Indian Air Force and, therefore, the Medical Board of 27 Wing, Air Force Station, Bhuj had forwarded his case for the grant of disability pension for further approval.
This recommendation was turned down on 1.3.1999.
The appeal filed by the petitioner was also rejected and consequent thereto he has filed the present petition.
3.
In the written statement, that has been filed on behalf of the respondents, after admitting that an individual, who is invalided out of service on account of disability, which is attributable to or aggravated by Air Force Service and is assessed at 20% is, entitled to disability pension as per Regulation 153 of the Pension Regulations for the Air Force, 1961 Part I.
It was, however, submitted that the case of the petitioner was not of a person being invalided out of service but he had retired after completion of his term of engagement and, therefore, was not entitled to any disability pension.
The fact, that the petitioner had developed Hypertension and was placed in Medical Category `CEE' (Temporary) and on subsequent review placed in Medical Category `BEE' (Permanent) on account of Hypertension and Diabetes Mellitus, was admitted.
It was submitted that these diseases are constitutional disorder not attributable to military service and, therefore, it is submitted that the case of the petitioner had rightly been rejected.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record of the case.
5.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner primarily relied upon the judgment of this Court, which is reported as Ex-Subedar Sardara Singh v. Union of India, 2001(1) SCT 667.
That case pertained to an individual enrolled in the Indian Army, who, on completion of his tenure of service, was found by the Medical Board to be suffering from more than 20% disability.
This Court while taking into consideration the provisions of Regulation 179 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1962 Part I had accepted the writ and directed the Union of India to release the disability pension to the petitioner with effect from the date of his retirement.
This judgment, in my view, would be of little assistance to the petitioner primarily on two grounds; one that the Pension Regulations applicable to the case of the petitioner are not para-materia with the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 and second because in this case the fact that the extent of disability from which the petitioner was found to be suffering was assessed at below 20% would take it out of the purview of Regulation 153 of the Pension Regulations for the Air Force which would govern the case of the petitioner.
Regulation 153 reads as under :-  "Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalided from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by air force service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by air force service shall be determine under the regulations in Appendix II."
6.
The fact that the petitioner's disability according to the communication Annexure P2, was assessed at less than 10 per cent, is not controverted by the petitioner, which fact would disentitle him from the relief sought for.
Even otherwise, a combined reading of Sections 160-A & 179 of the Pension Regulations for the Army 1961 Part I shows that while the said provision creates a right in the individual being discharged on completion of his tenure or on completion of service limit or on completion of terms of engagement, there is no such right created in Regulation 160-A which deals with the case of a similar situation.
A perusal of the language shows that the disability pension in the case of an individual retiree being discharged from the Air Force Service on completion of engagement is to be granted at the discretion of the President.
While it is correct that from the stand of the respondents, it is clear that they were not aware of this provision when they rejected the appeal and normally this Court would have required them to pass fresh order in accordance with law but for the fact that the disability suffered by the petitioner being less than 20% he would not in any case be entitled to grant of disability pension under Regulation 153 of the Pension Regulations for the Air Force 1961 Part I  7.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and has to be dismissed with the observations that if not still satisfied with the assessment of the Invalided Board, it will be open to the petitioner to apply for the constitution of a Review Medical Board to assess his medical condition.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition dismissed.