Viney Mittal, J - The present Civil Writ Petition has been filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India by Anoop Singh who is working as Ayurvedic Medical Officer in the State of Haryana.
The prayer made in the petition is to quash the order dated March 19, 1999 whereby respondent No. 2 has directed to withdraw the benefit of ad hoc service earlier given to the petitioner and also directed the Chief Medical Officer to withdraw and recover the excess amount paid to the petitioner because of counting the aforesaid ad hoc service.
2.
Certain facts may be noticed as follows :  On February 4, 1980, the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis as Vaid and continued to serve as such upto February 5, 1982 when the petitioner was ordered to be relieved due to the arrival of the recommendee of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Subsequently, the petitioner himself got selected as a regular incumbent on the aforesaid post after his due selection from Subordinate Services Selection Board and joined his service with effect from October 8, 1984.
The petitioner was placed in the scale of Rs. 700-30-850-900-40-1110-EB-50-1400 plus two advance increments and 25 per cent non-practising allowance.
On his joining as a regularly selected candidate, the petitioner made a representation to the authorities that he be also granted the benefits of his past ad hoc service rendered by him on the same post.
The aforesaid representation of the petitioner was duly considered and accepted by the respondents and service rendered by the petitioner as an ad hoc candidate from February, 1980 to February, 1982 counted and accordingly his pay was fixed after giving the benefit of aforesaid serviced towards increment.
On December 16, 1998, the petitioner received a show cause notice from Director Ayurveda, Haryana-respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was asked to show cause that since he had worked as a Valid on ad hoc basis from February 4, 1980 to January 22, 1982 and after that vide order dated January 22, 1982 he was ordered to be relieved on February 5, 1982 since his services were over and subsequently on his selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, he joined his duties with effect from October 8, 1984, and, therefore, since he was not Government servant from February 5, 1982 to October 7, 1984 and due to said break in service benefit of annual increment on ad hoc service could not be given.
It was further put to the petitioner that since Chief Medical Officer, Bhiwani had granted the benefit to the petitioner which was not valid, therefore, the Government had decided to withdraw the order of the Chief Medical Officer, Bhiwani due to which a recovery of Rs. 92,653.40 for the period October 9, 1984 to June 30, 1996 stood against the petitioner.
The petitioner was asked to show cause as to why the benefit given by the Chief Medical Officer, Bhiwani to him for his ad hoc service be not withdrawn and further as to why the recovery be not effect from him.
A copy of the aforesaid show cause notice dated December 16, 1998 has been appended as Annexure P/1 with the petition.
Accordingly, the petitioner submitted his reply dated January 9, 1999 which has been appended as Annexure P/2 to the petition.
Besides justifying his claim for counting his period of ad hoc service for all his benefits, the petitioner also claimed that certain other persons who were also similarly situated had already been granted a similar relief.
Vide order dated October 13, 1999, Director, Ayurveda, Haryana- respondent No. 1 felt dissatisfied with the reply of the petitioner and ordered that the benefits granted to the petitioner with regard to his ad hoc service be withdrawn and further directed that the recover of the excess amount be made from the petitioner.
The aforesaid order passed by the Director-respondent No. 2 is happened as Annexure P/3 with the petition.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the aforesaid order Annexure P/3 and has filed the present.
3.
On a notice issued to the respondents, written statement has been filed by respondents No. 1 to 3 contesting the claim of the petitioner.
The stand taken by the respondents is that since there was break in ad hoc service and the petitioner had not been selected through the proper channel at the time of his initial appointment on ad hoc basis, therefore, the aforesaid service could not be counted for granting him the benefit.
4.
During the course of arguments, Shri RK Malik, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner is confining his claim in the present petition merely to the order of recovery sought to be made from him for the said excess payment.
Shri Malik has submitted that since, at no stage, any mis-representation was ever made by the petitioner nor any fraud was played by him, therefore, the question of effecting any recovery from the petitioner did not arise.
For this Shri Malik has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 5763 of 2001 decided on November 7, 2001 (Dr. Subhash Chand v. State of Haryana and others).
We find that the submission made by Shri RK Malik, has merit and deserves to succeed.
In fact it is not the case of the respondents at all that any fraud was ever played by the petitioner or that any mis-representation was ever made by him for securing the benefit of ad hoc service.
In Dr. Subhash Chand's case (supra), reliance was placed on the judgment of Division Bench rendered in C.W.P.
No. 1951 of 1998 (Amarjit Kaur v. State of Haryana and others) decided on April 30, 1998, wherein it was noticed as follows :-  "The excess amount as per the respondents is Rs. 51,543/-.
It is not the case of the respondents that when the pay of the petitioner's husband was initially fixed, there was any mis-representation on his part which might have led the respondents to wrongly fix his pay.
Since there was no mis- representation or fraud played by the petitioner's husband we are of the view that under these circumstances, the respondents are not justified in ordering recovery from the dues of petitioner's husband.
Reference may be made to the Apex Court judgment in Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 668 : 1995(2) R.S.J.
139 in which it was held that if the incumbent was not responsible in any manner for the wrong fixation of his pay by the employer then in those circumstances the recovery cannot be ordered though the future pay may be in accordance with the right fixation.
A similar view was taken by us in C.W.P.
16824 of 1997 (Veena Rani Jaggi and others v. State of Punjab), decided on April 28, 1998 in which reliance was also placed on earlier judgment titled Praduman Lal v. State of Punjab, C.W.P.
No. 1654 of 1997, decided on September 2, 1997."
5.
On the other hand Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana submits that in fact the order Annexure P/3 was wholly legal and valid and the recovery sought to be made by the petitioner was fully justified.
He has relied upon another Division Bench judgment of this court in 2002(2) SCT 227 (P&H) (DB) : C.W.P.
No. 15343 of 1999 (Jai Singh v. State of Haryana and others) decided on December 3, 2001.
6.
However, wee find that the controversy in the present case is fully covered by Dr. Subhash Chand's case (supra) and Amarjit Kaur's case (supra) relied upon by the petitioner.
Therefore, the present petition is allowed to the limited extent that no recovery of any amount stated to have been paid in excess to the petitioner would be effected from the petitioner as envisaged in the order dated March 19, 1999 (Annexure P/3).
However, the other prayers made by the petitioner having not been pressed are declined.
Thus, the present petition is allowed to the limited extent indicated above but with no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.