Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner-Raj Karan, who was working as Technical Mate in J.L.N.
Canal, Water Services, Mechanical Division, Rewari in the State of Haryana, has filed the present civil writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the orders dated December 21, 2001 and orders dated January 8, 2002 vide which the benefit of higher grade of pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 already granted to him w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 has been ordered to be withdrawn.
The orders dated December 21, 2001 have been appended as Annexure P-7 with the petition, whereas the orders dated January 8, 2002 have been appended as Annexure P-6 with the petition.
2.
Certain facts may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner was appointed on work charge basis as a Technical Mate on the basis of his educational qualifications, which were Matriculation with ITI certificate.
The petitioner states that the State Government had taken a blanket decision that all technical posts for which the minimum qualification is matric with ITI certificate were entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
A copy of the aforesaid policy decision taken by the State Government has been appended as Annexure P-1 with the petition.
Accordingly, the petitioner represented with regard to his qualifications and the fact that he was appointed on the basis of the aforesaid qualifications and claimed that he was entitled to the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 w.e.f.
May 1, 1990.
The case of the petitioner with regard to the aforesaid claim was sent to the General Manager/Project, Irrigation Department, Haryana-respondent No. 2 and after due consideration, the General Manager directed the Superintending Engineer to grant the aforesaid scale to the petitioner.
A copy of the order dated January 8, 1998 issued by the General Manager/Projects, respondent No. 2 to the Superintending Engineer has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the petition.
Accordingly, the Executive Engineer-respondent No. 3 vide letter dated February 3, 1998 granted the aforesaid scale of Rs. 1200-2040 to the petitioner w.e.f.
May 1, 1990.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated February 3, 1998 has been appended as Annexure P-3 with the petition.
4.
Subsequently, on August 1, 2001, the petitioner was issued a show cause notice, as to why the benefit of the revised scales of Rs. 1200-2040 granted to him w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 be not withdrawn.
A copy of the aforesaid show cause notice has been appended as Annexure P-4 with the petition.
The petitioner submitted a reply in response to the aforesaid show cause notice.
5.
The matter was considered by the Executive Engineer and ultimately the petitioner received a copy of the letter dated January 8, 2002 sent by the Executive Engineer to the Sub Divisional Officer in which it was directed by the Executive Engineer that the petitioner was not entitled to the scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
Subsequent to the aforesaid letter dated January 8, 2002 another order was passed by Executive Engineer, by which the pay of the petitioner was re-fixed from the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 to Rs. 750-940.
A copy of the letter dated January 8, 2002 has been appended as Annexure P-6 with the petition, whereas the order dated December 21, 2001, has been appended as Annexure P-7 with the petition.
6.
The petitioner has grievance against the orders Annexure P-6 and P-7.
Through the aforesaid orders, not only his pay has been reduced but the amount stated to have been paid to him in excess has been ordered to be recovered.
The petitioner claims that the aforesaid orders are illegal, unjust, unfair and arbitrary.
7.
On a notice issued to the respondents, they have appeared and filed a written statement contesting the claim made by the petitioner.
The stand taken by the respondents is that, in fact, the pay scale of some technical posts for which minimum educational qualification prescribed is Matric with ITI certificate/polytechnic were revised by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Finance Department vide its memo dated August 23, 1990 and were raised from Rs. 750-940 to Rs. 1200-2040.
The respondents state that the post of T-Mate in Irrigation Department was not a technical post and for the aforesaid post there was no prescribed educational qualification.
The respondents maintain that the T-Mate is defined as Trade Man's Mate just like helper and are to assist skilled workman such as Operator, Fitter and Chargeman etc.
In these circumstances, the respondents state that the petitioner is not entitled to get technical grade in any manner.
They further state that since the petitioner had wrongly been granted the aforesaid grade, therefore, the same was rightly withdrawn and consequently the recovery sought to be made from the petitioner was wholly justified.
8.
We have heard Sh. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sh. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
9.
Sh. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner was appointed as a Technical Mate on April 1, 1978 on the basis of the qualification of Matriculation and ITI and no Technical Mate was ever appointed after that.
Since the post held by the petitioner was designated as a Technical Mate and the same was designated as such with a conscious decision, therefore, the petitioner was rightly granted the scale to Rs. 1200-2040.
Sh. Malik further submits that before granting the scale of the petitioner, the case was sent to the General Manager/Projects and it was a conscious decision after due application of mind that the scale was granted to the petitioner.
Sh. Malik submits that the only reason due to which now the benefit granted to the petitioner was sought to be withdrawn was that the post of Technical Mate was not a technical post.
According to him, this reasoning on the face of it is apparently not correct.
According to Shri Malik when the petitioner was appointed on the said post on the basis of his qualification (Matriculation with ITI) and the designation of the post also suggests that the post was of technical nature, then the reason assigned for the withdrawal of the benefit was totally illegal and arbitrary.
In support of his contention Sh. RK Malik has relied upon a judgment of the single Bench of this Court in Labh Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 311 (SC) : 1995(1) RSJ 345.
10.
On the other hand, Sh. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has submitted that although the petitioner was appointed to the post of Technical Mate but the same was not a technical post and there were also no prescribed educational qualifications for the same.
Sh. Amol Rattan submits that in fact it was because of the nomenclature of the post held by the petitioner which caused the confusion and it was for that reason that the petitioner was wrongly granted the grade of Rs. 1200-2040, to which he was not otherwise entitled to under the law.
On that reasoning, Sh. Amol Rattan has sought to justify the passing of the orders Annexures P-6 and P-7.
11.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having given our thoughtful consideration to the entire controversy, we find that the present petition deserves to succeed.
It is the admitted position between the parties that there were no minimum educational qualifications prescribed for the post when the petitioner was appointed to the same.
Still further, there is no dispute that the petitioner did possess the qualifications of Matriculation with ITI certificate and it was only on the basis of the aforesaid qualifications that the petitioner was actually appointed as a Technical Mate on work charge basis originally on April 1, 1978.
Subsequently, the services of the petitioner were regularised on the aforesaid post w.e.f.
January 1, 1987.
Under these circumstances when the petitioner was granted the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 w.e.f.
May 1, 1990, in accordance with the policy decision, then the said benefit now cannot be withdrawn merely because there were no statutory rules laying down any educational qualification for Technical Mate.
12.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ram Kishan and three others v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 7928 of 1993 decided on December 1, 1993, had directed the State of Haryana to fix the pay of the petitioners according to their qualification of Matric with ITI and even in the case of Labh Singh and others (supra), this court had taken a view that once a person had been recruited with the qualification on ITI/Polytechnic certificate, the Government cannot deny him the benefit of pay scale.
13.
Thus, in this view of the matter, the present writ petition is allowed.
Orders dated January 8, 2002 (Annexure P-6) and December 21, 2001 (Annexure P-7) are hereby quashed and the respondents are restrained from revising the pay scale of the petitioner in accordance with the aforesaid directions.
No costs.
Petition allowed.