Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a J.B.T.
teacher with the respondent-department.
He represented for his promotion to the post of Master.
The claim having not been decided, he approached this Court.
In pursuance to the direction given by a Bench of this Court, an order of promotion was passed.
Vide order dated April 9, 2001, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Master.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P/10 with the writ petition.
However, in pursuance to a verbal order, given by the District Education Officer, the petitioner was relieved of the duties of Master on May 2, 2001.
A copy of the order is at Annexure P/13 with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that the order be quashed.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter-alia averred that the petitioner was promoted from the post of JBT teacher to that of a Master vide order dated March 30, 2001.
He joined as Master on April 10, 2001.
However, the petitioner had to fulfill the educational qualifications by December 31, 1999.
Since he had passed B.Ed.
degree examination on February 11, 2001, he was not eligible for promotion.
In view of the cut-off date fixed by the department, the petitioner's promotion was wrong.
It was, thus, cancelled.
3.
Dr. Sachdeva, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the cut-off date has no nexus with the object of selecting suitable persons for promotion.
In any event, no notice or opportunity was afforded to him.
Thus, the impugned order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P/13 with the writ petition, is vitiated.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
4.
Admittedly, the orders regarding the petitioner's promotion were passed after he had qualified the B.Ed.
examination.
On the day of passing of the order of promotion, the petitioner was fully qualified for the post of Master.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents submits that he had to fulfill the qualifications by December 31, 1999.
Why ?
Under which rule ?
There is no answer.
Still further, there is nothing on record as to who had fixed the cut-off date.
In any event, if it was the case of the respondents that the cut-off date had been validly fixed and the petitioner had not fulfilled the qualifications for promotion by that day, they should have afforded him an opportunity to show cause.
This was not done.
In the circumstances of the case, we are satisfied that the action was not fair.
It was violative of the principles of natural justice.
Denial of opportunity had affected the petitioner's rank and status.
5.
In view of the above, the impugned order is set aside.
It is, however, clarified that in case the respondents wish to proceed against the petitioner, they will give him an opportunity to show cause against the contemplated action.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.