GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for quashing Annexure P-3 dated 111994 vide which Director, State Transport, Punjab (respondent No. 3) rejected the petitioner's claim for promotion as Junior Auditor.
The other prayer made in the petition is to strike down the amendment made in Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988 (for short, `the 1988 Rules') vide notification No. 10/2/90-EPI/3866 dated 951991.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the issue raised in the writ petition, it will be useful to briefly notice the relevant facts.
3.
The petitioner belongs to Scheduled Caste.
He joined service in the Transport Department as Clerk on 13111981.
He cleared the Assistant Grade Examination on 1511991 and became eligible to be considered for promotion to the posts of Assistant and Junior Auditor in accordance with the provisions of Punjab Roadways Ministerial (State Service Class-III) Rules, 1977 (for short, `the 1977 Rules').
At that time, a number of vacancies were available in the cadres of Assistants and Junior Auditors, but his case was not considered for promotion apparently because of the amendment in the 1988 Rules vide notification dated 951991.
C.W.P.
No. 14575 of 1993 filed by him for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to promote his as Junior Auditor was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court with the direction that the representation made by him may be considered and disposed of by passing a reasoned order.
In compliance of the direction given by the Court, respondent No. 3 considered the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor and rejected the same by recoding the following reasons :-  "There is a provision in the Punjab Roadways Ministerial (State Services Class-III) Rules, 1977 that 20% posts of Junior Auditors may be filled by direct recruitment and 80% by promotion from amongst Assistant Accountant, Cashier, Assistant Cashier, Clerks but as the decision taken by the Punjab Government Finance Deptt.
notification No. 10/2/90/EPI/3866 dated 1951991 all the posts of Junior Auditors in all the departments shall be filled by direct appointment from those candidates who are graduate in II Class or equivalent thereto.
As such now no post of Junior Auditor will be filled by promotion.
Therefore, the name of Sh. Jarnail Singh cannot be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor.
As far as promotion of this official to the post of Sr. Assistant is concerned, as per Punjab Roadways Ministerial (State Services Class-III) Rules, 1977, 25% posts will be filled by direct recruitment and 75% by promotion from amongst the Stenographers, Clerks, Ledger Keepers and Steno- typists.
At present there are total 108 posts of Sr.
Assistants in this Deptt.
and 81 posts are to be filled by promotion and 27 by direct recruitment.
From 81 posts of promotion quota, 16 posts are reserved for scheduled castes and out of this 18 persons are already working.
As such two more posts of scheduled castes category had already been filled up.
There are other many other senior officials, who have qualified the Assistant Grade Examination and they are required to be promoted as Sr.
Assistants.
At present there are five vacant posts of promotion quota.
On his turn, this official will be considered for promotion on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
Therefore, the case of this official for promotion to the post of Sr. Assistant has been considered as per directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the same is rejected."
4.
The petitioner has averred that the amendment made in the 1988 Rules cannot affect his entitlement to be considered for about as Junior Auditor by promotion because the rules regulating recruitment to that post i.e. the 1977 Rules have not been amended.
5.
In their written statement, the respondents have justified the rejection of the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor in accordance with the 1977 Rules by asserting that in view of the amendment made in the 1988 Rules vide notification dated 951991, recruitment to the post of Junior Auditor is required to be made 100% by direct appointment.
6.
At this stage, I deem proper to mention that during the pendency of the writ petition, respondent No. 3 promoted the petition as Junior Auditor vide order dated 11111996.
7.
Shri Pawan Kumar argued that notwithstanding the amendment made in the 1988 Rules, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for appointment as Junior Auditor by promotion because the 1977 rules which regulate recruitment to that post have not been amended and as per those rules, the post of Junior Auditor is required to be filled by both the methods i.e. direct recruitment and promotion.
8.
Shri Lakhinderbir Singh argued that after the amendment of the 1988 Rules, the post of Junior Auditor can be filled only by the direct recruitment and not by promotion and, therefore, the petitioner cannot be considered for appointment by promotion.
He, however, conceded that vide order dated 11111996, respondent No. 4 had promoted the petitioner as Junior Auditor on the premise that he had cleared Assistant Grade Examination prior to 951991.
9.
I have considered the respective arguments and perused the record.
Article 309 declares that subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State.
Proviso to the said Article lays down that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and for the Governor of a State or such person as he may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, to make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, and any rules so made shall have the effect subject to the provisions of any such Act.
10.
It is an admitted position that recruitment to various posts in the services of the Transport Department and conditions of service of the persons appointed against such posts are regulated by the 1977 Rules which have been framed by the Governor under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Likewise, the 1988 Rules have been framed by the Governor under the said proviso for regulating the pay scales of various posts.
Rule 9 of the 1977 Rules lays down the method of recruitment to various posts encadred in the ministerial services of the Punjab Roadways.
These include the posts of Assistant and Junior Auditor.
For the sake of convenience, Rule 9(1)(c) and (k) which regulate appointment to these posts is reproduced below :-  "9.
Method of Recruitment.
- (1) Appointment to the Service shall be made in following manner namely : (a) and (b) xx xx xx xx xx xx (c) in the case of Assistant including Preventive Maintenance Assistants :- (i) 20 per cent by direct appointment; and (ii) 80 per cent by promotion from amongst Stenographers, Clerks, Ledger Keepers and Steno-typists; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in service of Government of a State or Government of India, if a suitable candidate is not available by the methods referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii); (e) to (j) xx xx xx xx xx xx (k) in the case of Junior Auditors - (i) 20 per cent by direct appointment; and (ii) 80 per cent by promotion from amongst Assistant, Accountants, Cashiers, Assistant Cashiers or Clerks; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in service of Government of a State or Government of India, if a suitable candidate is not available by the methods referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii); (l) to (s) xx xx xx xx xx" 11.
A reading of the above quoted rules makes it clear that the appointment to the post of Assistant including Preventive Maintenance Assistant and Junior Auditor is required to be made by direct appointment and by promotion in the ratio of 80:20.
While amending the 1988 Rules for the purpose of prescribing revised pay scale for the post of Junior Auditor, the rule-making authority did incorporate a provision in the last column that recruitment to that post shall be made by direct appointment from among those who are second class graduates or possess equivalent qualification, but no corresponding amendment was made in Rule 9(1)(k) of the 1977 Rules.
In other words, the rules regulating recruitment to the post of Junior Auditor remained intact and under the relevant rule, the recruitment had to be made by direct appointment and promotion in the prescribed ratio.
Therefore, the reason assigned by respondent No. 3 for rejecting the petitioner's claim to be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor has to bee treated as legally unsustainable and order annexure P3 passed by him is liable to be quashed.
12.
I am further of the view that even if the amendment made in the 1988 Rules is treated as having the effect of indirectly amending the 1977 Rules, the petitioner's entitlement to be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor against the vacancies which had become available between 1511991 and 8.5.1991 cannot be taken away on the basis of the amendment made vide notification dated 951991 because the same is not retrospective.
This conclusion is buttressed by the fact that respondent No. 3 promoted the petitioner as Junior Auditor on the premise that he had cleared Assistant Grade Examination prior to the amendment of the 1988 Rules.
13.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P3 is declared illegal and quashed.
It is also declared that amendment made in the 1988 Rules vide notification dated 951991 did not have any effect on the petitioner's right to be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor in accordance with Rule 9(1)(k) of the 1977 Rules.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Junior Auditor with effect from 1511991, the date on which he passed the Assistant Grade Examination.
If he is found suitable, then he shall be promoted from that date and paid all consequential benefits.
This exercise shall be undertaken within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
While considering the petitioner's case for promotion, the competent authority must keep in view his entitlement to be considered for promotion against the vacancies reserved for scheduled castes.
Petition allowed.