TS Doabia, J - An order dated 291996 whereby the petitioner has been removed from service is being called in question.
The allegations against the petitioner were that while functioning as Member of the Force he had committed an offence of misconduct in his capacity as member of the Force inasmuch as he had produced a fake education certificate.
This charge was elaborated.
It was alleged that during the course of verification of qualifying service in respect of the petitioner it was found that the Date of birth recorded in the School Leaving Certificate of the petitioner stood erased and over-written.
Therefore, this aspect of the matter was got verified from the concerned school.
The petitioner was called upon to furnish the school leaving Certificate.
This certificate which was issued by the Principal, Higher Secondary School, Devkali, was said to have been issued on 2881995.
This School leaving Certificate was got verified from the concerned School.
The school authorities intimated that the petitioner had never studied in the School.
It was this aspect of the matter which form subject matter of inquiry.
One Puran Singh, Assistant Commandant, was appointed as Inquiry Officer.
In this Inquiry the petitioner had taken a stand that he did not produce the certificate.
In this enquiry the petitioner had not led evidence with a view to prove his innocence.
2.
The Inquiry Officer is said to have submitted his report and found the petitioner guilty.
The inquiry Officer in his report submitted on 1461996 makes mention of the fact that the matter was got investigated from the Criminal Investigation Department and the petitioner was given opportunity to put across his point of view.
15 days time was given to him.
He was unable to bring any witness in defence.
In para 6 of the report of Inquiry Officer all that has been stated is that the petitioner has been found guilty of the charges as proved.
What was the material which was against him and whether any witnesses in support of the prosecution were produced or not is not apparent from the proceedings which were recorded on 24.5.1996.
It also indicates that four questions were put to the petitioner.
He was asked as to whether he wants to lead any evidence in defence.
His reply was in the negative.
It was on this basis that order of removal was passed.
In this regard it will be apt to notice that what the authorities removing the petitioner have stated in Paras 4 and 7, which are relevant.
These are reproduced below :  "4.
The delinquent No. 700071004 Ct. Bijai Shanker Pandey was also given copies of DE proceedings but he did not produce any witness nor did he produce any firm supportive evidence in support of his claim of innocence for not producing Fake education certificate except that of plea that at the time of his enlistment i.e. on 15121970, he had deposited his all certificates to the Recruiting Board of CRPF and then his certificates were found in order.
But after a lapse of 25 years the Principal of High er Secondary Devkali, Balia (UP) had refused to admit the fact that he was a bona fide student of the said School and stated that the certificate produced by the individual was not issued by the School."
xxx xxx xxx "7.
However, the delinquent again appeared in person before DA on 18796 and requested for 15 days C/L for producing his defence documents.
Accordingly 15 days C/L was sanctioned to delinquent.
On expiry of 15 days C/L, he had produced an affidavit dated 27796 issued by the Court Special Judge, Balia (UP) in which his Date of Birth has been mentioned as 111952.
But is illetrate and his date of birth is required to be determined in accordance with the provision contained in CSR-79.
Since this documents has got no validity with regard to the charge of his producing Fake education certificate, the said affidavit is hereby not accepted and plea is turned down."
3.
Facts be again recapitulated.
The petitioner had rendered 25 qualifying service.
His papers were accordingly sent to the Accounts officer.
At that point of time the petitioner was called upon to submit a copy of school Leaving Certificate.
The petitioner made available a certificate said to have been issued by the Principal, Govt. Higher Secondary School, Devakali, Balia (UP).
The letter was addressed to the said Principal.
The Principal sent a communication on 2241996 in which he had taken a stand that the school record does not contain any record vis-a-vis the petitioner having entered the school.
It was this fact which led to the holding of a departmental inquiry.
4.
The issue in this case was as to what is the correct date of birth of the petitioner.
The petitioner joined the service more than 26 years back.
Action was taken against him.
As per the petitioner his date of birth was 111952.
This was the basis on which he was given appointment.
The copy of the certificate which was given is said to be Annexure-3.
This certificate appears to have been issued on 20882.
This certificate makes mention of the fact that the petitioner has passed in Class 8th.
All that the Principal in his communication dated 2241996 had stated is that on the basis of the record it is not possible to verify that any person was registered at Sr. No. 2304.
It be seen that Sr. No. 2304 is not the registration number but is the number of the certificate.
All that the been verified is that the petitioner's name is not found entered in the School Register.
These School Registers on the basis of which the Certificate is stated to have been issued were never produced.
Under similar circumstances in the case of Dheeraj Singh v. The Union of India & Ors., (SWP 2/1996) this Court vide judgment dated 21.12.1999 has expressed an opinion that the question as to Date of Birth should be examined at the time of enrolment and if a person continues to work for 20 years then the issue raised loses significant.
What was said by Court is reproduced below :  ".. .. .. .. ..
Since the petitioner has already rendered active service from the date of his enrolment till the date of removal from service which comes to nearly 29 years, he will be deemed in service from the date of dismissal till the date of this judgment for the purpose of pension.
In other words, he will stand compulsorily retired with effect from the date of this judgment subject to the condition that he will be entitled to all the retiral benefits, including the pay and allowances payable in case of premature retirement.
Retiral benefits shall include GP Fund, Leave encasement, gratuity etc.etc.
In case this judgment is not implemented within a period of four months, the petitioner shall be entitled to reinstatement with all the consequential benefits of pay and allowances along with costs of Rs.
5000/-."
5.
I am of the opinion that what has been said in SWP No. 2/1996 would be attracted to the facts of this case.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner was proceeded against under Section 11(1) of the CRPF Act 1949.
For facility of reference this section is reproduced below :-  "11.
Minor Punishments.
- (1) The Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be prescribed, may, subject to any rules made under this Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal any one or more of the following punishments to any member of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force, that is to say - (a) reeducation in rank, (b) fine of any amount not exceeding one month's pay and allowances, (c) confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not exceeding one month, (d) confinement in the quarter-guard for not more than twenty-eight days, with or without punishment drill or extra guard, fatigue or other duty, and (e) removal from any office of distinction or special emoluments in the Force."
6.
This section thus contemplates imposing of punishment upto reduction of rank.
It does not deal with punishment of removal.
Therefore, the petitioner is right in his submission that if action is also taken in terms of Section 11(1) then punishment of removal cannot be imposed.
For this reason and for reasons given in SWP No. 2/1996 (supra) this writ petition is allowed.
The order of removal of the petitioner is set aside.
The petitioner shall stand reinstated.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.