GR Majithia, J - Shri Joginder Singh Chatha, retired District and Sessions Judge, filed a Civil it in the Court of Additional Senior Subordinate Judge, Patiala, on September 25, 1990, for a declaration to the effect that he could not be retired from service earlier to April 30, 1982, and as a consequential relief prayed for all the financial benefits.
2.
Facts as enfolded in the plaint, briefly, are that the date of birth of the plaintiff is April 4, 1922; that he was appointed Naib Nazim in Nabha State vide order dated March 22, 1946 and joined Service at Phol (Nabha State) on March 29, 1946 at his service conditions were regulated by Nabha State Service Regulations, according to which he was to retire on attaining the age of sixty years; that the princely States of Punjab, including Nabha and Patiala, formed a Union in the year 1948 known as Patiala and East Punjab States Union (for short, the `PEPSU') and entered into a covenant, which was in the nature of the constitution of the new State that as per Article XVI of that Covenant, the members of the Public Services of the Covenanting States were to continue in service of the new State of PEPSU on the terms and conditions which were not less advantageous than those of which they were serving on February 1, 1948, or they could be retired, on payment of suitable compensation, if not required by the new State of PEPSU; that the plaintiff was serving as a permanent Naib Nazim in Nabha State and was thus entitled to the guarantee contained in the Covenant that he was integrated into the Judicial Service of PEPSU with effect from September 1, 1948 vide Home Department's order dated December 29, 1954; that on re-organization of the State of Punjab with effect from November 1, 1956, the State of PEPSU was merged into the new State of Punjab mid he was allocated to the new State of Punjab; that as per the provisions of Section 115 of the States Re-organization Act, 1956, his conditions of service in the former State were protected; that he served in the new State of Punjab as a Judicial Officer in various capacities and was promoted as Additional District & Sessions Judge in the year 1964 and was serving as such till the new State of Punjab was formed on November 1, 1966; that the plaintiff was allocated to the new State of Punjab with effect from November 1, 1966 and as per the provisions of Section 82 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966, his conditions of service in the former State were protected; that this Court passed an order on April 14, 1980, appointing Shri Jai Singh Sekhon as District and Sessions Judge, Jalandhar in his place with effect from May 1, 1980, without giving him any further posting wrongly presuming that he was retired from service on April 30, 1980; that his age of retirement was 60 years and he was to continue in service till April 30, 1982; that if he had continued in service, he would have been fixed in higher grade than the one which was allowed to him on the date of his retirement.
He served a notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, and on these premises, sought a declaration as stated above.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab and also by the Registrar, High Court for the States of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh, High Court for the States of Punjab and Haryana through its Registrar was added as a party defendant to the suit.
It filed written statement through its Registrar.
On the statement of the counsel for the plaintiff that the High Court for the States of Punjab and Haryana was not a necessary party, its name was struck off from the array of defendants vide order dated August 2, 1991.
Reference to any of the pleas in the written statement filed by the High Court for the States of Punjab and Haryana has not been made in this judgment.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, it pleaded that the suit was barred by time; that on formation of PEPSU on August 20, 1948, the Patiala Services Regulations were applicable to the entire territories of the PEPSU by Ordinance No. 1 of 2005; that according to Rule 91 of Pepsu Service Regulations, Volume I, read with Rule 3.13 Volume-III, every Government servant, on attaining the age of 55 years, was to retire on such pension as may be admissible to him; that after the merger of PEPSU with the State of Punjab on account of re-organisation of States, the retirement age of Punjab Government employees was raised from 55 years to 58 years vide Punjab Government's circular letter No. 54IG-3 GS/11926, dated March 28, 1963 with effect from December 1, 1962 and accordingly the plaintiff was retired from service on attaining the age of 58 years; that Article XVI of the Covenant only guarantees continuance of the permanent members of the public services of each of Covenanting States till August 20, 1948, because by virtue of the powers vested under Article VI, the administration of the Covenanting States had been transferred to the Raj Pramukh of the Union and from then onwards all rights authority and jurisdiction were exercisable only as provided by the Constitution framed thereunder; that in fact, in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article X(2) of the Covenant, Raj Pramukh promulgated Ordinance No. 1 of 2005 and from the date of enforcement of this Ordinance by virtue of the provisions of Rule 3, all Laws, Ordinances, Acts, Rules, Regulations, Notifications, and Firman-i-Shahi, having force of law in Patiala State on the date of the commencement of the Ordinance were to apply mutatis mutandis to the territories of the Covenanting States and with effect from that date all laws in force in the Covenanting State stood repealed that consequently, Nabha State Services Regulations, under which the plaintiff was to retire on attaining the age of 60 years, ceased to be in force, with the enforcement of the Ordinance and, thereafter, the conditions of service of the plaintiff came to be governed by Pepsu Service Regulations, Volume I read with Volume III and that according to 91 of these Regulations, the Government servants had to retire on attaining the age of 55 years; that there is no provision in the Pepsu Services Regulations whereby the age of superannuation is 60 years of Government employees, as fixed by the Erstwhile Nabha State, was protected; that the State of PEPSU was absorbed in the State of Punjab and the plaintiff cannot take any help from Section of the Re-organisation Act because after the formation of the State of Punjab, he came to be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules and according to which he was to retire on superannuation on attaining the age of 58 years and that he was rightly retired from service with effect from April 30, 1980.
4.
The plaintiff filed rejoinder to the written statement and reiterated the pleas taken in the plaint.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed by the trial Judge on March 25, 1985:  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD  3.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD  4.
Relief.
5.
Additional issues were framed on February 14, 1991 in the light of the written statement filed by the High Court for the States of Punjab and Haryana through its Registrar.
These are rendered redundant since this Court is not a party to the suit.
6.
The suit was originally pending in the Court of Additional Senior Subordinate Judge, Patiala.
During the pendency of the suit before that Court, the plaintiff moved an application under Order 1, Rule 10, Civil Procedure Code, for striking off the name of defendant No. 2 from the array of parties.
The application was dismissed by the Additional Senior Sub Judge by his order dated January 23, 1991.
The plaintiff aggrieved against this order assailed the same in Civil Revision No. 1163 of 1991.
The revision petition came up for hearing before the Acting Chief Justice on May 3, 1991 and he ordered that the suit be withdrawn from the Court of the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Patiala and transferred on the files of this Court.
It is how this suit has been placed before me for disposal.
7.
The statement of the counsel for the plaintiff was recorded on August 2, 1991 to the effect that the High Court of Punjab and Haryana was not a necessary party in the suit and its name be deleted from the array of the defendants.
The order dated August 2, 1991 ordering deletion of the name of defendant No. 2 from the array of the defendants has been placed on the file of CR No. 1163 of 1991, while in fact it should have been placed on the file of the civil suit.
I direct the Register of this Court to detach that order from the file of CR No. 1163 of 1991 and place the same on the file of the civil suit.
8.
Issue No. 1.
The plaintiff appeared as PW 1 at the trial and stated that he had joined service in Nabha State on March 29, 1946 as Naib Nazim.
The Maharaja of Nabha was the highest authority, who enjoyed supreme legislative powers; that he was permanent employee of Nabha State and under the Service Regulations he could only be retired at the age of 60 years; that he also deposed about the last salary drawn by him and the grade in which he would have been placed from November 1, 1980 if he had not been retired from service on April 30, 1982.
He also produced on record his service book.
9.
The entire dispute hinges upon the construction of the covenant entered into by the Rulers of Faridkot, Jind, Kapurthala, Malerkotla, Nabha Patiala, Kalsia and Nalagarh for the formation of PEPSU and the Patiala and East Punjab States Union Administration Ordinance, 2005 (Ordinance No. 1 of 2005) dated 20th August, 1948/5-5-2005 (Bk.)
made by the Raj Pramukh of PEPSU in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article X(2) of the Covenant.
The Covenant was signed by the Rulers concerned on May 5, 1948 and the Union was inaugurated on July 15, 1948.
Paragraphs 131, 132 and 133 of the White Paper on India States published by the Government of India, Ministry of States in 1950 read thus :-  "131.
The Patiala and East Punjab States Union comprises the six salute States of Patiala, Kapurthala, Jind, Nabha, Faridkot and Malerkotla and the two non-salute States of Nalagarh and Kalsia.
The Covenant (Appendix XXXIX) for the formation of this Union was signed by the Rulers concerned on May 5, 1948, by the Hon'ble Sardar Vallabhabhai Patel.
132.
These States lay in three separate blocks.
The main block comprised the territories of the Patiala, Nabha, Jind, Malerkotla and Faridkot States in the heart of the East Punjab.
It formed a fairly compact tract.
The Kapurthala State consisted of three enclaves in the Jullunder Division of the East Punjab.
The outlying districts of Narnaul, Dadri and Bawal, which formed parts of the Patiala, Jind, and Nabha States respectively lay within the geographical orbit of the southern districts of the East Punjab.
133.
In view of the fact that Patiala State, which had a population of about two millions, had been recognised as a separate viable unit, it was contemplated at earlier stages to form a Union of the East Punjab States without Patiala.
These States comprised an area of 3,693 square miles with a population of 1,3,67,628 and an annual revenue of about Rs. 20 millions.
It was, however, realised that a Union of the East Punjab States without Patiala would not endure.
From the point of view of territorial integrity, administrative efficiency and tapping of agricultural and other resources of those States, the formation of one Union inclusive of Patiala was clearly indicated.
The Ruler of Patiala expressed willingness to join the Union.
As a result of the adjustments made to reconcile the various points of view, the following provisions were included in the covenant :-  (i) The Ruler of Patiala was to be the first Rajpramukh and was to hold office during his life-time.
(ii) As in the case of the United States of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa, the Rulers of this Union will have for the purposes of election of the Rajpramukh such number of votes as is equal to the number of lakhs in the population of their States.
The Ruler of Patiala will not exercise his vote in the election of the Up-Rajpramukh.
(iii) The two non-salute States of Nalagarh and Kalsia will alternately hold one seat on the Council of Rulers.
The State so constituted comprises an area of 10,099 square miles with a population of 3,4,24,060 and a revenue of about Rs. 50 millions."
Article II of the Covenant says that the Covenanting States had argued to units and integrate their territories in one State with a common executive, legislature and judiciary, by the name of Patiala and East Punjab States Union (hereinafter to be referred to as 'the Union') Clause (3) of Article III provided that the Council of Rulers shall elect at a meeting one member of the Council to be the President and another to be the Vice-President of the Council and the President and the Vice-President so elected shall be the Raj Pramukh and the Up-Raj Pramukh respective of the Union.
Article V provided that there shall be a Council of Ministers to aid and advise the Raj Pramukh in the exercise of his functions except those under Article VII of the Covenant.
Articles VI, X and XVI of the Covenant read thus :-  "ARTICLE VI.
(1) The Ruler of each Covenanting State shall, as soon as may be practicable, and in any event not later than the 20th of August, 1948, make over the administration of his State to the Raj Pramukh and thereupon.
(a) all rights, authority and jurisdiction belonging to the Ruler which appertain, or are incidental to the Government of the Covenanting State shall vest in the Union and shall hereafter be exercisable only as provided by this Covenant or by the Constitution to be framed thereunder :-  (b) all duties and obligations of the Rulers pertaining or incidental to the Government of the Covenanting State shall devolve on the Union and shall be discharged by it;  (c) all the assets and liabilities of the covenanting State shall be the assets and liabilities of the Union; and  (d) the military forces, if any, of the Covenanting State shall become the military forces of the Union.
ARTICLE X  (1) There shall be formed, as soon as may be practicable, a Constituent Assembly in the manner indicated in Schedule II, and it shall be the duty of that Assembly to frame a Constitution of a unitary type for the Union within the frame-work of this Covenant and the Constitution of India, and providing for a Government responsible to the Legislature.
(2) Until a Legislature elected in accordance with the terms of the Constitution framed by it comes into being, the Constituent Assembly as constituted in the manner indicate in Schedule II shall function as the interim Legislature of the Union :  Provided that until a Constitution framed by the Constituent Assembly comes into operation after receiving the assent of the Raj Pramukh, the Raj Pramukh shall have the power to make and promulgate Ordinances for the peace and good Government of the Union or any part thereof, and any Ordinance so made shall, for the space of not more than six months from its promulgation have the like force of law as an Act passed by the Constituent Assembly; but any such Ordinance may be controlled or superseded by any such Act.
"ARTICLE XVI.
(1) The Union hereby guarantees either the continuance is service of the permanent members of the public services of each of the Covenanting States on conditions which will not be less advantageous then those on which they were serving on the 1st of February, 1948 or the payment of reasonable compensation or retirement on proportionate pension.
(2) The Union further guarantees the continuance of pensions and leave salaries sanctioned by the competent authorities in any of the Covenanting States to members of the public services of that State who have retired, or proceeded on leave preparatory to retirement, and the compassionate allowances granted to dependents of deceased members of those services, before the date on which the administration of that State is handed over to the Raj Pramukh."
10.
A reading of these Articles suggests that Ruler of each of the Covenanting States, not later than August 20, 1948, had to hand over the administration of his State to the Raj Pramukh of the Union and thereupon all rights, authority and jurisdiction belonging to the Ruler of the Covenanting State was to vest in the Union and exercisable as provided by the Covenant.
Article XVI guarantees the continuance in service of the permanent members of the public services of each of the Covenanting States on conditions which were not to be less advantageous than those on which they were serving on February 1, 1948.
The Union also guaranteed the continuance of pensions and leave salaries sanctioned by the competent authorities in any of the Covenanting States to the members of the public services that State who had retired, or proceeded on leave preparatory to retirement.
Article X of the Covenant says that until a Constitution as framed by the Constituent Assembly comes into operation after receiving the assent of the Raj Pramukh, Raj Pramukh shall have the power to make and promulgate Ordinances for the peace and good Government of the Union or any part thereof, and any Ordinance so made shall, for the space of not more than six months from its promulgation, have the like force of law as an Act passed by the Constituent Assembly.
In exercise of this power, Ordinance No. 1 to 2005 was promulgated by the Raj Pramukh of the Union and this Ordinance was called the Patiala and East Punjab States Union Administration Ordinance, 2005.
Sections 3 and 6 of the Ordinance are in the following terms :-  "3.
Enforcement of laws of Patiala State in the Union.
- As soon as the administration of any Covenanting State has been taken over by the Raj Pramukh as aforesaid, all Laws, Ordinances, Acts, Rules, Regulations, Notifications, Hidayats, Firman-i-Shahi, having force of law in Patiala, State on the date of commencement of this Ordinance shall apply mutatis mutandis to the territories of the said State and with effect from the date all laws in force in such Covenanting State immediately before that date shall be repealed :  Provided that proceedings of any nature whatsoever pending on such date in the courts or offices of any such Covenanting State shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Ordinance or any other ordinance, be disposed of in accordance with the laws governing such proceedings in force for the time being in any such Covenanting State.
6.
Adaptation of laws etc. - Except where the context otherwise requires, any reference in any law, order, rules, regulation, notification, Hidayat or Firman-i-Shahi, by law or other instrument enforced under Section 3 of this Ordinance shall, where the reference is to the officers, authorities,# documents, or territories mentioned in column of the following table, be construed as a reference to the authorities, officers, documents and terrories respectively mentioned in the second column of the said table :-  1.
Ruler, Darbar, His Highness , ljlas-i-Khas and the like Raj Pramukh of the Patiala and East Punjab States Union.
2.
Government of the State Government of the Patiala and East Punjab States Union.
3.
Official Gazettee, Government Gazette, State Gazette and the like Official Gazette of the Union.
4.
Patiala State and the like State of Union.
(2) The Government of the Union may make provisions with a view to adapting any law, rule, regulation, order, Hidayat, Firman-i-Shahi notification or instrument enforced under section 3 of this Ordinance to the changes effected or consequential on the establishment of the Union.
(3) Any court or authority may construe the provisions of any law, order, rule, regulation, notification, Hidayat, Firman-i-Shahi, bye-law or other instrument as aforesaid with such modifications not affecting the substance thereof as may be necessary or proper to adapt them as aforesaid with reference to the matter before the Court or authority."
A reading of Section 6 of the Ordinance indicates that as soon as the administration of any Covenanting State had been taken over by the Raj Pramukh, all laws, Ordinances, Acts, Rules, Regulations, Notifications, Hidayats, Firman-i-Shahi, having the force of law in Patiala State on the date of commencement of the Ordinance, were to apply mutatis mutandis to the territories of the said State, i.e. with effect from August 20, 1948, and all laws in force in such Covenanting State immediately before that date stood repealed.
Reference to law, order, rules, regulation, notification, Hidayat, or Firman-i-Shahi, bye-law or other instrument enforceable under Section 3 of the Ordinance shall be construed as a reference to the Raj Pramukh of the Union.
The Regulations of the Nabha State under which an employee was to retire on attaining the age of 60 years has not been produced on record of this file.
Assuming it was so, the same stood repealed under Ordinance No. 1 of 2005 after the administration of the Nabha State was handed over to the Raj Pramukh of the Union for administration, which could not be later than August 20, 1948.
After August 20, 1948, all laws, Regulations Notifications, Hidayats, Firman-i-Shahi, etc. in force in the Nabha State stood repealed and the laws, Ordinance, Acts, Rules, Regulations, Notifications, Hidayats, Firmans-i-Shahi having force of law in Patiala State were made applicable to the territories of that State.
Article XVI of the Covenant postulated continuance in service of the permanent members of the public services of each of the Covenanting States on conditions which were not to be less advantageous than those on which they were serving February 1, 1948.
This suggests that the salary drawn and other privileges granted to the permanent members of the public services of the Covenanting States were not to be curtailed.
This does not suggest that the Regulations under which their age limit had been fixed could not be repleaded.
Even the Ruler of the Covenanting State gad the right to issue fresh Firman-i-Shahi in super session of the earlier Firman-i- Shahi.
If he could supersede his earlier orders, there could be no bar for the Raj Pramukh of the Union to issue Shahi Firman or Ordinance or regulations modifying, rescinding or altering the Shahi Firmans.
As observed earlier, after the administration of the Covenanting State had been handed over to the Raj Pramukh of the Union, the Raj Pramukh was competent to issue Ordinances for the good administration of the Union.
With this end in view, the Raj Pramukh issued Ordinance No. 1 of 2005.
The resultant effect of Section 3 of the Ordinance was that if any such Shahi Firman ensuring the continuance of service upto the age of 60 years existed in the erstwhile Covenanting State, it stood repealed from the date of promulgated of the Ordinance, viz. August 20, 1948.
11.
Rule 91 of the Patiala Services Regulations, Volume I (for short, the PSR) says that gazetted officers shall retire on attaining the age of 55 years and will be entitled to receive pension under the Rules.
The plaintiff was integrated into judicial service of PEPSU with effect from September 1, 1948, as has been averred in para 7 of the plaint and this plea was not controverted by the State in the corresponding paragraph of the written statement.
Plaintiff's service book, Ex. P-2, indicates that the plaintiff was appointed as Sub Judge I Class, Sangrur on 29-8-2005.
He was a gazetted officer on the formation of the State of PEPSU and was governed by Rule 91 of the PSR, Volume I, On the merger of PEPSU with the State of Punjab with effect from November 1, 1956, he came to be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
The age of retirement was raised from 55 years to 58 years vide Punjab Government's circular letter No. 541G-3 GS/11926, dated March 28, 1963.
The plaintiff got the benefit under this circular letter by serving upto the age of 58 years and he was rightly retired on superannuation with effect from April 30, 1980.
Issue No. 1 is accordingly decided against the plaintiff.
12.
ISSUE NO. 2  The plaintiff says that the cause of action occurred to him on June 30, 1984, on the expiry of two months' period of notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code.
The plaintiff could seek the declaration under Article 113 of the Limitation Act, 1963, This is a residuary article for cases not covered by any other article.
It reads thus :-  "113.
Any suit for which, no period of limitation is provided elsewhere in htis Schedule Three years When the right to sue accrues.
Time under this article runs from the date when the right to sue accrues.
The words "right to sue" mean a right to seek relief, that is, a right to prosecute by law, to obtain relief by means of legal procedure.
There can be no 'right to sue' until there is an accrual of the right asserted in the suit and its infringement, or at least clear and unequivocal threat to infringe that right by the defendant against whom the suit is instituted.
(See in this connection, TH Hancock v. Imperial Batik of Canada, AIR 1930 PC 272, and Gannon Dunkerley and Co Ltd v. The Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 1433).
DW 1 Jaspal Singh Mamik, Assistant, Gazette-II Branch of this Court produced Gradation List of the Punjab Judicial Officers for the period from January 1, 1966 to October 1, 1991.
In the gradation list, the date of compulsory retirement of the plaintiff is shown as April 30, 1980.
This gradation list was supplied to the plaintiff and he acknowledged its receipt vide letter No. 3782, dated July 3, 1971.
In all the gradation lists commencing from January 1, 1966, onwards, the plaintiff's date of retirement on superannuation is shown as April 30, 1980.
Threat to the plaintiff's right that he would retire only on attaining the age of 58 years and not on attaining the age of 60 years, as was mentioned in the gradation lists, occurred when the gradation lists for the period from January 1, 1966 onwards were published, On receipt of the gradation lists, he must have come to know that the authorities had fixed his date of retirement on superannuation as April 30, 1980.
Right to sue accrued to him when the gradation list was communicated to him.
The right to sue accrued to the plaintiff when it was made known to him that he would retire on attaining the age of 55 years and, thereafter, in 1965 when he was informed that he would retire on attaining the age of 58 years.
This Court even conveyed to him the gradation list and it was received by him on July 3, 1971.
On the date of receipt of the gradation list, a threat was administered to him that his alleged right had been infringed.
It is correct that there can be no "right to sue" until there is an accrual of the right asserted in the suit and its infringement or at least clear and unequivocal threat to infringe that right by the defendant against whom the suit is instituted.
As observed earlier, a threat to the "right to sue" of the plaintiff was made when the gradation list was conveyed to him and acknowledgement of its receipt was made by him on July 3, 1971.
Thus, the plaintiffs suit is obviously beyond limitation.
Issue No. 2 is answered in favour of the defendant.
ISSUE NO. 3;  There is no bar in law to maintain the suit.
The plaintiff brought a suit of civil nature, the object of which is the enforcement of a civil right or an obligation.
So, a suit brought for the enforcement of the rights or obligations by a person as a citizen of the State is a suit of civil nature and this Court has the jurisdiction to try the same.
This issue is answered against the defendant and in favour of the plaintiff.
ISSUE NO. 4 Relief :  For the reasons stated above, the suit fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Suit dismissed.