Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Counsel for the petitioner contends that the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the judgment of Division Bench in the case of Suraj Bhan and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2001(2) SCT 708 (SC) : 2001(1) RSJ page 205.
Learned counsel appearing for the State contends that the petitioner was already promoted and as such he could not be granted the benefit of second ACP Scale as it was primarily intended to protect the evil of stagnation in Government service.
Prima facie, we are of the view that the judgment is squarely applicable to the facts of the present but what is more weighing with us is that the pay scale which the petitioner was admittedly receiving for a considerable period has been reduced by the respondents vide order dated 1281999, copy annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P-1 without complying with the principles of Audi Alteram Partem.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei (1967) 2 Supreme Court Report page 625 has held as under :-  "We think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even administrative order which involves civil consequences as already stated must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
Following the above principle, we are of the considered view that the petitioner has not been heard before the order making reduction in his pay scale was made.
Thus, we set aside the order Annexure P-1 and direct the respondents to reconsider the matter in accordance with law after affording an opportunity to the petitioner and keeping in view the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Suraj Bhan's case (supra).
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Petition disposed of.