NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of two civil writ petitions No. 11137 and 13180 of 2001 in which common questions of law and fact arise.
Since arguments were addressed in civil writ petition No. 11137 of 2001, the facts are being taken from this case.
2.
Petitioners herein are students of Shaheed Udham Singh College of Engineering & Technology, Tangori (Mohali) in the District of Roopnagar (for short the college).
They were admitted in the year 2000 to the first year of the 4-years B.Tech.
Courses in different disciplines on the basis of their merit in the Common Entrance Test - 2000 (CET - 2000) conducted by the Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar (hereinafter referred to as the University).
On the basis of this test the University made admissions to various Degree level Engineering and Architecture courses as are being run in institutions and Universities located in the State of Punjab for the academic session 20000-2001 including the college.
The admissions for this year were completed by August 2000 and the academic session commenced with effect from August 9, 2000.
Students who were admitted to different courses in different institutions were required to deposit fee in their respective institutions by August 11, 2000.
The schedule regarding change of branch was fixed in the Brochure issued by the University and branches could be changed by the Head of the Institution on 16/17-82000.
Second counselling for filling up the resultant vacancies concluded on 2382000 whereafter the admissions in each institution became final.
85 per cent of the total seats in all the institutions in the State of Punjab were reserved for the internal candidates from within the State and 15 per cent were open to candidates on All India basis.
Petitioners No. 1, 3 and 4 were admitted against the 15 per cent seats whereas petitioners No. 2 and 5 were admitted against the 85 per cent seats.
The college is approved by All India Council for Technical Education, New Delhi (AICTE), Government of Punjab and is affiliated to the University.
The approval granted to the college by AICTE is in the following disciplines with an annual intake as noted against each :  i) Computer Science & Engineering 60 ii) Electronics & Communication Engineering 60 iii) Electrical Engineering 60 iv) Mechanical Engineering 60 Total intake capacity :  240 Additional 10 per cent seats of the sanctioned intake strength in each course are also filled up in the second year of B.Tech.
programmes on the basis of the Lateral Entry Engineering Test (LEET) conducted by the University for diploma holders.
3.
The question of approval for introduction of additional/increase in intake capacity in Degree course in Information Technology related areas in the college was under consideration of AICITE.
By letter dated 13112000 addressed to the Secretary, Technical Education & Industrial Training, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh, AICTE accorded approval to the college for starting the additional course in Information Technology and also increased the intake capacity of the already running courses as under :  Course(s)  Existing approved intake New approved/revised intake Duration (years) Computer Science & Engineering Degree 60 90 4 Electronics & Communication Engineering Degree 60 90 4 Electrical Engineering Degree 60 60 4 Mechanical Engineering Degree 60 60 4 Information Technology Degree 0 60 4 Total :  240 360 4.
The increase in intake/additional courses was approved only for the year 2000-2001 and further extension was to be granted after due consideration.
Approval for the increase intake capacity and for starting the additional course in Information Technology was received from AICTE for the year 2001- 2002 as well by letter dated 1462001.
Since the approval for the increase in intake capacity was received in November, 2000 long after the course of studies had commenced for the academic year 2000-2001, the University did not think it proper to fill up the additional seats because that would have resulted in large scale dislocation of the students and would have disturbed their studies.
Moreover, students could not have been admitted against the additional seats as late as in November, 2000 as they would not have been able to complete the course of their studies for the first semester.
The University, however, decided to offer additional seats to the students of 2000 batch in the third semester on the basis of their merit in the first semester examination.
A notice was published in the daily Tribune on 14.7.2001 informing the students that the University shall carry out up-gradation of branches of the students admitted through CET-2000 based on the result of the first semester examination held in December 2000.
It may be mentioned that first semester examination was held in December, 2000 and the result of that examination had been declared.
Students had also appeared in their second semester examination but result of that examination was still awaited.
The notice further stated that students interested in the up-gradation of their branches and change of institutions could appear in the joint counselling to be conducted by the University on its campus on 1972001 at 9 AM 134 students were up-graded on this date.
Some of the students who had appeared in the first semester examination but could not clear the same had applied for re-evaluation of their result.
Such students were also given a chance to apply for up-gradation provided they were declared pass as a result of re- evaluation.
The counselling was held for them on 882001 and a notice in this regard was published in the leading local newspapers including The Tribune, Punjab Kesari and Ajeet.
In this counselling 23 students were up- graded.
Petitioners No. 1, 4 and 5 had to re-appear in some of the papers in the first semester examination and they had applied for re-evaluation of their result.
They did not clear the re-appear papers even after re-evaluation.
Petitioners No. 2 and 3 were also to re-appear in some of the papers in the first semester.
They did not apply for re-evaluation of their result.
Since none of the petitioners had cleared the first semester examination even after getting their result re-evaluated, they were not considered eligible for up- gradation in the counselling held on 1972001 and again on 882001.
It was then that they filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the action of the University in offering the additional seats in the college to all the students of different institutions in the State of Punjab.
Their plea is that the additional seats should have been offered only to the students of the college like the petitioners who had been admitted to the course in the year 2000.
5.
In response to the notice of motion, the University has filed its reply.
It was later allowed to file an amended written statement.
The factual position as stated above has not been disputed though the plea of the petitioners that additional seats should have been offered only to the students of the college has been controverted on the ground that it would not have been fair to the students of different institutions who had been given admission in different institutions on the basis of CET-2000.
6.
It was strenuously urged by Shri GK Chatrath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners that the additional seats had been sanctioned by AICTE in the college and it was but proper that those seats should have been offered only to the students of the college like the petitioners to up-grade them in different branches of the Engineering courses.
He contended that the action of the University in this regard was contrary to para 5 in Part-B of the Admission Brochure issued by the University for admission to first year of Bachelor of Engineering/Technology courses in the year 2000.
He stated that additional seats had been sanctioned in the Punjab Engineering College and also in Chemical Engineering department of the Punjab University as well and those were offered only to the students who had been admitted in those institutions.
Learned counsel appearing fro the University, on the other hand, placed reliance on clause (v) of the General Conditions contained in the notification dated 432000 whereby the University had been appointed as the authority competent to conduct the CET-2000 to contend that since the approval for the additional seats had been received long after the admissions for the academic session 2000-2001 were over, admission against the additional seats could not be made for that session and the University had perforce to offer seats to the candidates in the third semester to up-grade themselves.
7.
We have heard counsel for the parties and find no ground to interfere in the exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
There is no gain saying the fact that approval from the AICTE for the additional seats was received for the first time in November, 2000 when admissions for the academic session had come to an end and the course of studies had already begun.
Not only this, first semester was about to come to a close and the examinations for that semester were held, in December, 2000.
This being the position, the University could not admit the students against additional seats in the first year for the academic session 2000-2001 because in that event students so admitted would not have completed their course of studies.
This apart, since the seats were being offered to the students of other institutions as well, it would have resulted in dislocation of studies of the students of other institutions.
In these circumstances, the University in its wisdom thought it proper to throw open the additional seats to the already admitted students in all the institutions on the basis of their merit in the first semester examination.
Admissions were to be made in the third semester and by that time the result of the first semester had been declared.
This was a policy decision taken by the University presumably because it thought that had the approval for the additional seats been received before counselling was over in August, 2000 these seats then would have been available to the candidates of all the institutions who were seeking admission for the academic session 2000-2001.
The petitioners contend that additional seats should have been thrown open only to the students like the petitioners who were admitted in the college for the academic year 2000-2001.
This could be an another way of dealing with the additional seats.
As already observed, the University decided to thrown open the additional seats to the students of all the institutions.
There does not seem to be any arbitrariness in this decision as the decision taken by the University applies equally to all students of different institutions who were similarly placed and were given admission on the basis of their merit position in CET-2000.
There were two different ways of dealing with the additional seats which became available after the admission to the first year of the course had closed and the University choose one of them which we have already held is not arbitrary.
It is well settled that in a situation when two courses are open to the University and it chooses one which is not arbitrary, this court does not interfere in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Even if one were to agree with the petitioners that the seats should have been confined to the students admitted in the college, it is not for us to substitute our own opinion for that of the experts who are governing the University and its affiliated institutions.
We do not agree with the learned senior counsel for the petitioners that para 5 in Part-B of the Brochure stood violated in the present case.
Before we observe any more, it would be relevant to notice that para which is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference:  "5.
Allotment of Institution and Branch : The allotment of the institution and the branch of study will be made at the time of the counselling on the basis of candidate's merit position in CET-2000, availability of seats, the choice and the eligibility of the candidate.
Candidate should be fully prepared to select the institution and branch from amongst those available at the time of his/her counselling.
No subsequent change of institution shall be permitted under any circumstances.
In case of vacancies occurring within an institution a candidate already admitted to that institution may exercise his/her option in writing for change of branch, which will be considered by the Institution strictly in accordance with CET- 2000 merit and in accordance with the instructions to be issued by Punjab Technical University as per the schedule given in this brochure."
A bare reading of this paragraph makes it clear that it applies to admissions originally made before counselling was over in August, 2000 and does not cover the filling up of additional seats which became available after the admissions were over.
It is true that allotment of the institution and the branch of study is offered to the candidate at the time of counselling on the basis of his merit position in CET-2000 and admittedly, this was done when admissions were made in July/August, 2000.
It was on the basis of their merit position in CET-2000 that the petitioners were offered admission in the college in different branches of the Engineering course.
It is further clear from the aforesaid paragraph that once a student has selected an institution and the branch from amongst those available at the time of counselling, no subsequent change of institution is permitted.
However, in the case of vacancies occurring within the institution a candidates is given right to exercise his option in writing for change of branch which would be considered as per his merit position in CET-2000.
This paragraph refers to vacancies and not to additional seats.
If a seat were to become vacant i.e. a student admitted was to leave the institution for any reason whatsoever that seat would be filled up in accordance with this paragraph but additional seats which became available after the admissions are over cannot in the very nature of things be governed by paragraph 5.
Again vacancies as referred to in this paragraph would mean a vacancy occurring from amongst the original seats for which admissions were originally made.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that this paragraph does not apply to the additional seats.
8.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioners did not clear the first semester examination by 882001 when second counselling was held to up-grade the students admitted in different institutions in the State.
They were, thus, ineligible for being considered for up-gradation.
No fault can, thus, be found with the action of the University in this regard.
In the result, the writ petitions fail and the same stand dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.