RL Anand, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with his assistance have gone through the record of the case.
2.
The challenge in this writ petition has been given to the order dated 15.2.2001 (Annexure P-8) and the order dated 312002 (Annexure P-11).
For the purpose of disposal of this writ petition, it will be proper for us to refer to the order of the appellate authority which runs as follows :-  "I have minutely examined the record and the points raised by the official in appeal and found devoid of merits for the following reasons :-  (a) Secretary, PSEB had been authorised to decide the case under common proceedings along with other persons involved in this case by the competent authority.
As such the action is in order as per Regulation 13 of the PSEB Employees (P&A) Regulations, 1971.
(b) The inquiry can be got conducted even from a retired officer.
Moreover, no such objection was raised by the official during enquiry.
(c) While examining PWs during enquiry the official has not objected to and it was found sufficient and feasible to examine those witnesses to prove the allegations.
d) The punishment is justified.
Dismissal is on account of irregularities committed by the official and the recovery is on account of embezzlement amount involved.
e) During enquiry, he has been found guilty of the charges.
f) The allegations proved against Sh. Mohan Lal are different from the charges proved against Smt. Sarita Kumari, Audit Clerk and Sh. Sarabjit Singh, Rev.
UDC.
In case of small power categories Sh. Mohan Lal, UDC has tick marked with green pencil as token of checking of all the entries which has not been done by Smt. Sarita Kumari.
More so, at some places in the ledger, certificates written in green pencil are available showing the period checked and these certificates have been initialled by Shri Mohan Lal, Audit Clerk, Smt. Sarita Kumari, LDC/Audit was not entrusted with the audit of Industrial consumers.
In view of the above, I am of the considered view that the punishment of dismissal along with recovery of Rs. 36,431/- already awarded to Shri Mohan Lal, UDC is correct and I agree with the same".
3.
The reading of the above order would show that there was total application of mind on the part of the appellate authority on all aspects which were raised by the delinquent official including the one that punishment was not justified.
While invoking the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, we have to see whether procedural illegality has been committed by the punishing authority or by the appellate authority.
4.
After going through the voluminous record of the case, we are of the opinion that no procedural illegality has been committed by the Inquiry Officer, Punishing authority or by the appellate authority.
5.
Faced with this difficulty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the gravity of punishment which has been awarded to the present petitioner is disproportionate to the charges framed against him and specially with regard to the act which is attributable to the co-delinquent officials.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel also relied upon 1983(4) Supreme Court Cases 225, Sengara Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others.
6.
We are not convinced with the submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
We are not sitting as a Court of appeal.
We have already stated above that while invoking the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, we have to see whether there is any procedural illegality or whether the impugned order has been passed by an officer having no jurisdiction into the matter.
On both these aspects, we are not in favour of the petitioner.
Keeping in view the role attributed to the petitioner, we cannot, by any stretch of imagination, say that the punishment awarded to the petitioner was harsh or disproportionate to the charge framed against him.
7.
Before parting with this order, we also give our mind to all those delinquent officials, who indulge in these types of activities, directly or indirectly, and convey our feelings to the punishing authorities also that such delinquents who indulge in corruption, fraud, embezzlement or who connive as a passive partner in these types of scams, deserve no sympathy.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.