DK Seth, J - The Rehabilitation Industries Corporation (RIC) was incorporated on 6th April, 1959 with an object to provide employment to the refugees.
This industry was wholly owned by the Central Govt. By a notification issued in exercise of Section 39 of the Industrial Disputes Act the Central Govt. had delegated its power to the State Govt. which is Annexure "F" to the petition.
2.
Mr. Manik Das, learned counsel contends that the power has been delegated under Section 39 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It is the State Govt. which becomes the appropriate Govt. and the Central Govt. ceased to be the appropriate Govt. by reason of such delegation.
As such, until and unless the delegation is withdrawn by a notification in the manner, the Central Govt. cannot exercise any authority as appropriate Govt. in respect of RIC.
He contends that without revoking the order of delegation contained in annexure "F" the Central Govt. sought to use the power of appropriate Govt. in granting approval to the prayer for closure of RIC which is also subject matter of an industrial dispute referred to by the State Govt. as an appropriate Govt. to the Industrial Tribunal and the said reference is pending.
Therefore, Mr. Das contends that the approval granted for the closure is a nullity and void ab initio.
However, since the question with regard to the merit of the approval for closure is pending decision before the Tribunal therefore he has not made any submission with regard to the validity of approval except on the question of jurisdiction.
3.
Mr. Dipankar Ghosh, learned counsel for the respondent assisted by Mr. Gupta submits that by reason of Section 25-L Chapter V the Central Govt. is the appropriate Govt. in terms of clause (b) thereof since in the present case the Central Government holds 100% share of RIC.
The said character cannot be taken away simply by reason of a delegation made under Section 39.
He also refers to annexure "F" and points out that the delegation was not an absolute delegation.
It provided that the said power can also be exercised by the Central Govt. and the delegation was subjected to the condition that Central Govt. shall exercise all the powers under the said Act and rules made thereunder as and when it considers necessary to do so.
According to him the order of delegation itself is reserved for the Central Govt. being the appropriate Govt. to exercise such power at any point of time whenever it deems fit and that this power can be exercised both by the Central Govt. and the State Govt. By reason thereof by a legal fiction though the State Government was not appropriate Govt. it became an appropriate Govt. under the said delegation.
It is only for delegation that notification is necessary but there is no necessity of having regard to the condition in which the delegation was made to invoke the same for exercising the power under Section 25(O).
Mr. Ghosh has also relied on the decision in the case of Huth v. Clarke, 1890(25) QBD 391 at page 395, Godawari S Parulekar v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1966 SC 1404 at page 1406 (Para 6) and Gwalior Rayon Mills v. Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, AIR 1974 SC 1660 at page 1673 (Paras 38 and 39).
According to him, the delegation does not divest the original power or abrogates the original power.
4.
Mr. Das, however, referred to the decision in case of Cooper Engineering Ltd v. PP Mundhe, AIR 1975 SC 1900 : 1975 Lab IC 1441 as well as Naga Valley Electric Supply Corporation v. Their Workmen, 5 FJR 208 (sic).
He has also relied on the decision in the case of Workmen of Shri Ranga Vilas Motors (P) Ltd. v. Shri Ranga Vilas Motors (P) Ltd., 1967(2) Lab LJ 12 : AIR 1967 SC 1040 in support of his contention.
He has also pointed out from the affidavit-in-opposition filed by the Central Govt. where they have admitted that the State Government is the appropriate authority and as such, the approval under Section 25(O) can only be granted through the State Govt. being the appropriate Govt. and not by the Central Govt. which has ceased to be the appropriate Government.
5.
I have heard the submissions of the respective counsel at length.
6.
Since the merit on the grant of approval under Section 25(O) is subject matter of consideration before the Tribunal, I confine the scope of this writ petition only to the extent of the delegation of the power and as to who is the appropriate Government for the present purpose, in the facts and circumstances of the case.
None of the observations made in this order shall be taken to affect the question of merit on grant of approval which is a pending dispute before the Tribunal on a reference made by the State Government as an appropriate Govt., the validity whereof cannot be challenged, in the view of the delegation made in Annexure "F" which is still subsisting and operative, which fact is not in dispute.
7.
Section 25(L) Clause (b) defines 'appropriate Government' under chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In relation to the chapter VB in respect of an establishment where not less than 50 (51 ?)
per cent paid up share capital is held by Central Government, the Central Govt. shall be appropriate Government.
Here hundred per cent share is held by the Central Government.
8.
Therefore, in terms of the said definition which begins with the non- obstante clause, the Central Government is the appropriate Government which cannot be disputed.
9.
Section 39 empowers the appropriate Government to delegate its powers exercisable by it under the Industrial Disputes Act or the Rules framed thereunder, in relation to such matters, and subject to such conditions, and may be specified in the said direction, by a notification in the official gazette, to the State Govt. or such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government.
In exercise of this power, by a Notification issued on July 3, 1998 contained in annexure F, the Central Government delegated its powers in respect of RIC including various other Central Government Undertakings.
The principal context of the said delegation may be beneficial for our present purpose as quoted below :-  "Ministry of Labour  Notification New Delhi, the 3rd July, 1998 SO 556 (E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by the Section 39 of the Industrial Act, 1947 (14 of the 1947), the Central Government hereby directs that all the powers exercisable by it under that Act and the Rules made thereunder shall in relation all the Central Public Sector Undertakings and their subsidiaries, corporations and autonomous bodies specified in schedule annexed to this notification be exercisable also by the State Government subject to the condition that the Central Government shall exercise all the powers under the said Act and Rules thereunder as and when it considers necessary to do so."
10.
In the present context the question has to be read having regard to the proposition of the law as advanced by the respective counsel and the said delegation contained in annexure F as quoted above.
Before embarking upon the proposition of the law we may note the features of the said delegations.
The said delegation purports to empower the State Government also to exercise the powers exercisable by the appropriate Government being the Central Govt. as a whole on the condition that the Central Govt. as the appropriate Govt. may exercise the powers under the said Act and the Rules as and when it considers necessary to do so.
Thus, the delegation is not an absolute one.
It did not divest itself as a whole.
On the other hand it had delegated the powers exercisable by the appropriate Govt. also to the State Govt.
Both the Central and State Governments could exercise the said power by reason of use of the expression 'also'.
Then again, it had reserved its rights or power on the condition as stipulated therein.
Thus plain reading of the said delegation indicates that the Central Govt. had never divested itself of the power, neither was it abrogated.
11.
So far as Section 39 is concerned, it empowers delegation subject to such condition as may be specified in the direction by which the delegation is made.
Thus it is competent for the appropriate Govt. to delegate with certain conditions.
The restrictions of conditions having not been specified, it can be any condition.
Here the condition having been provided, it cannot be said that it was incompetent.
By reason of Section 39 such condition could well be reserved or indicated or included in the order of delegation.
Therefore, if a delegation is made with certain condition and if such condition reserves the right to exercise the power delegated, to the delegator itself, in that event the delegator is competent to exercise the power since been delegated, whenever the delegator deems fit and necessary to do so.
An act of delegation is not an act of divesting.
The act of delegation is not an act of substitution.
It is only empowering some one to act in addition on behalf of the delegator.
The delegate never becomes or steps into shoes of the delegator.
Delegate's act may bind the delegator.
But it never means abrogation and abdication or deprivation or divesting of the power of the delegator altogether, conferring absolute power to the delagate.
Therefore I am unable to accept the contention of Mr. Das that the Central Govt. ceased to be the appropriate Govt. for all time to come so long annexure F remains in force.
12.
The decision cited by Mr. Das in case of Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur v. State of West Bengal, 2000(1) Cal HN 39 having relied on paragraph 18 does not help us in the present facts and circumstances of the case.
In the said case the extent of delegation and incorporation of conditions and exercise upon power of such delegation was not in question and the Court was not called upon to decide the issue involved in this case.
Similarly, the other decisions cited by Mr. Das do not help in the facts and circumstances of the case on the ground that the facts of those cases are distinguishable and the ratio decided therein cannot be attracted in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
13.
In Huth v. Clarke (supra), it was held that delegation does not divest the original power.
It retains the original power.
It is only an additional authority granted who is also entitled to exercise the power.
The same is also evident from the use of the expression "also" in the order itself apart from the reservation of the power being a condition of the delegation.
The principle enunciated in Huth v. Clarke (supra) has been followed by our Supreme Court in the decision in Godavari S Parulekar (supra) as is evident from paragraph 6 of the said decision.
"In Huth v. Clarke, 1890(25) QBD 391 Willis, J observed at p. 395.
"Delegation, as the word is generally used, does not imply a parting with powers by the person who grants the delegation, but points rather to the conferring of an authority do things which otherwise that person would have to do himself."
In our opinion by issuing the aforesaid notification the State Govt. has not denuded itself of the power to act under R 30."
14.
The said principle was again followed in Gwalior Rayon Mills (supra).
In paragraphs 38 and 39, the apex Court had held as follows :  "38.
Willis J, said in Huth v. Clarke, 1890(25) QBD 391 at P. 395.
"Delegation as the word is generally used, does not imply a parting with powers by the person who grants the delegation but points rather to the conferring of an authority to do things which otherwise that person would have to do himself.......
It is never used by the legal writers.
so far as I am aware, as implying that the delegating person parts with his power in such a manner as to denude himself of his rights."
See also John Willis "Delegatus non potest delegate", 21 Canadian Bar Review 257.
39.
If this essential nature of the concept of the delegation is kept in mind, it is not difficult to understand the principle of the leading.
decisions on the question of delegation of legislative power and the theory of abdication."
15.
It is a kind of relation of principal and agent.
However by reason of section 25-L(b) it is the Central Government which is the appropriate Govt.
The State Government can never be the appropriate Government in respect of an industry covered under Section 25-L(b) of the Act.
It is only by reason of delegation a legal fiction is created in favour of the State Govt. empowering it to exercise the power of the Central Govt.
It does not substitute the Central Government.
By legal fiction by reason of delegation the act of State Government are validate and is deemed to have been done by the Central Govt. itself.
The delegate does not acts of its own.
It does it as a delegate for the delegator.
Therefore, delegation never denudes the delegator of its power.
16.
Thus from the above principle it appears that the delegation does not take, away the right of the delegator altogether.
The said right remains with the delegator and may be exercised when it deems fit and proper.
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case in relation to the question of grant of approval under Section 25(O), the Central Government remains the appropriate Government despite the delegation and it is open to it to exercise such power for grant of approval under section 25(O).
17.
However, I have not entered into the question on merit or validity of the approval granted under section 25(O) which remains open to be agitated by the parties in the appropriate proceedings before the appropriate forum, as the case may be.
18.
This writ petition is thus disposed of.
19.
There will be no order as to cost.
20.
As prayed for by Mr. Das, Tribunal shall dispose of and decide the dispute as early as possible preferably within a period of six (6) months from the date of communication of this order.
21.
Xerox certified copy of this judgment and order be made available to the parties at an early date.
Order accordingly.