RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Nobody has appeared on behalf of respondent No. 8.
2.
Dr. Satpal Taneja, Reader, Department of Physics, Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak (Haryana) has filed the present writ petition against the respondents, including the private respondents, and it has been prayed by the petitioner that directions be given to respondent Nos. 2 and 3 to promote him to the post of Professor under the Merit Promotion Scheme in the Department of Physics with effect from 30th September, 1994.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined as Reader in the Department of Physics in the respondent-University in pursuance of his selection by a Selection Committee constituted for this purpose on 30th September, 1986.
The respondent-University introduced Merit Promotion Scheme for its teachers and laid down guidelines in this behalf.
It is the grouse of the petitioner that respondent Nos. 4 to 10 are junior to him as they were promoted as Professors under the Merit Promotion Scheme, but they were never regularly appointed as Readers.
On 9th December, 1995 the petitioner made a representation that he may also be considered for the post of Professor.
He was called for interview to appear before the Selection Committee, but the interview could not be conducted as one of the external experts expressed his inability to participate in the selection process.
Resultantly, the petitioner submitted another representation on 15th May, 1995.
In the meantime, respondent No. 4 was promoted as Professor under the Merit Promotion Scheme on 7th June, 1995.
Vide order Annexure P-5, the State of Haryana directed the Universities to review the cases of persons promoted under Merit Promotion Scheme.
On 8th September, 1998 the petitioner was informed that his case for promotion could not be considered as there was no clear vacancy.
4.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that as he has attained 8 years experience as Reader, he is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Professor w.e.f.
30th September, 1994.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and for my purpose the stand taken up by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in the written statement should be incorporated in this order.
It has been stated by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in the written statement that at the time of promotion of respondent Nos. 4 and 10 as Professor under Merit Promotion Scheme, the petitioner had not completed the prescribed 8 years service as Reader and, such, he was not eligible for promotion.
Consequently, the present petition should be dismissed.
It was also maintained by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 that the scheme introduced by the University Grants Commission in the year 1982 i.e. on 23rd November, 1982 was accepted by the University vide its Executive Council's resolution No. 50 dated 19th February, 1984.
Under this scheme, it was obligatory on the part of a candidate to have 8 years experience in the cadre.
The petitioner did not have the requisite 8 years experience and, therefore, he could not be considered for promotion on the expiry of 8 years starting from 30th September, 1986.
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 also took the stand that the petitioner remained on extra-ordinary leave (without pay) w.e.f.
20th August, 1991 to 31st August, 1992.
As per the university rules, the extra- ordinary leave (without pay) are not counted towards earning annual increment.
So by excluding the period of extra-ordinary leave, the petitioner completes his 8 years service on 12th October, 1995 and not on 30th September, 1994 as claimed by him.
As per the cut-off date of eligibility prescribed and approved by the Executive Council of the respondent University ie 31st March and 30th September of each eligibility year, the petitioner became eligible for promotion on 31st March, 1996 after completion of 8 years service in the cadre of Reader.
On the other hand the respondent Nos. 4 to 10 had completed their 8 years continuous service in the cadre of Reader during the month of September 1993 to September, 1995 and accordingly they were promoted to their respective posts earlier to the petitioner in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Merit Promotion Scheme.
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 further took the stand that the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Professor under the scheme was referred to the Selection Committee in its meeting held on 8th January, 1996 but he could not be considered as one of the external experts expressed his inability to join the deliberations of the Selection Committee.
Even otherwise, the petitioner was not eligible for promotion as Professor at that time as his eligibility cut off date was 31st March, 1996.
With this broad defence, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have made a prayer for the dismissal of the writ petition.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
7.
During the course of submissions it was brought to my notice that petitioner Shri Satpal Taneja filed C.W.P.
No. 9303 of 1999 in which he gave the challenge to the order dated 3rd November, 1998 and he further made a prayer that directions be given to the University to release annual increment for the extra-ordinary leave (without pay) which was duly sanctioned to him by the Executive Council of the University.
This writ petition came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Single Judge and vide judgment dated 5th October, 2001, it was held by the Court that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of increment during the period of extra-ordinary leave from 20th August, 1991 to 31st August, 1992.
Resultantly, the writ petition was allowed with a direction to the University to compute the relief due to the petitioner and pay the same to the petitioner.
This judgment has a direct bearing on the present writ petition.
Even the period starting from 20th August, 1991 to 31st August, 1992 is taken as a qualifying period for consideration to the post of Professor, the petitioner becomes eligible for consideration w.e.f.
30th September, 1994.
Therefore, as per the Merit Promotion Scheme, the petitioner comes within the consideration zone of the promotion starting from 30th September, 1994.
Therefore, it has become necessary for me to give directions to the respondent-University to re-consider the case of the petitioner after counting the period of extra-ordinary leave on duty and if the petitioner becomes suitable for the post of Professor as on 30th September, 1994, he will be entitled to that post.
8.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-University has stated that it is possible that the University may attack the judgment of the Hon'ble Single Judge dated 5th October, 2001.
For the time being, the operation of the judgment dated 5th October, 2001 has not been suspended by any court of competent jurisdiction.
In these circumstances, the judgment holds the field.
The effect of the judgment has already been narrated above in this order.
Still for the sake of removing any doubt it is hereby made clear that if the judgment dated 5th October, 2001 is challenged by any court of competent jurisdiction, then the University would be at liberty to deduct this period from the requisite period of eight years.
Be that as it may, the writ petition is allowed and directions are given to the respondent-University to re-consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Professor as on 30th September, 1994, and if the petitioner is found entitled and becomes qualified, he shall be deemed to have been promoted to the post of Professor from this date with consequential benefits.
It is also made clear that the ultimate promotion, if given to the petitioner, will be subject to the final approval of the State Government.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petiton allowed.