Amar Bir Singh Gill, J - The petitioner disputes the rejection of his admission to MSc.
(Information Technology) Course (MSc.
IT) by the Panjab University, Chandigarh for the Session 2001-2002 and has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him the admission in the said course.
2.
The petitioner passed B.Sc.
(Computer Science) from Kurukshetra University with 60% marks in the year 2001.
For admission to MSc.
(IT) of the Panjab University, prospectus were issued containing the following eligibility conditions :-  Eligibility Conditions The test shall be open to all such candidates who fulfill the condition of eligibility given below :- Bachelor of Computer Applications (BCA) degree under 10+2+3 system of examination of Panjab University with at least 50% marks ; or Any other examination recognized by Panjab University equivalent o the above examination.
Admission Criteria : The joint admission to all....
The admission shall be based solely on the relative merit of the candidate as determined by the result of the entrance test being held in the year 2001 subject to reservations....
The University will publish merit list of the candidates for the above course on the basis of attainment of minimum of 30% aggregate of maximum marks in the test.
Only in the case of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/...." 3.
Since no list or specific mention of equivalent examination to BCA as recognised by the Panjab University was mentioned in the prospectus, the petitioner, after verbally verifying, applied for admission to the said course.
he was issued roll number by the University.
He took the entrance test on 1172001 and qualified the same by obtaining 36% marks aggregate, copies Annexures P1 and P2.
Out of 300 total seats available, 295 candidates including the petitioner cleared the entrance test.
The petitioner submitted admission form in time as per prospectus.
On 2372001, i.e. the date of counselling for the admissions, he produced his original certificates and during the course of checking the same, a Member of the Admission Committee informed the petitioner that he was not eligible for the admission since he did not pass the qualifying examination i.e. BCA degree.
The candidates lower in merit otherwise were given admission.
The petitioner then approached the Chairman/Head of the Admission Committee with a representation, copy Annexure P3.
He again made a representation, copy Annexure P4, to the Vice Chancellor of the University.
On 282001, a notice, appeared in the newspapers that out of 350 seats, only 179 candidates were admitted in the IT Course and the final counselling was to be held on 1182001 inviting the BCA students who did not appear in the entrance test.
A copy of the cutting of news item is annexed as Annexure P5 with the writ petition.
The petitioner, thus, craves the indulgence of this Court for issuance of mandate to the respondents to grant him admission in MSc.
(IT) Course.
4.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the respondent-University.
6.
It is not disputed before us that the petitioner has not passed the qualifying examination i.e. BCA degree for the purpose of admission to MSc.
(IT) Course which, according to the prospectus, as referred to above, was the main eligibility condition.
However, the plea of the petitioner is that his B.Sc.
(Computer Science) degree is equivalent to the qualifying examination i.e. BCA and as such he has a right to admission.
7.
In reply, it has been contended that the case of the students who had passed B.Sc.
with Computer Science as one of the elective subjects was referred to the Director, Department of Computer Science and Applications, Panjab University with regard to equivalence BCA examination.
The opinion received from the Director, Department of Compute Science, Panjab University reads as follows :-  "The case of students who have passed B.Sc.
with Computer Science as one of the elective subjects was referred to Mr. Behl for determining its equivalency with BCA examination.
Mr. Behl gave a categorical `No' and told me in writing that these students are misleading by writing B.Sc.
(Computer Science) after having studied Computer Science only as one of the subjects at B.Sc.
level and, thus, their degree is not equivalent to BCA degree."
8.
In view of the above, the petitioner was not found eligible for admission and as such the same is denied to him.
The petitioner is unable to satisfy this Court if the Course he studied in the B.Sc.
with Compute Science as elective subject was identical or the same as the syllabi for the BCA degree course.
Admittedly, B.Sc.
with Computer Science as elective subject implies that Computer Science is one of the subject studied alongwith the other subjects for graduation in Science, whereas the BCA pertains entirely to the study of Computer Science and as such Computer Science one of the elective subjects in B.Sc.
course cannot be equated with the study of BCA course.
The fact that the petitioner's application was entertained and he was successful in the entrance test as well is not sufficient by itself to grant him the admission since the prospectus itself at Sr. No. 7 General Rules, Sub Item Nos. (i) and (ii), page 7 reads as follows :-  "(i) All those candidates who have appeared in the qualifying examination as applicable under the relevant course during the academic session 2001-2002 are also eligible to take the entrance test, but their admission to the test shall be purely provisional, which shall stand cancelled, if they do not pass the qualifying examination securing the prescribed percentage of marks.
Such candidates shall not have any claim, whatsoever, with regard to their admission to the Course, in the event of their not passing the qualifying examination with the requisite percentage of marks, if any, by the date fixed for the purpose.
All other eligibility conditions remain the same for such candidates.
(ii) xx xx xx xx" 9.
The petitioner himself has produced a copy of the result of his entrance test, Annexure P2, which carries the following note :-  "Note :- This result of the Test is provisional and in no way qualifies a candidate to get admission in an institution unless he/she satisfies the qualifications and such other eligibility conditions as are prescribed for admission in the rules/regulations of the University/Institution concerned."
10.
The petitioner, in the circumstances, has no case for issuance of any such direction since he was not eligible having not passed the qualifying examination for MSc.
(IT) course.
11.
There being no merit in this writ petition, the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.