Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - CM No. 3205 of 2002.
Application is allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Exemption as prayed for is granted.
CM stands disposed of  C.W.P.
No. 1817 of 2002  2.
We have head counsel for the petitioner at some length.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that no muster rolls were being maintained for the relevant period is there was no work.
Additionally he contends that the workman had not worked for 240 days in the year immediately preceding the alleged termination of his service.
There is apparent contradiction in the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner.
If no muster rolls were being maintained it cannot be understood as to how the State calculates the days for which the workman had worked.
However, the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Panipat recorded a finding of fact that the workman had worked for 240 days and termination of his services was in violation of provisions of 25-G and 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It may be appropriate to refer to the following finding recorded by the learned Tribunal :  "He has come with the summoned record.
He has admitted that the workman was employed in April, 1988.
He has admitted that the Rajinder was employed on 171987 and is still working and Oma was employed on 171988 and Dalbir was employed on 141989 and Sat Narain was employed on 24.3.1989 and their dates of appointments are Ex.W-1.
He has stated that all these persons won their case from the Labour Court and they are still working.
The other witness examined by workman WW-1 PK Aggarwal has also tendered Ex. W-1 and he has admitted that Dalbir was employed on 141989, Oma was employed on 171988 and Sat Narain was employed on 24389.
Meaning thereby that all these persons were employed after the employment of the workman and they are still working with the management.
Therefore, one thing is clear that these persons were employed after joining of the workman and they have been retained whereas the workman has been removed from service.
Therefore, principle of last come first go has not been followed by the Management while terminating services of the workman.
Therefore, termination of the services of the workman is in violation of provisions of Section 25-G of the Act."
4.
These findings of fact are based upon appreciation of evidence.
It was no where the plea of the management before the Labour Court either in the written statement of in the evidence that muster rolls were not being maintained.
5.
In view of our above findings, this writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.