Bakhshish Kaur, J - The petitioners have invoked the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing Annexures P-4 to P-6 whereby the respondent Ns 4 to 6 have been promoted as Senior Draftsmen Grade II (Civil) and for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote the petitioners to the post of Senior Draftsmen Grade II (Civil) from the date respondent Nos. 4 to 6 were promoted i.e. 171995.
2.
The backdrop of the case is that the petitioners were appointed as draftsman Grade III (Civil) in the pay-scale of 330-560 vide letter Annexure P-1.
The respondents Nos. 4 to 6 were appointed on 1751985, 2351985 and 6.6.1985 respectively as draftsman Grade III (Civil) in the same pay scale.
The seniority list of the draftsman Grade I (Civil) as on 111995 is Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
A perusal of the same shows that the petitioners figure at serial Nos. 5 to 10 whereas respondent Nos. 4 to 6 figure at serial Nos. 11 to 13.
Thus, the respondents are junior to the petitioners.
3.
The petitioners as well as the respondents Nos. 4 to 6 were promoted to the post of Draftsman Grade I with effect from 17 1990 in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1445/-.
Further, respondent Nos. 4 to 6 were promoted to the post of Senior Draftsmen, Grade II (Civil) with effect from 171995, whereas the petitioners who are senior to them, have been left out and discriminated.
Copies of the promotion orders are Annexure P-4 to P-6.
4.
The petitioners made a joint representation against the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 6 as Senior Draftsmen Grade II, which is Annexure P-7.
The respondent No. 2 had promoted 7 officials, 4 from General Category and 3 from Reserved Category i.e.
Scheduled Caste on 171996 to the post of Senior Draftsman Grade II (Civil).
In this way, total 43 posts were filled up, meaning thereby that as per the number of reserved posts, 3 officials in excess had been promoted.
As the total number of Scheduled Caste officials comes to 10, there was a reservation for a maximum number of 7 Senior Draftsmen (Civil) and, it was, therefore, by promoting 3 officials in excess of reserved vacancies, petitioners and other eligible draftsman have been deprived of their claim for further promotion.
The vacancies occurring at that time are depicted in the chart Annexure P-8.
Thus, the respondent Nos. 4 to 6 have been illegally promoted against non-available posts of Scheduled Caste officials, which has led to the non-filling up of vacancies in the General Category, thereby adversely affecting the claim of the petitioners for further promotion.
The action of respondents Nos. 1 to 3 in promoting respondent Nos. 4 to 6 is violative of Articles 14, 15, 15 and 19 of the Constitution of India.
5.
The petitioners who had been making representations against the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 6 also filed a Grievances Petition before respondent No. 3 as per policy of the Corporation and also asked for detailed reasons for ignoring them.
Since no valid reason has been given for rejecting their claim, therefore, they again represented inviting instructions dated 2821997.
Then, respondent No. 2 issued a circular that the ground of rejection should be made known to the employees who have filed the Grievance Petition so that they know the basis of the decision.
But no such ground has been communicated.
6.
The respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in their joint written statement, have raised preliminary objections that this petition having been filed after a period of more than two years, deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
No legal right of the petitioners has been infringed, therefore, the writ petitioners are not entitled to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court, because they have also been promoted as per their seniority, to the post of Draftsman (Special Grade) with effect from 171997 and since then they have been working on the promoted post.
7.
On merits, it is pleaded inter alia, that the respondent Nos. 4 to 6 were promoted to the post of Senior Draftsman Grade II against the reserved posts for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in the stream of SC/ST roster maintained by the answering respondents in accordance with reservation of SC/ST candidates in appointment/promotions.
8.
The correct roster for SC/ST is annexed herewith as Annexure R-2.
The rosters were duly checked and inspected by the Deputy Secretary and Liaison Officer for SC/ST, Ministry of Power, Government of India.
It is also admitted that they are following the 40 points roster prescribed for the purpose, but averred that Annexure P-24 attached with the petition is wrong and the true version of 40 point roster maintained by the answering respondent is Annexure R-5.
9.
I have heard Shri AK Mittal, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri Ashok Aggarwal, Senior counsel for the respondents.
10.
The main point for consideration is whether the denial of promotion to the petitioners is violative of the principle of equality in matters of public appointments and promotions, as enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
11.
Shri AK Mittal, learned counsel contended that once the petitioners have been shown senior to the respondent Nos. 4 to 6 they could not be superseded in the matter of promotion to the next higher post.
The seniority list Annexure P-2 makes it clear that the petitioners figure at serial Nos. 5 to 10 whereas respondent Nos. 4 to 6 figure at serial Nos. 11 to 13.
Petitioners have submitted their case to the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd No valid ground was conveyed for rejecting their claim for promotion.
12.
The appointment letter of the petitioner-Sunil Kumar is Annexure P-3 while that of Madan Pal is Annexure P-4 dated 28.7.1995 and that of respondent Nos. 5 and 6 is Annexures P-5 and P-6 respectively.
13.
Factually, there is no dispute that initially the petitioners were senior to the respondent Nos. 4 to 6 as per seniority list prepared, but can the order of promoting them in ignoring the petitioners be termed as wholly illegal and unjustified ?
The answer to this query is certainly in the negative because the promotion was made strictly in accordance with the roster points against the reserved posts.
This is purported to have been done in pursuance of the Presidential Directives forwarded by Ministry of Power and NES in terms of Article 36 of the Articles of Association of National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (for short `the Corporation').
The representation submitted by the petitioners was considered by the Corporation on earlier occasion and later on, another order was passed on 2232001, copy of which has been placed on record, which fact is not denied by the petitioner.
It is specifically mentioned that the representation does not depict the only claim made by the petitioners.
Instead, it consists of allegations against the officers, Department and the Corporation without any basis or justification.
14.
Mr. Mittal, learned counsel also tried to derive benefit from the proceedings held by the NHPC Grievance Authority on March 1997 wherein the grievance of the petitioners and others regarding their supersession because of the carry forward of SC/ST reservation point was considered and it was observed that there is no carry forward point in respect of SC/ST candidates in case of promotions from Group C to Group B category i.e. from non- supervisory to supervisory through selection process.
The carry forward of roster points is allowed only when there is a promotion from Group C to Group B category by seniority-cum-fitness.
The Grievances Authority has further enunciated two points by saying that according to promotion policy and rules of the Corporation, promotion from non-supervisory to supervisory cadre i.e. from Group C to Group B is by process of selection on the basis of merit.
It is also mentioned that the member of the Grievance Authority, representing P&A Wing brought to the notice of the Grievance Authority that promotions of Draftsman (W-6) to (S-2) is being done on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness through DPC and not through process of selection on the basis of merit.
Thus, the Grievance Authority formed its opinion as under :  "35 The Grievance Authority after examining the directives issued by the Government in respect of SC/ST reservation vis-a-vis policy of the Corporation, is of the view that the above Draftsmen do have a genuine grievance of being superseded due to the carry forward roster point, which is not permissible otherwise."
"5.
However, since it may be advisable to demote a person already promoted, the only remedy remains is to promote all the above six superseded Draftsmen Grade I to Senior Draftsmen Grade II even by upgrading the posts in case of non-availability of vacancy.
Further by doing so there will remain only one more Draftsman of the same batch, who besides being of SC category, was also eligible for promotion along with above Draftsmen."
Therefore, the Committee finally recommends promotion of all the 7 Draftsmen of Grade I to Senior Draftsmen Grade II even by upgrading the posts w.e.f.
July 1995, the date of promotion of Shri Mohinder Singh, whose promotion gave rise to the grievance."
Now, whether the direction of the Grievance Committee is binding or it is only advisory.
15.
As is gathered from the material brought on record, the promotion process has been carried out by the respondents on the basis of the promotion policy and the roster maintained Annexure R-2, which in duly checked and inspected by the Deputy Secretary and Liaison Officer for SC/ST, Ministry of Power, Government of India, as pointed by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Even the Corporation in its order dated March 22, 2001 has conveyed to the petitioners that the finding of the Grievance Committee is only recommendatory and not binding, therefore, non-implementation thereof cannot be construed as mis-reporting by an officer or a particular department.
The promotion from Draftsman Grade I to Senior Draftsman Grade II i.e. Group B to Group C is vacancy post and due to non-availability of vacancies, the petitioners were not promoted in the year 1995.
Serve vacancies were available in 1995 out of which 4 senior-most candidates belonging to General Category and 3 belonging to the Reserved Categories were promoted including one point post of reserved category was carried forward from previous year ie 1992.
In this way, all the promotions were made by following the 40 point roster applicable to the promotions in respect of 80 point roster.
Thus, viewed from every possible angle, promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 6 cannot be termed as unjustified, warranting interference by this court.
In view of the aforesaid, there is no merit in the writ petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.