Amar Dutt, J - Shri Sat Paul Arora, has filed the present writ petition against the respondent and it has been prayed by the petitioner that directions be issued to the respondents to grant him the pay scale of Rs. 5500-175-9000 with effect from 111996.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he is working as Stenographer Grade `C' in Indian Institute of Kayachikitsa, Patiala.
The Stenographers Grade "C" working in the Headquarters are getting the pay scale of Rs. 5500- 9000 with effect from 111996, whereas the petitioner is getting a pay scale of Rs. 4500-7000.
In short the case set up by the petitioner is that their cadre and seniority are joint and the artificial distinction made by the respondents that a Stenographer Grade "C" working in the Headquarters will get more salary as compared to the petitioner, is illegal.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and the stand taken up by the respondents is that the Stenographers Grade "C" working in be Headquarters are doing arduous duties as compared to the duties to the performed by the petitioner and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the higher pay scale as claimed by him.
It is also the stand of the respondents that there can be two grades in the same cadre and this distinction had earlier been maintained throughout without any objection.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
In our view the artificial distinction drawn by the respondents cannot stand the test of judicial scrutiny.
During the course of submissions it has been fairly conceded by the learned counsel for the parties that the post of Stenographer Grade "C" is inter-changeable between the Head Office and the Field Office.
The seniority is one; the feeder cadre is one and the qualifications for the post of Stenographer Grade "C" are also one.
In these circumstances we are of the considered opinion that petitioner is entitled to the higher pay scale of Rs. 5500-175-9000 with effect from 111996.
6.
Faced with this difficulty learned counsel for the respondents has drawn our attention to two citations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as 1989 Supp (2) Supreme Court Cases 616, Gopika Ranjan Choudhary v. Union of India and other and 1998(2) Supreme Court Cases 598 : 1998(2) SCT 540 (SC), Union of India and others v. Ram Gopal Agarwal and others.
We have gone through both the citations and these citations are distinguishable on facts.
In the cited case the cadre was separate.
There was a patent distinction with regard to the arduous nature of duties between the two cadres and in these circumstances the benefit of equal pay for equal work could not be granted but in the present case as we have tried to highlight above that the cadre is joint: seniority is joint and the posts are inter-changeable and, therefore, the petitioner could not be discriminated with those Stenographers who have the chance to work in the Headquarters.
Resultantly, the writ is hereby allowed and mandate is issued against the respondents to grant the pay scale of Rs. 5500-175-9000 to the petitioner with effect from 111996.
If this grade has been further revised the petitioner shall also get the benefit of that revised pay scale.
We also give the declaration that this benefit of pay scale shall be given uniformly to all those Stenographers who are similarly situated.
Petition allowed.