RL Anand, J - By this judgment, I am disposing of C.W.P.
No. 18103 of 2001, titled Rajpal etc. v M/s. Punjab State Electronics Development and Production Corporation and others, 2002(2) SCT 82 (P&H) and C.W.P.
No. 18334 of 2001, titled Mehma Singh etc v M/s Punjab State Electronics Development and Production Corporation, as in opinion of this Court, both these writ petitions can be disposed of by a common judgment and facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 18103 of 2001.
2.
The petitioners were the employees of M/s Punjab Electro-Optics Systems Ltd respondent No. 2.
This concern is the product of Punjab State Electronics Development and Production Corporation, respondent No. 1.
Both respondents No. 1 and 2 are limited companies.
For the last several years the petitioners are working with respondent No. 1 because of the paucity of work and fund with respondent No. 2 and as per the conditions of service also the petitioners services could be transferred to respondent No. 1.
Unfortunately respondent No. 1 filed a petition under Section 434 of the Companies Act against respondent No. 2.
It came up for hearing before the Company Judge who ordered for the liquidation of respondent No. 2 vide order dated 4.10.2001 and the following order was passed :  "This order may be read in continuation of the order dated 3071998 vide which the Company petition No. 77 of 1998 was admitted.
Publication has already been done.
Nobody has appeared from the side of the respondent company.
In these circumstances, I order that the respondent company M/s Punjab Electro Optics Systems Ltd be wound up.
The Official Liquidator attached to this Court is directed to forthwith take into his custody all properties and effects and the books and papers of the company.
The petitioner is further directed to advertise the notice of winding up order in one issue each of the Indian Express, Chandigarh Edition and Dainik Tribune, Chandigarh and also in the Punjab Government gazette within fourteen days from today.
Let a formal order of winding up the drawn up in accordance with law.
2.
At this stage, Shri Deepak Thapar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the employees of the respondent company submits that the interest of the employees of the company under liquidation be kept in view.
He submits that the company under liquidation is a sister concern of the petitioner company.
It has been financed by the petitioner company.
The employees of the respondent Company under liquidation at the moment are working with the petitioner company.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, at this juncture, states that the employees of the respondent company though are working with the petitioner company but they are working on humanitarian ground.
Under the law the company Court is also supposed to watch the interest of the workers.
At the moment the workers of the respondent company are working with the company of the petitioner though on temporary/humanitarian basis.
It is hereby directed that the petitioner company shall try to absorb the ex- employees of the respondent company against the suitable vacancies keeping in view their qualifications.
Every endeavour shall be made by the petitioner company to accommodate the ex-employees of the respondent company.
Let a copy of the order be sent to the Official Liquidator for compliance."
3.
The case set up by the petitioners is that since they are working with respondent No. 1 for the last several years which is none-else but a mother company of respondent No. 2, therefore, in view of the observations made by the Company Judge and also in view of the fact that they are working for the last several years against the work being provided to them by respondent No. 1, their services may not be terminated.
Rather the directions be given to respondent No. 1 to treat the petitioners as their employee and to allow them to continue in the work.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The stand of respondent No. 1 is that petitioners were ex-employees of respondent No. 2.
It has gone in liquidation with the passing of the order of liquidation.
The petitioners cannot insist or call upon respondent No. 1 to give employment to them.
It is also the stand of respondent No. 1 that relationship of workman and employer immediately came to an end with the passing of the order of liquidation.
I have heard Shri Deepak Thapar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Shri RS Aulakh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 3 Ms. Jasleen Sawhney, Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
It is the common case of the parties that petitioners were the employees of respondent No. 2 which has gone into liquidation.
As per the conditions of services of the petitioners, their services could be transferred to any branch or office of the company located at any place in India and to any of the project to be promoted by respondent No. 1.
In this view of the matter, the services of the petitioners were transferred to respondent No. 1 but nevertheless they will be deemed to be the employee of respondent No. 2 which has gone into liquidation.
The effect of liquidation is that the relationship of workman and employees ceases and the rights of the ex-employees is only to get the salary from respondent No. 2.
Now ancillary point which survives for determination is that since the petitioners are working for the last several years with respondent No. 1.
Whether any direction should be given to respondent No. 1 to accommodate the interest of the petitioners.
6.
It has been stated in the written statement on behalf of the respondent No. 1 that it has always been sympathetic towards the petitioners and it took all out efforts to rehabilitate them.
At present, there is no vacancy nor there is any scope according to their qualifications and experience.
The petitioners would be adjusted as and when any vacancy arises suiting their qualifications and experience.
In view of this stand taken by respondent No. 1 and in the larger interest of the petitioners, both the writ petitions are disposed of by giving directions to respondent No. 1 that petitioners alone would be adjusted as and when any vacancy arises suiting their qualifications and experience and no outsiders shall be taken.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.