Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard counsel for the petitioner at some length.
2.
Learned Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Faridabad vide his award dated 262000 declined relief of the workman and specifically came to a finding that his services were not terminated by the management and it was always willing and ready to take him.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that the findings of labour Court are contrary to the record.
We are not impressed with this argument.
For the purpose of convenience, we may refer to the findings recorded by the learned labour Court on the issues before him :-  "It was admitted as correct that the claimant had gone on medical leave on 25101995.
Workman, on the other hand, as WW-1 stated that he was engaged on 521990 and had gone on leave on 25101995 due to illness of his mother and when he returned after one week, he was not permitted to do his duty and his services were terminated on 6111995.
Sh. Jai Parkash as WW-2 also stated to the same effect.
10.
A perusal of copies of attendance register Ex.M-2 to M-41 shows that the workman has been shown having been absent since 25101995 and his name has been on rolls thereafter till date.
A further perusal of the written statement, shows that the management had been willing to take the workman back on duty.
Management took similar stand before labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Statement recorded there had not been placed on record.
All three MWs, have also stated that the management was ready to take the workman back on duty.
It is a fact that no letter was issued by the management after the workman absented himself, nor the workman himself had written any letter to the labour authorities that he was not permitted to work after 25101995.
So, in these circumstances, it is made out that it was a workman himself who absented w.e.f.
25101995 after availing some leaves and he has been absent continuously in the attendance register and his name has not so far been struck off and further more the management has not so far terminated his services.
So, in these circumstances, it is made out that the management has not, at all, terminated his services and the workman himself absented and, thus the workman is at liberty to join his duties at any time as his name is still on the rolls of the management."
3.
These are findings of fact which are based upon proper appreciation of evidence.
We may also notice that Annexure P1, annexed to the writ petition, is the demand notice raised by the petitioner and the case now sought to be pleaded was even mentioned in the demand notice.
The workman pleaded the case of termination with effect from 6111995 which has been found factually incorrect.
We see no reason to interfere.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.