GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal against order dated 5.4.1991 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 4582 of 1989 directing the appellants to pay enhanced subsistence allowance and interest on the arrears of the subsistence allowance to the writ petitioner-respondent.
2.
The appellants have challenged the impugned order on the following grounds :-  (a) that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for payment of enhanced subsistence allowance must be treated as legally untenable and unjustified because the appellants were not responsible for prolonging the period of suspension.
(b) The learned Single Judge committed a serious legal error by awarding interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the arrears of subsistence allowance ignoring the fact that the writ petitioner-respondent had remained in jail up to 1984 on account of his conviction on the charge of murder and till 1984, he had not made any demand for payment of subsistence allowance.
3.
At the hearing, the learned Deputy Advocate General made a statement that he is not pressing first ground of challenge.
Therefore, the only issue which remains to be considered is whether the direction given by the learned Single Judge to the appellants to pay interest to the respondent on the arrears of subsistence allowance is legally correct and justified.
4.
A perusal of the record shows that respondent-Dr. Jai Shankar had joined service in the Health Department of the Government of Punjab on 631964.
By an order dated 2441970, he was placed under suspension on account of his involvement in a murder case in Himachal Pradesh.
He was convicted by the Sessions Judge, Shimla on 5.12.1977 and was sentenced to life imprisonment.
He was released from Jail in 1984 in compliance of the order passed by the Supreme Court.
In the meanwhile, he was dismissed on 1491981.
After release from jail, he made representation to the government for payment of subsistence allowance for the period between 2441970 and 1491981, but no action was taken on request till 24.2.1989 when a sum of Rs. 9672090 was paid to him.
Thereafter, he filed C.W.P.
No. 4582 of 1989 for directing the respondents (appellants herein) to pay enhanced subsistence allowance at the rate of 75% of his pay form the expiry of first six months of his suspension and also pay compound interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the arrears of subsistence allowance.
The appellants contested the prayer made by the respondent mainly on the ground that the department was not responsible for delay in the release of the subsistence allowance.
In the written statement filed on their behalf, it was averred that the writ petitioner could not be paid subsistence allowance because he was in police custody/jail.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and directed the appellants to pay enhanced subsistence allowance and also pay interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the arrears.
6.
Shri NDS Mann, learned Advocate General, Punjab argued that the direction given by the learned Single Judge for payment of interest should be declared illegal and quashed because the appellants were not at all responsible for delay in the payment of subsistence allowance.
He pointed out that the respondent had remained in jail from April, 1972 to September, 1984 and, therefore, the appellants could not pay subsistence allowance in terms of Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I (for short, `the rules').
He submitted that interest on the arrears of subsistence allowance could have been awarded by the learned Single Judge only if there was any deliberate delay on the part of the appellants to pay the amount of subsistence allowance on due dates and not otherwise.
7.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the argument of the learned counsel and the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
Rule 72(1)(ii)(a) of the Rules declares that a government employee, under suspension, shall be entitled to an amount equivalent to leave salary which the government servant would have drawn if he had been on leave on half pay and in addition, dearness allowance, if admissible, on the basis of such leave salary.
Proviso to this rule empowers the competent authority to vary the amount of subsistence allowance for any period subsequent to the period of first six months.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 72 declares that no payment under sub-rule (1) shall be made unless the government employee furnishes a certificate that he was not engaged in any employment, business, profession or vocation.
In our opinion, Rule 72(1) entitles an employee to get subsistence allowance as of right subject to the production of certificate envisages by Rule 72(2).
However, the production of certificate cannot be insisted upon in the case of an employee, who is due to his arrest or otherwise, incapacitated from undertaking any employment, business, profession or vocation.
In other words, the right of an employee who is suspended on account of arrest in a criminal case and whose suspension or detention continues during the pendency of trial cannot be denied the amount of subsistence allowance on account of non-production of certificate in terms of Rule 72(2) of the Rules.
In such cases, it is for the employer to devise appropriate mechanism for payment of subsistence allowance during the period of trial, else it will be treated as a case of unlawful withholding of amount due to suspended employee entitling the latter to claim interest on the arrears of subsistence allowance.
The question as to whether a writ petition can be maintained for claiming interest on the delayed payment was considered and answered in the affirmative by a Full Bench of this Court in RS Randhawa v. State of Punjab, 1997(3) RSJ 318.
That was a case relating to delay in the payment of pension and other retiral benefits.
The Full Bench adverted to a large number of decisions of the Supreme Court and held that an employee, who is denied the pension and other retiral dues, is entitled to claim interest from the employer by filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In our opinion, the ratio of the decision of RS Randhawa's case (supra) deserves to be applied to a case, like the present one because non-payment of subsistence allowance to a suspended employee can appropriately be treated as depriving him of the source of sustenance affecting his right to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
In view of above, we do not find any valid ground to interfere with the order of the learned Single Judge.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.