GS Singhvi, J - This is yet another illustration of frivolous and vexatious litigation, the number of which has been increasing day to day.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that immediately after issuance of order dated 8.9.1999 by the Government of India vide which the President's sanction to the initiation of departmental proceedings against the petitioner had been granted under Rule 9(2)(b)(i) of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (for short, the Rules), he filed an application under Section 19(1) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short, `the Act') and succeeded in persuading Chandigarh Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal (for short, `the Tribunal') to entertain the same and also pass an interim order dated 21.12.1999 directing the non-applicants (respondent Nos. 1 to 5 herein) not to hold enquiry in respect of any event which had taken place more than 4 years before the initiation of departmental proceedings.
That appears to have happened because counsel representing respondent Nos. 1 to 5 did not bring to the notice of the Tribunal the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Ashok Kacker, 1995(7) SLR 430; Union of India v. AN Saxena, 1992(4) SLR 11 : 1992(2) SCT 327 (SC) and by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 344 of 2000 - OP Sachdeva and others v. The Food Corporation of India and others, 2000(2) SCT 726 (P&H)(DB) : decided on 1312000 against Courts interdiction in the pending departmental enquiries.
3.
The interim order passed by the Tribunal did not satisfy the petitioner and, therefore, after receiving notices from the Enquiry Officer to inspect the record and participate in the proceedings of enquiry, he filed Miscellaneous Application No. 1129 of 2001 for restraining the concerned authority from continuing the proceedings of enquiry.
This was another attempt by the petitioner to subvert the proceedings of enquiry notwithstanding the fact that on an earlier occasion, the Tribunal had declined his prayer for stay of the departmental enquiry.
We are happy to note that the Tribunal did not entertain the unjustified prayer of the petitioner for stay of the enquiry and granted limited stay against passing of the final order.
4.
Still dissatisfied, the petitioner has invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for restraining the concerned authority from proceeding with the enquiry by asserting that in view of Section 19(4) of the Act, the departmental proceedings cannot be continued.
5.
Shri DK Bhatti argued that admission of the application filed by the petitioner under Section 19(1) of the Act had the effect of automatic abatement of the proceedings of departmental enquiry and, therefore, the order passed by the Tribunal declining the petitioner's prayer for stay may be quashed.
Learned counsel submitted that the expression "every proceeding under the relevant rules as to redressal of grievances in relation to the subject matter of such application" used in Section 19(4) of the Act includes the pending departmental enquiry and, therefore, respondents No. 1 to 5 cannot continue the proceedings of enquiry during the pendency of proceedings before the Tribunal.
6.
We have given serious thought to the argument of the learned counsel, but have not felt impressed.
Rather, we are convinced that the argument is wholly misconceived and deserves to be rejected.
Sections 3(r), 19(1), (3) and (4) and 20(1) of the Act which have bearing on the decision of the plea raised by the petitioner read as under :-  "3(4) "service rules as to redressal of grievances", in relation to any matter, means that rules, regulations, orders or other instruments or arrangements as in force for the time being with respect to redressal, otherwise than under this Act, of any grievances in relation to such matters."
...
19.
(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal may make an application to the Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.
Explanation.
- For the purposes of this sub-section, "order" means an order made - (a) by the Government or a local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or by any corporation [or society] owned or controlled by the Government owned or controlled by the Governmental : or (b) by an officer, committee or other body or agency of the Government or a local or other authority or corporation [or society] referred to in clause (a).
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such inquiry as it may deem necessary, that the application is a fit case for adjudication or trial by it, admit such application : but where the Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may summarily reject the application after recording its reasons.
(4) Where an application has been admitted by a Tribunal under sub-section (3), every proceeding under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances in relation to the subject-matter of such application pending immediately before such admission shall abate and save as otherwise directed by the Tribunal, no appeal or representation in relation to such matter shall thereafter be entertained under such rules.
20.
Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.
- (1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances."
7.
A combined reading of the provisions reproduced above shows that an application filed by an aggrieved person can either be admitted or rejected.
In the latter case, the Tribunal is required to record reasons [Section 19(3)].
Sub-section (4) of Section 19 of the Act lays down that where the application has been admitted under sub-section (3), every proceeding pending for redressal of grievance in relation to the subject-matter of the application shall abate and no appeal or representation in relation to the subject-matter of the application pending before the Tribunal can be entertained except under the direction of the Tribunal.
Section 20(1) of the Act lays down that the Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant has availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to the redressal of grievances.
The expression service rules as to the redressal of grievances used in Section 19(1) and 20(1) has been defined in Section 3(r) of the Act.
It is relatable to any rule, regulation, order or other instrument or establishment in force with respect to redressal of any grievance in relation to such matter.
A harmonious reading of these provisions leads to an irresistible inference that once the Tribunal admits an application, all departmental remedies availed by the applicant for redressal of his grievance, which is subject-matter of the application, would abate.
In other words, the applicant cannot, after admission of the application under Section 19(3), pursue departmental remedies for redressal of his grievance.
The object sought to be achieved by enacting Section 19(4) is to avoid duality of actions by the aggrieved person and by recognising the wide and pervasive reach of the jurisdiction, power and authority vested in/ conferred upon the Tribunal, the Legislature imposed an embargo on continuation of the departmental action for redressal of grievance after admission of the application.
However, there is nothing in the aforementioned provision from which it can be inferred that a pending departmental enquiry would automatically abate once an application filed by the employee for quashing of the proceedings has been admitted by the Tribunal.
The proceedings of departmental enquiry cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be treated as proceedings under the relevant service rules for redressal of the grievance in relation to subject-matter of the application.
Therefore, the petitioner's prayer for restraining the respondents from continuing the enquiry cannot be entertained.
8.
The argument of Shri Bhatti that departmental proceedings should be deemed to have abated with the admission of application filed by the petitioner, if accepted, would lead to grave adverse consequences and would encourage the employees to attempt sub-version of the disciplinary proceedings simply by filing an application under Section 19(1) and somehow or the other persuading the Tribunal to admit the same.
In our opinion, there is no valid ground to accept such an argument.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.