JS Narang, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are seeking appointment as a lecturer, to qualify for such appointment, they are required to pass an examination defined as National Education Test (hereinafter referred to as NET) which has been notified by the University Grants Commission (in short, referred to as UGC).
The said examination is held twice in a year by UGC in June and December of the year.
The said examination consists of three papers.
The first part is of General Knowledge which is common to all.
The second part relates to overall view of the subjects studied and that the questions are objective type, meaning thereby, out of various answers one answer has to be picked up.
The third paper is in the specialisation of the subjects studied and opted by a candidate.
2.
In pursuant thereto, a notice dated September 18, 1999 was published and in response thereto, the applicants applied and the test was to held on December 26, 1999.
The petitioners having acquired degree of Master of Business Economics (in short M.B.E.)
opted for specialisation Subject Code-17 i.e. Management for part III examination as the subjects containing in the said Code were taught to them during their acquisition of course defined as M.B.E.
The UGC did not accept the option given by the petitioners and intimated that all of them are not eligible for Subject Code-17 Management but are eligible for Code 01-Economics.
The petitioners contested the view point of UGC and submitted a representation stating that the subjects which they have been taught, are not taken to the course of Master of Business Administration and that Code-17 contains almost all those subjects which have been studied by them while acquiring M.B.E.
course.
The representation was not accepted and that roll numbers were sent to the petitioners reiterating the change in the subject code of the petitioners, i.e. instead of Code-17, the Code-01 was maintained.
However, the roll numbers have been received by them.
3.
The petitioners felt aggrieved by the communication.
The view point expressed by UGC has been made subject-matter of challenge by way of present petition.
Notice of motion was issued and regarding interim relief, the respondents were directed to permit the petitioners to appear for Code 17- Management paper for the examination scheduled to be held on December 26, 1999.
However, it was specifically observed that the petitioners shall appear in the aforesaid code at their own risk and responsibility.
The publication of result pertaining to the petitioners in respect of the aforesaid code was not to be declared till further orders.
4.
It is submitted by Mr. GS Bal, learned Counsel for the petitioners that Subject Code 17-Management consists of five papers whereas Subject Code 01- Economics in Paper III, consists of 15 papers, whereas, the subject taught to the petitioners in the M.B.E.
course comprised of 11 papers and that the comparison of these papers with Subject Code 17-Management shows that four papers are common to both except one paper i.e. Co-operative Management.
It shall be apposite to notice the nature and character of these papers under Subject Code 17-Management, Subject Code 01-Economics and subjects taught in M.B.E.
Course which read as under :-  "Paper III of the Subject Code 17-Management consists of the following papers :- (i) Personal Management (ii) Industrial Relation (iii) Marketing Management (iv) Financial Management  (v) Co-operative Management Whereas the papers in the Subject Code : 01-Economics in Paper III are as follows :- (i) Agricultural Economics.
(ii) Banks and other Financial Institutions.
(iii) Industrial Economics.
(iv) Public Finance.
(v) International Economics.
(vi) Econometrics.
(vii) Economics, Planning and Growth in India.
(viii) Cooperation.
(ix) Technography.
(x) Rural Economics.
(xi) Tribunal Economics.
(xii) Development/Planning Status.
(xiii) Management Economics/Business Economics.
(xiv) Economics of Enterprises.
(xv) Behaviour.
Whereas the subject taught to the petitioners in the M.B.E.
Course comprises of :- (i) Marketing Management.
(ii) Financial Managements.
(iii) Instrument and Services.
(iv) Labour Economics and Industrial Relations.
(v) Personal Management.
(vi) International Marketing and Finance etc. (vii) Finance.
(viii) HRD.
(ix) International Business System.
(x) Quantitative Methods.
(xi) Environment etc." The argument is that the petitioners have been unnecessarily required to appear in Subject Code 01-Economics and that on comparison of the papers whereby the M.B.E.
Course shows that not even a single paper in common.
This approach of UGC would automatically non-suit the petitioners and that they shall not be able to qualify the examination, which is the basic requirement for seeking appointment to the post of lecturer.
The approcahc of UGC is absolutely un-reasonale and devoid of merit and is violative of principles of natural justice.
5.
The written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 only.
The stand is that as per the requirements, the candidates who offer themselves to appear in the aforesaid examination, have to appear in the subject of their post graduation only and that if the subject is not covered in the list of subjects at item No. 9, he/she may appear in the subject related to one, he/she had at post graduation.
It has also been notified that issuance of admission card would not imply that the candidature of a candidate is finally accepted.
The eligibility conditions as provided in the curriculum/syllabi can again culminate into rejection of the candidature.
Thus, in view of the aforesaid conditions, which have been duly notified the candidature of the petitioners would have been rejected but keeping in view the interest of justice, equity and fair play, the petitioners have been allowed to appear in economics which is closely related to M.B.E.
course, as per the view of UGC.
It is further the sand that both M.B.A. and M.B.E.
courses cannot be equated, as the recognition of M.B.A. course is entirely different than the M.B.E.
course.
Both the courses are at complete variance.
The question of education of these courses does not arise.
It is also the stand that passing of papers in M.B.E.
Course should not mean that they can be equated with Master of Business Management.
In fact on account of this ambiguity, the candidature of petitioners could have been rejected.
The petitioners have been found ineligible for Management and therefore, they have been permitted to appear in Economics as per their eligibility.
6.
It is contended by learned Counsel for the petitioners that the UGC has permitted previously similarly situated students for appearing in NET examination in Subject Code 17-Management.
The names of such candidates have been mentioned in para 14 of the petition.
It is contended that this fact has not been denied by the UGC as is apparent from reply to para 14.
It shall be apposite to notice the reply of UGC which reads as under :-  "14.
That in reply to para 14 of the Writ Petition, it is submitted that the set rules/provisions for appearing in NET Exam for candidates was made applicable only from December, 1998.
This mistake might have done due to oversight by Coordination at the Secretary level.
Therefore, these candidates might have appeared in the examination.
Shri Amar Preet Chhina is doing PH.D. in the Department of Management.
It is not disputed case as the research can be done in inter disciplinary subject."
The plea taken is, it must have been due to some mistake or due to over-sight by the Coordination section at the secretarial level.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to seriously controvert the contention of learned Counsel for the petitioners and he has not been able to disclose or put up justifiable mistake stated to have been committed while allowing permission to the candidates mentioned in para 14 of the petition while permitting them to appear in Subject Code 17-Management papers.
7.
It has been further contended by learned Counsel for the respondents that in pursuant to Order dated January 9, 2001, the matter was referred to Committee of experts and that the report has been placed on the court file.
As per the report, it has been categorically opined that the M.B.A. course and M.B.E.
degree are not at all comparable as the programmes contained in both the courses are entirely different and on the basis of course contents, it is not at all justifiable to compare the two courses.
As such, the points raised by the petitioner have not been accepted as valid.
8.
It has been disclosed by learned Counsel for the petitioners who had been permitted to appear in the subject i.e. Code 17-Management paper though the result has not been declared officially but, unofficially it has been leart that only the petitioner No. 2 has passed and the rest have failed.
However, dehors of the above, I am required to determine as to whether a candidate acquiring M.B.E.
course can be allowed to appear in the Subject Code 17-Management paper of his is required to appear in Subject Code 01-Economics.
9.
I have considered rival contentions of learned Counsel for the parties.
I am of the considered opinion that the perusal and comparison of the paper which has been defined as Subject Code 17-Management with the subjects which have been taught in M.B.E.
course brings them around in close proximity, whereas, Subject Code-01 Economics is nowhere near the subjects contained in M.B.E.
course.
Thus, UGC has very correctly granted permission to the candidates previously, whose names have been disclosed in para 14, for appearing in Subject Code 17-Management and not in Master of Business Economics.
It cannot be accepted as justifiable mistake by the respondents.
Perhaps ambiguity did weigh in the minds of the respondents but UGC acted correctly by giving permission.
The correct approach is that the candidates who are situated like petitioners should be allowed to appear in Subject Code 17-Management and not Master of Business Economics.
10.
I have also perused the report submitted by the Committee.
It is strange that instead of comparing the ambit and scope of the papers offered in Management course and M.B.E.
Course, reliance has been placed upon the contents of the courses and the Committee has further opined in respect of the validity of the points raised by the petitioner despite the fact that they are subjudice before this Court.
The report of the committee is absolutely vague and that the purpose for which the indulgence was given by the admitting Bench, has not been explained at all.
The Committee has not been able to examine the aspect as to how and why the earlier students with M.B.E.
course had been allowed to appear in Subject Code 17-Management, the report is not at all tenable and I am afraid, is of no help to this Court for opinion the compatibility of the papers studied by students in Code 17-Management and M.B.E.
Course.
The perusal of the papers shows that excepting one paper, all other papers are common, whereas, the papers spelt out in Master of Business Economics, not even a single paper is common.
On the face of it, opinion of Expert Committee deserves to be ignored and rejected.
11.
Keeping in view the facts of this case, the claim of the petitioners shall be considered in respect of National Education Test in which they had been allowed to appear in Subject Code 17-Management and that result shall be officially declared and the successful candidates/petitioners shall be taken to have passed the National Education Test.
In view of the above discussion, petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.