RL Anand, J - Shri Surender Singh, Head Constable, No. 19/RWR has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying that the order dated 27111999, Annexure P-3, issued by Respondent No. 2, and show cause notice dated 14121999, P-4, issued by respondent No. 3, received by the petitioner on 17121999, be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was selected and appointed in open competition as Constable on 24101979.
He passed B-1 test and was placed in list B-1.
He was deputed to the Lower School Course in October, 1984 and passed the said Course in March, 1985.
The work and conduct of the petitioner was outstanding and he was placed in list "C" on 12.4.1985.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 651990.
On 7101997, the petitioner was on duty at Police Post Jaisinghpur Khera Naka under Police Station Bawal, District Rewari when Joginder Singh son of Kanwal Singh resident of Tohana violated the provisions of the Excise Act by having found in possession of one quarter of liquor.
FIR No. 573 was registered under Section 61114 of the Excise Act at Police Station Bawal.
At the time of his arrest said Joginder Singh, respondent No. 4, threatened the petitioner that since he was the relative of former Chief Minister Mr. Om Parkash Chautala, therefore, the petitioner would face dire consequences.
The threat given by Joginder Singh was recorded in the zimni orders and the case was investigated by the petitioner on 7101997.
The petitioner took Joginder Singh to Civil Hospital, Bawal and the doctor gave the report that Joginder Singh was smelling of alcohol.
Joginder Singh was asked to give bail bond and surety bond but he refused to give.
He was produced before the Judicial Magistrate on 8101997 and was released on bail.
Later on, the petitioner was Charge sheeted in a departmental inquiry on the complaint of Joginder Singh, who made allegations against the petitioner that he was given beating at the time of his arrest.
The petitioner alleges that when Joginder Singh was produced before the Magistrate or doctor, he nowhere stated that he was beaten by the petitioner.
The petitioner specifically alleges that Joginder Singh is the real maternal uncle of Devinder Singh son of Brig.
Karan Singh and said Devinder Singh is married to the daughter of Mr. Om Parkash Chautala, now Chief Minister of Haryana.
On the basis of false complaint of Joginder Singh the petitioner was charge sheeted and the inquiry was entrusted to DSP, Kosli in which 15 witnesses were produced by the prosecution as well as by the defence and after considering all the aspects of the case Shri Baljit Singh, DSP, Kosli exonerated the petitioner of the charge.
The inquiry conducted by Baljit Singh was put up before SP, Rewari, who agreed with the finding of the DSP, Kosli and ordered for the filing of the inquiry on 241999.
Even the challan was presented against Joginder Singh in the Court of Judicial Magistrate and charge was framed against him.
But on account of the change of policy of the Haryana Govt., the excise case was withdrawn against Joginder Singh.
Mr. Om Parkash Chautala appointed Mr. SPS Rathore as DGP, who got a false report from DSP, Kosli and ordered the suspension of the petitioner.
He further ordered the Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon to review the order passed by the SP, Rewari on 241999.
The suspension order was passed on 27111999.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that DGP directed the IGP, Gurgaon to dismiss the petitioner by exercising the powers under Rule 1628 of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred the `Rules') for which a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
The petitioner alleges that the order of suspension is absolutely illegal, and based on mala fide intention and the same should be quashed.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
They filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, they have the power to proceed against the petitioner under Rule 1628.
The IGP, Gurgaon did not agree with the report of the SP, Gurgaon and by exercising the powers under Rule 1628 ordered for further investigation on receipt of complaint from Joginder Singh.
Therefore, the action of the respondent authorities is perfectly legal.
4.
In support of his case the petitioner has placed on record Annexure P-1, the statement of Dr. Chander Shekhar, Annexure P-2, the complaint of Joginder Singh dated 22101997 on the basis of which inquiry was conducted, Annexure P-3, the order vide which the petitioner was placed under suspension, Annexure P-4, the show cause notice issued by IGP, Gurgaon, Annexure P-5, the inquiry report dated 13111999 filed by Shri Karnail Singh Cheema, who exonerated the petitioner from the allegations levelled by Joginder Singh and Annexure P-5, the inquiry report dated 22111999.
It may also be mentioned here that Joginder Singh also filed a criminal complaint against the petitioner on 24101997 which was dismissed by the trial Court on 24.5.1999.
However, Joginder Singh has filed an appeal which is still pending, as informed to this Court.
5.
In rebuttal, the respondents have placed on record photographs Annexure R-1 and also the report dated 22111999 Annexure R-2 = P-6.
6.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Vijay Dahiya, AAG, Haryana on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4, Mr. CL Katyal, Advocate on behalf of respondent No. 5 and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
7.
It is the common case of the parties that earlier a departmental inquiry was conducted on the complaint of Joginder Singh, respondent No. 5, in which he has repeated the same allegations which were the subject matter of the complaint given to DGP.
It is also the admitted case of the parties that in the earlier departmental inquiry Shri Baljit Singh, DSP, Kosli was appointed the Inquiry Officer by the department and he gave the finding in favour of the petitioner and exonerated him from all the allegations.
Also it is not disputed that the Punishing Authority i.e. SP, Gurgaon, concurred with the finding of the Inquiry Officer, who exonerated the petitioner from all the charges.
It is also a fact that respondent No. 5 filed a criminal complaint before the Illaqa Magistrate and in the said complaint the petitioner was discharged and the complaint of respondent No. 5 was dismissed.
Though it is stated at the Bar by the learned counsel for the respondents that against the order of acquittal the appeal is pending, but there is no supporting document to this extent.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that after obtaining second complaint from Joginder Singh by the DGP, the same was marked to IGP, Gurgaon, who was under the influence of the political authorities.
The political authorities and the police authorities were out and out to see that the petitioner should be dismissed from service.
That complaint was again marked for investigation to Mr. Karnail Singh Cheema, who gave the report dated 13111999 vide which the petitioner was again exonerated.
Since the authorities were bent upon in harping the petitioner, then a pressure was exercised upon Mr. Karnail Singh Cheema, who gave one more report dated 22111999 in which the petitioner was indicated.
The counsel for the petitioner submitted that Rule 1628 is not applicable to the facts in hand.
The procedure adopted by the respondent authorities is totally illegal.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondents relied upon Rule 1628 and submits that the Inspector General of Police and Deputy Inspector General of Police have powers to call for the reports of the awards made by their subordinates and then modify and annul the punishment.
They have also powers for further investigation of the matter and they could also depute an officer who could investigate the matter.
9.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondents for the first reason that when the report dated 13111999 had been given, what was the necessity for submission of second report dated 22111999.
In the first report the petitioner was exonerated.
The report of earlier Inquiry Officer was endorsed.
There was hardly any circumstance or ground for calling the second supplementary report dated 22111999.
This action is mala fide on the part of the respondents authorities.
10.
Let us examine the provisions of Rule 1628.
No doubt, the Inspector General of Police and Deputy Inspector of Police have the powers to modify or annul the sentence or decisions of the subordinates but in what manner and at what stage.
This rule clearly envisages that Inspector General of Police or Deputy Inspector General of Police can call for the records of the awards made by their subordinates and confirm, enhance, modify or annul the same or make further investigation or direct such to be made before passing orders.
Meaning thereby that the Inspector General or Deputy Inspector General should have summoned the records of the inquiry report which was filed by the Punishing Authority and after recording the reason of difference could modify, annul or order for further investigation.
It has not been done in the present case in such manner.
Rather, a novel method was adopted.
A fresh complaint was entertained by the Director General of Police and it was marked to Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon, who ordered a fact finding inquiry by marking it to Mr. Karnail Singh Cheema, who gave the report Annexure P-5 dated 13111999.
The report was not acceptable to the Inspector General of Police.
He again referred the matter to Mr. Cheema.
The second report dated 22111999 was called and on the basis of that report order Annexure P-3 was passed clearly indicating that placing the petitioner under suspension has been done in a mala fide manner just to appease Joginder Singh who was admittedly a relation of the Chief Minister.
On the basis of the report dated 22111999 the order of suspension was passed on 28111999 and thereafter notice Annexure P-4 was issued to the petitioner to show cause why he should not be dismissed from services.
This action on the part of the respondent authorities is totally illegal, against the statutory rules and has been passed with a mala fide intention.
In my opinion, the provisions of Rule 1628 though no doubt give powers to the superior officers to disagree with the reports of their subordinate officers, but before invoking these provisions, there must be some basis before them flowing from the evidence recorded by the Inquiry Officer so that the higher officer may record the finding of difference.
But in the present case the matter was entrusted to Mr. Cheema.
The sole object of the Inspector General of Police was to get a favoured report.
Unfortunately, it was not given at the first instance.
But a second report was managed and thereafter the suspension order followed.
All theses chains of facts would show that the impugned orders Annexures P-3 and P-4 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
11.
The learned counsel for the respondents No. 1 to 4 relies upon Ex- Constable Rakesh Kumar v. The State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) RSJ 333 and submits that the word "award" appearing in Rule 1628 includes finality to the proceedings and not restricted to the order of punishment.
There is no dispute with this proposition of law.
I am not challenging the powers of the Inspector-General, Deputy Inspector-General or the Superintendent of Police that they cannot differ with the finding of the Inquiry Officer.
In my view they can differ on the basis of the evidence recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
They have no business to collect the evidence independently so as to make it handle for disagreement with the findings of the Inquiry Officer, especially when those have been affirmed by the Punishing Authority.
The procedure adopted by the respondent authorities is illegal.
It smacks of pressure and motives.
Resultantly, I allow this writ petition, set aside the impugned orders Annexures P-3 and P-4 and give directions to the respondents to take the petitioner on duty forthwith on receipt of the copy of the order and the suspension period of petitioner, if any, shall be considered on duty with all full back wages.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.