RS Mongia, J (Oral)- The petitioner was appearing in the final professional examination of the MBBS held in November-December 1990 by, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar at Government Medical College, Amritsar Centre.
According to the respondent-University, while the petitioner was appearing in surgery paper B examination on 8.12.1990, the Centre Superintendent, Dr. Rajinder Singh Sidhu detected a handwritten paper lying on the seat in front of the petitioner at about 445 pm The examination had started at 2 pm and was to end at 5 pm The Centre Superintendent had sent to the University the following report regarding the alleged use of unfair means by the petitioner :  "When I detected the hand-written paper lying on the seat in front of the candidate, I moved my hand to pick up them.
She said you 'stop it' Bloodly .........' in a threatening manner.
I picked up the paper from there in the presence of Asstt.
Superintendent Surinder K Sharma who was also there with me."
Dr. Surinder Kumar Sharma, Assistant Superintendent had endorsed the report of the Centre Superintendent and had stated that the incident had happened in his presence as reported by the Centre Superintendent.
Alongwith the abovesaid report, the hand-written paper on which signatures of the Centre Superintendent had also been put for authentication, was also forwarded to the University.
2.
The mother of the petitioner Dr. Sita Sharma is working as a Professor of Pharmacology in Medical College, Amritsar.
It is further the case of the University that Shri Kuljit Khurana, Assistant Registrar (Unfair Means Cases) of the University reported that on 27121990 at about 9.45 a.m. Dr. Sita Sharma (mother of the petitioner) alongwith the petitioner came to him with an excuse of making a representation in connection with a case reported against the petitioner regarding the use of unfair means and requested him for some information about the written report sent by the Centre Superintendent.
It has been further stated in the report by Shri Khurana that as a copy of the report is sent to the candidate by the office and there are directions for expeditious settlement of the cases, he sent for the file of the case from the office and read over to the petitioner and her mother the written report of the Centre Superintendent.
It is further mentioned that while the said file was still in his hand on the table, a telephone call came and during the time he was answering the telephone call, Dr. Sita Sharma snatched the file from the table in a split second and she took out the incriminating slip which had been received alongwith the report and put it in her mouth, chewed and swallowed it and in seconds she ran out taking her daughter along.
This incident had taken place at about 1010 A.M. Mrs. Kamlesh Kumari of the unfair Means Cases Branch and Shri Brij Lal of the office of the Controller of Exams.
were also reported to be present.
3.
A show cause notice dated 821991 was issued to the petitioner charging her of the use of unfair means and violation of the provisions of Ordinance 10(a), (g), (k) and (z) read with Ordinance 11 of he Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar Vol. 11, 1986.
This was for the purpose of giving an opportunity to the petitioner to appear and explain her case before the Standing Committee dealing with the unfair means cases on 1521991.
In view of the submissions made by counsel for the petitioner, it is not necessary to further delve into the facts regarding the proceedings before the Standing Committee.
Suffice it to say that after recording of the evidence and giving opportunity to the petitioner, the Standing Committee came to an unanimous conclusion that petitioner was guilty of offences under Ordinance 10(a), (k) and (q) read with Ordnance 11.
She was disqualified from appearing in any examination of the University for a period of two years each for offences under the above said ordinances.
However, the punishment was ordered to un- concurrently.
The order of the Standing Committee dated March 22, 1991 has, been annexed an Annexure P-7 with this writ petition.
In view of the order Annexure P-7 a notification (annexure P-6) was issued by the Guru Nanak Dev University on 28.3.1991/3.4.1991 disqualifying the petitioner in terms of the order Annexure P-7.
The notification Annexure P-6 and the order of the Standing Committee Annexure P-7 have been impugned by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
4.
As a matter of fact, it may be observed here that a Division Bench of this Court on April 18, 1991 had dismissed the writ petition in limine by passing the following order :  5.
"No ground to interfere has been made out.
Dismissed."
The petitioner took the matter to the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court remanded the case to this Court by passing the following order on December 9, 1991 :  "Special leave is granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
We are of the view that High Court was in error in not issuing notice to the respondents to clarify the position.
Apart from that the High Court has not given any reason for arriving at its conclusion to dismiss the writ petition of the petitioner in limine.
We are of the view that the matter is such in which the High Court might have to go deeper into it.
Accordingly we allow this appeal, set aside the order of the High Court and request it to admit the writ petition and decide it on merit in accordance with law.
The respondent have the liberty to file their counter in the High Court.
Since the matter requires prompt attention, we expect that the High Court disposes it of within a period of two months.
Interim order, if any, maybe sought by the parties from the High Court."
The Ordinances under which the Petitioner as held guilty by the Standing Committee, may be reproduced at this stage :  "10.
The use of unfair means in, or in relation to, the examination shall include the following acts or omissions on the part of the candidate, viz :  (a) being in possession, in the examination hall, of papers books, notes, or writing on any part of the candidate's clothes or any writing on his body or table or desk or on foot-rule and/or instruments like setsequares, protractors, slide rules or any other material with notes or hints written thereon, which may be, or intended to be, of possible help to the candidate in the examination; x x x x x x x  (k) swallowing or attempting to swallow a note or paper or running away with it or causing its disappearance or destroying it in any manner : x x x x x x  (q) (i) misbehaving towards the Superintendent or any other member of the supervisory staff or any member of the inspection team or the flying squad, or with another candidate inside the examination hall or outside, before, during or after the examination; or (ii) creating disturbance in the examination hall or in its vicinity; or (iii) organizing a walk out or instigating others to walk out; or misconducting oneself in any manner in or outside the examination hall; or (iv) disturbing or disrupting the examination in any manner whatsoever; or (v) carrying into the examination hall fire-arms or any other weapon; x x x x x x x  111 A candidate found guilty of committing any one or more of the offences under Ordinance 10 (Supra) shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination of the University for the period specified as under :  x x x x x x  (b) For offences under clauses (a), (d), (e) (g), (h), (j) (k), (m), (w) and (y).
Disqualification for a period of not less than two years.
(f) For offences under clause (q).
Disqualification for a period that may extend to five years, but be not less than two years."
x x x x x x  6.
Mr. Sibal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner has not urged anything to challenge the order of the Standing Committee, Annexure P-7 on merits.
He, however, has submitted that even if the offences as alleged are taken to be proved against the petitioner, the punishment is too harsh and excessive.
He submitted that petitioner had a brilliant academic career and if the allegations are taken to be proved, it was really the mother of the petitioner who might in her anxiety to save her daughter had done what is alleged against the petitioner.
He drew my attention to averments in para 3 of the petition to highlight that in ICSE examination, petitioner had got 85% marks, in pre-Medical, she had secured 8275% marks, in Pre-Medical, 8369% marks and she had attained 150th Position the P.M.T.
Examination.
Out of 4000 candidates who had appeared in the examination in the year 1986.
In the first professional and second professional MBBS Examinations held by the University in the years 1988 and 1989, she had secured 7346% and 7266% marks respectively.
He further argued that the stigma of having been punished by the University for using unfair means during the examination would ways remain attached to the petitioner and taking all these facts into consideration, the learned counsel submitted that the punishment should be reduced by this Court.
For this submission, he relied upon two Single Bench judgment of this Court reported as Mohinder Lal Jain v. The Vice Chancellor, Panjab University, 1966 P.L.R.
735 and Shinder Singh v. The Guru Nanak University, Amritsar, 1975 P.L.R.
659.
Mohinder Lal Jain's case (supra) was a case from Panjab University wherein in the particular regulation it was provided that for committing an offence of unfair means of a particular type the candidate shall be disqualified for a particular number of years.
While dealing with this aspect as to whether any lesser punishment could be given the learned Judge held that "the mere use of word 'Shall' in regulation 12(b) does not prevent the University in using its discretion to give lesser punishment if it otherwise chose to do so.
`Shall' in the context in which the word is used in the regulation really means `may' and a discretion vests in the University to reduce the punishment if the authorities think fit," in para 19 of the judgment given in Mohinder Lal Jain's case (supra) it was observed as under :  "It is a matter of regret that Regulation 12(b) does not prima facie appear to leave any discretion in the University authorities as to the quantum of punishment in a case like this, where the career of candidate had been brilliant and for reasons which are difficult to guess he somehow seems to have scooped down in some weaker moment to the alleged unfair means adopted by him, surely some lesser punishment should be deemed to be adequate.
The word "shall" in Regulation 12(b) has been interpreted by the University to restrict its power as to the quantum of punishment the university can inflict.
The mere use of the word 'shall' should not have prevented the university in using its discretion to give lesser punishment if it otherwise chose to do so.
"Shall" in the context in which the word is used in Regulation 12(b) quoted above really means 'may', and a discretion vests in the University to reduce the punishment inflicted on the petitioner if the University authorities otherwise think it a fit case for adopting that course."
Shinder Singh's case (supra) pertains to Guru Nanak Dev University.
In the Ordinances of the Nanak Dev University, which are under consideration in the present case as also in Shinder Singh's case provided that the punishment shall not be less than a particular number of years.
While dealing with the aspect of quantum of punishment, the learned judge in Shinder Singh's case while relying on Mohinder Lal Jain is case observed as under :-  "However, the punishment imposed on the petitioner seems to be quite excessive as he has been disqualified from taking any examination for four years and this would mean that in the whole educational career is blocked.
This should not be the intention of the punishing regulation.
The modern trend, even in the case of criminals, is that an attempt has to be made for reforming the guilty person instead of condemning him.
If the person remains disqualified for four years, he is condemned for ever and out of frustration, when he knows that his educational career is finished, he may resort to any other crime of serious nature.
I am of the view that lesser punishment shall meet the ends of justice in this case.
The learned counsel for the University states that four years disqualification is the minimum under the regulations and lesser punishment cannot be awarded.
In this connection ..... learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on Mohinder Lal Jain v. The Vice-Chancellor, Panjab University.
This is a case relating to the Panjab University.
Relevant regulation of the Panjab University is similar to that to the Guru Nanak University and a similar argument was advanced that lesser punishment cannot be awarded as in regulation, the word 'shall' is there and it is observed, while interpreting regulation 12(b) of the Panjab University Calendar, by RS Narula, J as he then was, that the word 'shall' in regulation 12(b) has been interpreted by the University to restrict its powers as to the quantum of punishment the University can inflict and the mere use of `shall' should not have prevented the University in using its discretion in giving lesser punishment, if it otherwise chose to do.
The word 'shall' in the context in which it has been used in regulation 12(b) really means may and a discretion vests in the University to reduce the punishment inflicted on the petitioner if the University authorities otherwise think it a fit case for adopting that Course.
So the word 'shall' used in regulation 12(b) of the Panjab University Calendar has been interpreted as 'may' and it is held that the University authorities have the discretion to reduce the quantum of punishment if they so desire.
In the instant case, the word 'shall' has been used in Ordinance 5(a) of Guru Nanak University Calendar, 1973 and in view of the above authority shall here also mean 'may' and the University authorities have the discretion to reduce the punishment inflicted on the petitioner in order to meet the ends of justice."
7.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the University, however, submitted that there is no discretion with the University under the Ordinances referred to above to give any lesser punishment as the wording of the Ordinances is that "not less than" the particular number of years of disqualification shall be awarded to the candidate found guilty.
He further submitted that in any case, this Court under Article 226 cannot interfere in the quantum and at the most, the matter can be referred back to the University for reconsideration regarding the quantum of punishment.
8.
As the learned counsel for the petitioner has not challenged the impugned order on merits, the findings regarding in the factum of the petitioner being guilty of the alleged offences under the University or ordinances are hereby, upheld.
However, in view of the authorities referred to above, I am of the opinion that the University has the discretion to give lesser punishment if a case is made out, I agree with the learned counsel for the respondents that if the Court thinks that the punishment is prima facie excessive then the matter should the remitted back to the concerned authorities for reconsideration regarding the quantum of punishment.
I am of the view that considering the facts that petitioner had a brilliant academic career, that her mother had played a role to make the offence look a glaring and enlarged one and further that there is no evidence on the record that the petitioner had in fact really made use of the alleged incriminating material and further that in view of the fact that the guilt of the petitioner is being upheld and the plot of having used unfair means in a examination would always remain attached to the petitioner for the rest of her life, the punishment under the circumstances is too excessive.
Normally, under these circumstances, the case should be remitted back to the University authorities to reconsider the matter regarding the quantum of punishment.
However, in the peculiar facts of this case that if the case is remanded back to the University for reconsideration, then the punishment of two years which has been imposed on the petitioner would almost come to an end and the question of the University's reconsiderating the matter regarding the quantum of punishment may not then arise at all.
In these circumstances, I am of view that ends of justice would be met if the disqualification of the petitioner is reduced to about one and a half years and she is asked to reappear is surgery Paper B of the MBBS final professional examination in which she was caught using unfair means in the ensuring examination and her result is declared after taking into consideration the marks obtained by her in the other five papers of the second professional MBBS examination which she took in November/December, 1990 alongwith the marks in Surgery paper B which she may take in the ensuing examination.
The writ petition is dismissed subject to the observation/directions made above regarding the quantum of punishment.
There will be no order as to costs.