Monoranjan Mallick, J - The National Projects Construction Corporation Ltd Workers Union of India and two (of) its members have filed this writ petition praying for a writ of mandamus directing the Respondents to sanction, release and pay interim relief to their workmen-employees in terms of the Government Order/Notification dated 891987 and Office Memorandum dated 541988.
2.
The petitioners state as follows :  In terms of Bureau of Public Enterprises Memorandum dated 8th September, 1987 the workers/employees of Respondent Corporation are entitled to get the interim relief in terms of the said memorandum.
But in spite of the fact that the said Memorandum is squarely applicable to and binding upon the Management of the Respondent-Corporation they wilfully refused to pay in terms of the said memorandum of the Bureau of Public Enterprises.
The employees of the public sector enterprises including the employees of the Respondent No. 1 raised demand for payment of interim relief as no ad hoc relief was granted to them as was given to the Executives and Supervisors employed in different public sector enterprises on the basis of an earlier similar notification issued by the Bureau of Public Enterprises, Government of India being dated 141987.
After considering the said demand for the interim relief made by the non-executive employees of the Public Sector Enterprises and holding several discussions and meetings with the representatives of the Trade Unions representing the said employees the Government of India through the Bureau of Public Enterprises issued the Notification dated 891987 authorising the management of all the Public Sector Enterprises for sanction and payment of interim relief to their non-executive employees as they have already done with respect to their executives with effect from 111986 at the rate mentioned in the said notification which is Rs. 100/- per month in respect of those employees drawing basic pay up to Rs. 700/- per month and interim relief at the rate of Rs. 120/- per month in case of employees drawing above Rs. 700/- up to Rs. 1000/-.
3.
Even though the Management of the Respondent-Corporation was and is authorised as a public sector enterprise to sanction and pay the said interim relief to the employees of the said Corporation but has not honoured or implemented the said notification.
Hence this writ petition.
The Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 contest the writ petition by filing an affidavit-in-position.
4.
The Respondents contend that the writ petition is not maintainable in the Original Side of High Court and is barred by Rules 4 and 7 of the Rules of High Court at Calcutta relating to Application under Article 226 of the Constitution.
5.
They also challenge the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the Respondent Corporation is not a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, that it is a Body incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 having no statutory character nor has any obligation to perform public duty nor any such duty of statutory nature is imposed on it by law or by statute in the matter of employment of its staff and writ of Mandamus or any other writ would issue for enforcement of the said contract of service and the contract of service is purely contractual and does not have any legal character.
6.
The Respondents contend that the circular issued by the Bureau of Public Enterprise has no binding effect on any Government company and unless and until the same is adopted by the company the same cannot be imposed upon the company.
They also contend that the circular of the Bureau of Public Enterprises dated 891987 has no manner of applicability to the facts and circumstances of the present case inasmuch as the period of validity of the wage settlement dated 14101983 has not expired and as per Section 19(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 the settlement has to be terminated with reference to a particular date since the settlement dated 14101983 is still in existence and has not been terminated as yet, there does not appear to be any question of the applicability of the above circular of the Bureau of Public Enterprise to the workers of this Respondent No. 1.
They, therefore, submit that the writ petition being not maintainable is liable to be dismissed.
7.
The petitioners in their affidavit-in-reply have refuted all the above contentions of the Respondents.
8.
As regards the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that under Rules 4 and 7 of the High Court Rules in respect of Applications under Art. 226 of the Constitution this writ petition is to be filed in the appellate side, I am of the view that it is true that none of the Respondents have their office within the jurisdiction of Original Side of High Court and the writ petition should not have been entertained in the Original Side of High Court.
But when the writ petition has already been entertained and directions for affidavits have been issued, then when the High Court in its Original Side does not lack inherent jurisdiction under Art. 226 of the Constitution as some of the Respondents have transferred their office within the State of West Bengal.
I am not inclined to return back the writ petition to its Appellate Side for disposal.
9.
The next contention of the Respondents regarding maintainability is that it is not a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
10.
The Respondents contend that even though the Respondent-Corporation is a Government Company and the Central Government and State Government hold and control all the shares of the company but they exercise limited control over the management of the said Corporation and day-to-day management of the said Corporation is vested in the Board of Directors of the Corporation who perform their functions according to the Companies Act and the Memorandum and Article of Association.
It is also contended that the Respondent-Corporation does not carry on any State protected monopoly business or any public functions related to the Government and thus it does not come within the meaning of State or other authority of Art. 12 of the Constitution.
The writ petitioners, on the contrary, submit that the Respondent-Corporation is an instrumentality of the State, that it is wholly owned by the Central and State Government, that the Board of Management is nominated by the President of India and the President has the authority to issue necessary directions upon the Board which the Board of Management is bound to carry on and that there is therefore complete State control in the affairs of the Corporation and even though it is government Company within the meaning of the Companies Act it is very much an instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
11.
The Supreme Court in Ajoy Hasia's case reported in AIR 1981 SC 487 reviewing all the earlier decisions has laid down certain tests to determine as to whether a Corporation created by State under the Statute is an instrumentality of the State or not.
12.
It has been clearly pointed out in that decision that a Corporation may be a statutory Corporation, or a government company or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act but whatever be its genetical origin it would be an authority within the meaning of Art. 12 of the Constitution if it is an instrumentality or agency of the State and that would have to be decided on the proper assessment of the facts in the light of the relevant factors.
13.
According to that decision the absolute State control in Management and Finance is one of the tests in support of the view, that the corporation is an instrumentality of the State.
In C.I.W.T.C.
Ltd. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, AIR 1986 SC 1517 : 1986 Lab IC 1312 the Supreme Court has also held the C.I.W.T.C.
Ltd. even though a Government company to be a State as it is a company owned by the Central and State Governments and the Board of Management is nominated by the President and the Board has to obey all the Directions of the President and is thus under the full control of the State.
The case of the present petitioner is exactly similar and, therefore, I am of the view that the Respondent No. 1 is an instrumentality of the State.
14.
On behalf of the Respondents, the decision of a learned single judge of Calcutta High Court reported in (1988) 1 Cal FIN 475 (Anupam Ghosh v. Union of India) has been cited in which the learned Judge has held that Andrew Yule & Company is not instrumentality of State but is merely a government company within the meaning of Companies Act.
But in the case of Andrew Yule & Company the Government owns only majority shares and is not wholly owned by the Central and State Governments.
Therefore the facts of the above case are entirely different from those of the present case.
On the contrary, the facts of this case, are similar to that of the Supreme Court decision in AIR 1986 SC 1517 : 1986 Lab IC 1312.
15.
In that view, I am unable to hold that the Corporation is not an instrumentality of the State.
It comes within the purview of other authority under Art. 12 of the Constitution.
16.
The writ petitioners have alleged that even though the Respondent Corporation has implemented the Bureau of Public Enterprises Memorandum dated 141987 in respect of its executives, but has illegally refused to implement the Memorandum of the said Bureau of Public Enterprises dated 891987 to extend the benefit of interim relief to the workers.
17.
On the contrary the case of the Respondents is that the Respondent No. 1 was justified in not implementing the said Memorandum so far as the workers are concerned because the wage settlement entered into by the Workers Unions and the Management of the Respondent No. 1 dated 14101983 is still in force and has not been terminated and in view of the conditions of the Circular dated 891987 the Respondent No. 1 has no obligation to implement the said Circular when wage settlement is in force and the said circular cannot be automatically binding upon the Respondent No. 1 until and unless the Board of Management of the Respondent No. 1 adopts it and the Board of Management has the sufficient justification for not adopting the said Circular.
18.
I have no doubt in may mind that the Circular dated 891987 of the Bureau of Public Enterprises does not automatically bind the Respondent No. 1 and the Board of Management has to adopt it to implement the same so that the workers of the Respondent No. 1 can get the interim relief provided in that Circular.
But I am also of the view that the Respondent No. 1 cannot illegally and arbitrarily refuse to implement it.
It is also a fact that other sister corporation namely, National Project Construction Corporation Ltd doing the similar nature of job has (sic) adopted it.
On behalf of the petitioners xerox copy of the judgment of Ajit Kumar Sengupta, J dated 17121987 in writ petition filed by Burn ISW Employees Union against the Burn Standard Companies has been placed for perusal.
From the same it is gathered that the learned Judge has also issued mandate upon the Burn Standard Companies to implement the Memorandum dated 891987.
19.
On carefully perusing the said judgment I find that the learned Advocate for the Respondent-Company in that case conceded that the workers were entitled to get the interim relief but prayed for modifications of the said Circular in the light of another Circular of the Bureau of Public Enterprises.
The learned Judge, however, directed the implementation of that Circular in full on the ground that the said interim relief is subject to adjustment when the fresh wage settlement is to be entered into between the Workers Union and the Management.
20.
In this case the Respondents' case is that the workers are not entitled to the interim relief as the wage settlement dated 1410-1983 is still in force and the relevant circular dated 891987 is not applicable when the wage settlement entered into between workers union and the management are still in force.
21.
In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties the copy of the circular dated 891987 is reproduced below :  "No. 2 (30)/87-BPE(WC) Government of India  Ministry of Industry  Bureau of Public Enterprises  14, CGO Complex, Lodi Road,  New Delhi - 110003.
8th September, 1987  Sub : Grant of interim relief to employees governed by wage settlements in public sector enterprises on Industrial Dearness Allowance.
The employees in public sector enterprises on Industrial pattern governed by wage settlements have raised a demand for payment of interim relief consequent to the sanction of ad hoc relief to executives in BPE's OM2(50)/86-BPE(WC), dated 1487.
After careful examination of the demand Government have decided to authorise managements of public sector enterprises of Industrial DA to sanction interim relief w.e.f.
1186 in enterprises where the period of validity of wage settlements has expired or is to expire shortly.
Interim relief will be paid at the rate of Rs. 100/- per month in respect of those drawing a basic pay up to Rs. 700/-.
For those drawing basic pay between Rs. 701 and Rs. 1000, interim relief will be paid at the rate of Rs. 120/- per month.
For those drawing basic pay above Rs. 1000/- the rates of interim relief payable per month will be the same, slabwise, as notified for executives.
2 The relief given is purely interim in nature and is to be absorbed in wage settlements being negotiated under the wage policy and guidelines issued in this regard.
The interim relief should be taken into account when observing the guidelines already laid down for wage settlements.
Wage settlements where they are already due or are due shortly should be finalised immediately and well in time.
3.
As the interim relief is to be absorbed in the wage settlement to be finalised it would not count for any other purpose.
4.
The interim relief will not be payable in public sector enterprises where settlements have already been finalised at levels beyond the guidelines issued in January, 1987 or those governed by Tripartite Engineering Settlement in West Bengal or in enterprises where wages agreements are finalised on the recommendation of Wage Boards as in the case of cement, jute and textile units.
5.
The modalities of payment of interim relief should be finalised by the concerned managements of public sector enterprises at the unit level.
6.
Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Steels & Mines etc. are requested to bring the contents of this OM to the notice of all the managements of public sector enterprises under their administrative control for necessary action.
Department of Public Enterprises may be consulted for any clarifications on the decision to pay the interim relief.
Sd/  (AK Roychowdhury) Joint Adviser (Finance)"  22.
From the same it is clear that the Bureau of Public Enterprises instructed the public sector undertakings to grant the interim relief to the workers in case the wage settlement is not in force or is about to expire shortly.
23.
The wage settlement dated 14101983 has been annexed with the writ petition.
There is nothing in that settlement to indicate as to how long it would remain in force.
In such a case in view of Section 19(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act it remains in force for a period of six months from the date on which the Memorandum of Settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute and shall continue to be binding after the expiry of the said period until the expiry of the period of two months from the date on which a notice in writing of intention to terminate the settlement is given by any one party to the other party or parties to the settlement.
The petitioners have submitted that the petitioner union has submitted a Charter of Demands and that shows that the wage settlement has been terminated.
But the petitioners have failed to prove anything to show that the wage settlement dated 14101983 has been terminated by the petitioner No. 1 by issuing a notice in terms of Section 19(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In that view of the matter I am of the view that there was sufficient justification for the Respondent No. 1 not to implement the circular dated 891987.
The wage settlement dated 14101983 has not been validly terminated and is therefore continuing in force and the workers are enjoying the wage benefits under such settlement.
In that view the circular dated 891987 is not required to be implemented by the Respondent No. 1 and the Respondent No. 1 did not commit any illegality in not implementing it.
The petitioners can enter into fresh wage settlement and to get higher benefits.
The interim relief is to be given to the workers where the validity of wage settlement has expired or is about to expire and the said relief is to be adjusted with the wage increase agreed upon at such future settlement.
When the wage settlement dated 14101983 is still in force the circular dated 891987 of the Bureau of Public Enterprises is not applicable to the workers of the Respondent No. 1 whose wages and other benefits are still governed by the wage settlement dated 14101983.
24.
In the result, the writ petition fails and is therefore dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.