RC Gandhi, J - This Letters Patent Appeal is directed against an order dated 30.1.1999 passed in S.W.P.
No. 2273/98 whereby the learned Single Judge has disposed of the petition directing the respondents to take steps to fill up the posts of Agriculture Extension Officer substantively.
2.
A few facts necessary for disposal of the appeal are : that the appellants, Junior Agriculture Assistants in the Agriculture Department, were put as incharge of the posts of Agriculture Extension Officer (AEO) on stop gap basis vide order dated 19121995 issued by the respondent-State.
This order was kept in abeyance on 26121995.
The appellants approached the learned Single Judge seeking their continuation as Incharge AEOs.
The learned Single Judge vide order under appeal disposed of the writ petition observing that the policy of working ad hoc appointments has been deprecated by the Apex court and accordingly issued directions for filing up the posts substantively, maintaining the impugned order dated 26121995.
3.
The appellants have challenged the order of the learned Single Judge on the ground that the same amounts to ousting the appellants without providing them an opportunity of being heard and that many other persons are still working in the stop gap arrangement in the department and the appellants have been discriminated.
The order dated 2121995 keeping in abeyance the earlier order dated 19121995, has been passed by the Government without hearing them.
4.
We have heard learned Counsel for the appellants, perused the order under appeal and other record.
5.
Stop gap arrangement to a higher post does not vest any right in a public servant to hold the post continuously.
Incharge, stop gap or ad hoc appointment can be made by the respondents keeping in view the provisions contained in Rule 14 of the J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, which reads thus :  "Temporary appointments :- (1) Where it is necessary in the public interest owing to an emergency which has arisen and could not have been foreseen, to fill immediately a vacancy in a post borne on the cadre of service, class or category and the making of an appointment to such vacancy in accordance with these rules would involve undue delay, excessive expenditure or administrative inconvenience, the appointing authority may appoint a person otherwise than in accordance with these rules temporarily with the prior approval of the Chief Minister in co-ordination until a person is appointed in accordance with these rules but such temporary appointment shall in no case exceed three months on each occasion and not more than nine months in all.
xx xx xx xx" The stop gap arrangement wherein the appellants were asked to hold the post of AEOs, was made by an order dated 19121995, cannot be continued in any circumstance beyond 9 months.
The order itself has outlived its life and is not capable of remaining in operation.
It is not in dispute that the stop gap arrangement or ad hoc appointment does not vest any preferential right for promotion in a public servant occupying the office of a higher post in that capacity.
Notwithstanding that it equally applies to the holder of the post in such capacity that he has no right to continue unless his service conditions or fundamental rights in terms of Article 16 of the Constitution, are infringed or violated.
The order dated 19121995 has outlived its life by efflux of time in relevance to the provisions of Rule 14 (supra), therefore, the relief prayed for protecting such capacity of the appellants to work against the posts on stop gap arrangement cannot be protected.
6.
The next argument of Mr. Nayyar, learned Counsel for the appellants is that the appellants have not been heard by the respondents Judge and have been condemned unheard.
The argument, though appealing, is not capable of warranting any interference in the order under appeal.
The appellants before us, could not improve their case for continuation in stop gap arrangement.
However, in any case, the order dated 19121995 could be operative only for 9 months in view of the mandate of Rule 14 (supra).
Thereafter the appellants have no legal right to continue against the post unless they are supported by valid orders issued by the respondents for their continuation.
The Supreme Court in case State of UP and another v. Ram Krishna and another, 1999(4) SCT 267 (SC) : JT 1999(6) SC 391, has held :-  "It was not a regular appointment on a clear vacancy, but it was a temporary appointment for a period of three months and was made conditional upon his showing progress during that period.
This appointment was to take effect from 191979 as respondent was working from that date as Tube Well Operator.
In the second order of termination dated 2921980 it was recorded that having made no improvement in work as being irresponsible the services of the respondent were not needed in the department and, therefore, terminated with immediate effect.
The impugned order was an order of termination simpliciter of a temporary government servant namely the respondent, therefore, the provisions of Article 311 would not be attracted."
The Apex Court while dealing with stop gap arrangements has held in case Ramakant Shripad Sinai Advalpalkar v. Union of India, 1993(3) SCT 586 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1145 as under :-  "The third contention is that appellant's `in charge' arrangement in the higher post had continued for so long a period that a determination of equivalence on the basis of his lower substantive post would become arbitrary.
This contention ignores the fact that an `in charge' arrangement is not a recognition of or is necessarily based on seniority and that, therefore, no rights, equities or expectations could be built upon it......" The last plea of Mr. Nayyar is that many other persons similarly situated are working against the higher posts and the appellants have been discriminated.
The concept of equality and discrimination is positive in terms of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and not negative.
7.
The ad hoc arrangement has been made by the respondents against a gazetted post and cannot be continued in any eventuality in law beyond six months without the consultation of the Public Service Commission.
Such an arrangement can be made by the respondents without consulting the PSC for six months and cannot be continued beyond that period.
This proposition of law is evident from sub-rule (d) of Rule 4 of the J&K Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1957, which is extracted below :-  "4.
It shall not be necessary for the Commission to be consulted - xx xx xx xx (d) on the suitability of candidates for - (i) appointment to a permanent post of a person temporarily for a period not exceeding six months, if owing to any emergency having arisen, it is necessary in the public interest to fill the vacancy immediately and there is likely to be undue delay in making the appointment after consultation with the Commission; (ii) officiating promotions or transfers to any service or post, when at the time of making the promotion or transfer there is reason to suppose that the officiating promotion or transfer will be for not more than six months; xx xx xx xx" If factually the plea of Mr. Nayyar is correct, said AEOs holding the posts on ad hoc/stop gap basis are being continued in violation of the aforesaid position of law, in that event, the respondents shall review the cases of all such persons and take a decision thereon in terms of the rules for making ad hoc or stop gap arrangements within six weeks.
We do not find any ground to interfere with the judgment under appeal.
Consequently, the appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.