Ashim Kumar Banerjee, J - The writ petitioner was exonerated from all the charges by the enquiring officer by his report dated December 12, 1991.
By a letter dated July 1, 1992 the writ petitioner was asked by the Divisional Security Commissioner, R.P.F.
South Eastern Railway, Kharagpur to submit a reply within 10 (ten) days.
On the basis of the order of the disciplinary authority passed on June 26, 1992 wherein it appears that the disciplinary authority has disagreed with the opinion of the Inquiry Officer.
It appears from the said order of the disciplinary authority that a notice was directed to be issued to the writ petitioner asking him to submit any representation against the proposed punishment.
Learned Advocate, appearing for the writ petitioner submits that since the enquiry officer has exonerated the writ petitioner from all charges, the disciplinary authority, without affording adequate opportunity to the writ petitioner of hearing and without recording his tentative finding, while disagreeing with the enquiry officer, is not entitled to pre-judge the issue and direct the writ petitioner to submit reply on the basis of the proposed punishment.
In support of his contention reliance has been placed on the Apex Court decision reported in Punjab National Bank v. Kunj Behari Misra, 1998(3) SCT 833 (SC) : 1998(2) LLJ 809 (SC).
The Apex Court in the said case was of the view that the principles of natural justice would demand that the authority which proposes to decide against the delinquent must give him a hearing.
When the inquiring officer holds the charges to be proved then that report has to be given to the delinquent officer who can make a representation before the disciplinary authority takes further action which may be prejudicial to the delinquent officer.
When, like in the present case, the inquiry report is in favour of the delinquent officer but the disciplinary authority-proposes to differ with such conclusions then that authority which is deciding against the delinquent officer must give him an opportunity of being heard otherwise he would be condemned unheard in departmental proceedings what is of ultimate importance is the finding of the disciplinary authority.
2.
Learned Advocate, appearing for the respondent-authority, however, submits that the opportunity has been afforded to the writ petitioner by giving him opportunity to reply to the order and to submit representation on the basis of the order of disciplinary authority appearing at Page 53 of the Writ Petition.
With due respect to learned Advocate appearing for the respondents, I feel that the opportunity has been given to the writ petitioner by the said order appearing at Page 53 only against the proposed punishment, no opportunity was given to the writ petitioner before the disciplinary authority arrives at a conclusion that the writ petitioner has been found guilty according to him.
3.
Hence the writ petition succeeds.
Order appearing at Page 53 is quashed and set aside.
This order will, however, not preclude the respondent- authority to take step in accordance with law and in terms of the observation made by the Apex Court in the case of Punjab National Bank (supra).
Writ petition allowed.