Satya Brata Sinha, J - This application is directed against the judgment and order dated 16.9.1998 passed by the West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal in T.A.
No. 125 of 1996 whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioner herein was dismissed.
The petitioner has filed a writ application before this Court which was marked as C.O.
No. 14280(W) of 1989 wherein he had prayed for the following reliefs :  "(a) Writ of mandamus commanding the respondents, their agents and servants to treat the petitioner belonging to West Bengal Subordinate Engineering Service/West Bengal Subordinate Service in Agricultural Engineer (Agri.
Mech) with effect from 141965 and to confer the Grade-I Scale of S.AE with effect from 141981 and to promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Engineer in the cadre of West Bengal Service in Agricultural Engineer (Agri- Mech) with effect from 1941982.
(b) Writ of Mandamus commanding the respondents to declare the petitioner to be entitled to be considered as S.AE and AE in West Bengal Service of Agricultural Engineers by giving all seniority, benefit of service from the date of joining the petitioner on 141965 and further commanding the respondents to provide and absorb the petitioner in the cadre even by creating supernumerary post of S.AE and AE so far the petitioner is concerned together with all service benefits with effect from 141965 and 1941982 respectively."
Having regard to the nature of the order proposed to be passed, it is not necessary to state the facts of the matter in a great details.
2.
The main contention of the petitioner is that the persons similarly situated having been directed to be belonging to the West Bengal Subordinate Engineering Service/West Bengal Subordinate Service in Agricultural Engineer (Agri-Mech) he also be treated similarly with effect from 141965 and be granted the senior scale of pay.
The petitioner has contended that this Court in CR No. 4981(W) of 1982 has held that the draftsmen be given the same benefit granted to the Sub-Assistant Engineer.
3.
In the said judgment undoubtedly the draftsmen were found to be included under the West Bengal Subordinate Service under ROPA Rules, 1961 and also under ROPA Rules, 1981 but allegedly had been excluded under the ROPA Rules, 1981.
While making observation on such exclusion, it has been observed that "it is up to the Government to keep any post under any service and it is not for the Court to judge the necessity or otherwise on such occasion."
4.
The learned Tribunal however proceeded on the basis that the recommendation of the Pay Revision Committee has a limited effect whereas the matter relating to framing of Recruitment Rules is within the exclusive domain of the Government.
It has been noticed :  "The Recruitment Rules of West Bengal Subordinate Agri-Engineers framed under No. 4260-Estt/10.1.1977 dated 2151980 of the Department of Agriculture indicate that there are two wings viz. Civil Wing and Mechanical Wing and for being selected in the Mechanical Wing, the essential qualification is required to be a Diploma in Mechanical Engineering or any equivalent Diploma with one year practical training.
The petitioner is not having any Diploma and as such, he cannot come under the purview of the West Bengal Subordinate Engineering Service.
The petitioner is also silent as regard to duration of training for obtaining National Trade Certificate."
5.
Probably before the learned Tribunal the notification of the Central Government dated 3151968 whereby and whereunder the National Trade Certificate was directed to be held as equivalent to Diploma had not been brought to its notice.
It may be noticed that the recommendation had been made in favour of the petitioner wherein it was stated :  "Sri Mitra joined as Mech.
Draughtsman on 141965 at EE (M) Western Divn.
Bankura.
He belongs is to a cadre of WB Subordinate Engg.
Service vide page No. 348 of GO No. 5472-F dated 27.12.1961 and page No. 313 of GO No. 5212-F dated 31.12.1970.
He belongs to a cadre of Subordinate Service of Agricultural Engineer within the meaning of recruitment rule 2(b) Civil/Mechanical Wing under Notification No. 4260 dated 2151980 of the Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of West Bengal, Deptt.
of Agriculture."
6.
It further appears that the essential qualification laid down in the Recruitment Rules for West Bengal Subordinate Service of Agricultural Engineers in Mechanical Wing is licentiate in Civil Engineering Diploma or any equivalent Diploma.
The petitioner in the writ application had categorically stated that in terms of the notification dated 2151980 as contained in annexure "H" to the writ application be being in service from 141965 in the equivalent post of Sub-Assistant Engineer should have been considered for promotion being eligible therefore to the post of Assistant Engineer within the meaning of the provision of the West Bengal Service (RUPA) Rules, 1970 as also 1980.
7.
Having considered the matter, we are of the opinion that as the learned Tribunal has not considered the aforementioned question which was relevant for the purpose of the determination of the issues raised before the learned Tribunal in the light of the relief prayed for by him, the matter be considered afresh by the Tribunal.
8.
For the reasons aforementioned, this application is allowed and the impugned judgment and order dated 16.9.1998 passed by the learned Tribunal are set aside.
The matter is remitted back for consideration of the matter afresh.
9.
Having regard to the fact that the matter is pending for a long time, we would request the learned Tribunal to consider the desirability of disposing of the matter as early as possible and preferably within a period of 3 months from the date of communication of this order.
Urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied on priority basis.
Orders accordingly.