Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) is a premier service in the State.
It is the goal of every one.
In the year 1990, the Haryana Govt. decided to fill up 21 posts in the service by Special Recruitment.
A large number of persons participated in the race.
Those, who were eliminated in the preliminary heat(s) or were unable to reach the final stage of consideration by the Haryana Public Service Commission, have approached this Court through this bunch of 13 writ petition Nos. 10948 of 1990, 664, 894, 999, 1011, 1129, 1200, 1201, 1221, 1246, 1269, 1560 and 1610 of 1991 which were placed before the Division Bench for hearing.
The issues raised are partly legal and partly factual.
2.
It is necessary to make a reference to the sequence of events.
In the year 1990, it was felt that a number of posts in the Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) (for short 'the Service') were lying vacant.
Various non-H.C.S.
officers were being appointed against the posts meant for the H.C.S.
officers.
Arrangements were being made by giving additional charge to the officers.
Certain posts were even otherwise lying vacant.
The strength of the H.C.S.
officers was likely to be further reduced by retirement as also by promotion of certain officers to the IAS cadre.
Certain vacancies of the year 1985 and 1989 had also not been filled up due to pendency of court cases or postponement of examination etc. As a result it was proposed that 21 posts in the service be taken out of the purview of the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission') and be filled up by Special Recruitment as envisaged under the proviso to Rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 (for short 'the Rules').
A proposal in this behalf was placed before the Cabinet after obtaining permission from the Chief Minister, Haryana.
The necessary approval having been accorded by the Cabinet, the Chief Secretary to Govt. Haryana issued a circular to all the Financial Commissioners and Secretaries to Govt. Haryana vide his letter of July 17, 1990.
The list attached with this letter shows that the circular was sent to all the Departments and the District & Sessions Judges in the State.
In this letter, it was observed that the State Govt. was considering to make Special Recruitment to the Service from amongst the Class II officers excepting those who had a channel of promotion and those belonging to technical services like Engineers, Doctors, Veterinary Surgeons, Police Officers etc.
It was, therefore, desired that the name(s) of the Class II officers to the extent indicated in Annexure I to the letter who fulfilled the conditions of eligibility may be recommended to the Govt. by July 31, 1990.
The following conditions of eligibility which had to be fulfilled as on January 1, 1990 were prescribed :-  i) should at least be a graduate of recognised University; ii) should not have attained the age of more than 48 years; iii) should have rendered at lest five years' continuous Government service in regular capacity in Haryana; iv) should have overall record of "Very Good" category or better than that during the last 5 years (i.e. from 1985-86 to 1989-90).
This order was conveyed to various authorities vide letter of January 25, 1991.
The information was sought from the respective authorities in the proformas mentioned in this letter.
This was followed by another letter of November 13, 1990 which was sent by the Chief Secretary to various Financial Commissioners, Secretaries to Government, Haryana and all Heads of Departments.
The field of choice was widened.
It was pointed out that the matter had been reconsidered and it had been decided that the District Revenue Officers/Tehsildars/Naib Tehsildars, Block Development and Panchayat Officers and members of Class III services who had regular channel for appointment to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) may also be considered in addition to the Class II officers in various Departments.
It was further desired that the name(s) of the officers/officials to the extent indicated in the Annexures to the letter who fulfilled the conditions stipulated therein may be forwarded to the Govt. by December 4, 1990.
The conditions of eligibility were as under :-  i) should at least be a graduate of recognised University; ii) should not have attained the age of more than 48 years; iii) should have rendered at least 5 years' continuous Government service in regular capacity in Haryana; iv) should have record of 'Very Good' category or better than that during the last 5 years (i.e. from 1985-86 to 1989-90).
It was further pointed out that such employees as were officiating in Class I posts but held lien on Class II posts would be eligible in the category of Class II officers.
This was followed by yet another letter of December 20, 1990.
In this letter it was observed that the exigencies of the Service required that Special Recruitment should be made to the Service in accordance with provisions of proviso to Rule 5 of 1930 Rules.
The Govt. had accordingly ordered that Special Recruitment to the Service for filling up 21 vacancies of the year 1990 shall be made from the following sources and in accordance with the 'method as set out hereinafter' :-  i) Class II officers in various departments and Districts will be appointed to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch).
Condition (ii)(d) as mentioned above was modified by an order passed by the Chief Minister on January 14, 1991 (as apparent from the record produced before us by the learned Advocate General) to provide as under :-  "should have overall record of 'Very Good' category i.e. at least 3 'Very Good' or better reports and 2 reports of not less than 'Good' category, during the last five years (from 1985-86 to 1989-90)."
In re : invited from amongst members of Class III services will be as prescribed for regular recruitment to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) under the provisions of Rule 8 of the PCS (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930.
(ii) The eligibility conditions for the candidates as on 1.1.1990, will be that the candidate :  a) should at least be a graduate of recognised University; b) should not have attained the age of more than 45 years; c) should have rendered at least 5 years' continuous Government service in regular capacity in Haryana; and d) should have record of 'Very Good' category or better than that during the last 5 years (i.e. from 1985-86 to 1989-90).
iii) The recommendations of all the eligible candidates received from various departments will be forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission for drawing up a merit list of persons considered suitable for appointment to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and the persons so selected 0, 1990.
In this letter it was observed that the exigencies of the Service required that Special Recruitment should be made to the Service in accordance with provisions of proviso to Rule 5 of 1930 Rules.
The Govt. had accordingly ordered that Special Recruitment to the Service for filling up 21 vacancies of the year 1990 shall be made from the following sources and in accordance with the 'method as set out hereinafter' :-  (i) Class II officers in various departments and District ponse to these circular letters, the recommendations made by different officers were screened by the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana.
The names of the persons considered suitable were finally forwarded to the Commission.
From the records of the Government, it has been pointed out to us by the learned Advocate General that the names of a total of 75 officers were forwarded by the Chief Secretary to the Commission.
Some of the persons who had failed to cross the hurdle of screening at the level of the Chief Secretary and were unable to make it to the level of the Commission have approached this Court through the present writ petitions.
These petitions can be divided into two sets.
The first category amongst the petitioners in these petitions is of persons who belong to the services from which regular recruitment is made through different Registers.
These categories include the cadres of District Revenue Officers, Tahsildars, Naib-Tehsildars, members of Class III Services and Block Development and Panchayat Officers.
Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10948 of 1990, 894, 1246 and 1269 of 1991 have been filed by members of the above Cadres.
Second set of petition viz. Civil Writ Petition Nos. 664, 999, 1011, 1129, 1200, 1201, 1221, 1560 and 1610 of 1991 have been filed by members of other services viz. those (from services like) the Agriculture Department, Employment, Education and Municipal Services of the State.
3.
The arguments were initially addressed by the learned counsel for the petitioners in the first set of cases.
It was contended by Mr. RK Malik and Mr. HS Hooda, learned Counsel for the petitioners that the Special Recruitment to the Service under the proviso to Rule 5 had to be confined to only those sources which had been specified in Rule 6 viz. the District Revenue Officers, Tahsildars, Naib Tahsildars, Members of Class III Ministerial establishment and Block Development and Panchayat Officers, and that the rules did not permit the authorities to consider the claims of members of other services.
It was their case that the action of the respondent-State in considering the members of other services for special recruitment was totally contrary to the provisions of the rules and was thus legally untenable.
In the alternative, it was submitted that in case it was held that Special Recruitment could be made from sources other than those specified in Rule 6, the provisions contained in the proviso to Rule 3 would attract the wrath of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as no guidelines etc. had been laid down in the rule itself regarding the services from which Special Recruitment could be made.
It was thus maintained that the provision would be vitiated by the vice of excessive delegation.
General conditions which would be applicable to both sets of petitions were also raised to contend that it was incumbent upon the respondents to carry out the process of screening de novo in view of the fact that the criteria as laid down in the letter of December 20, 1990 had been modified by the subsequent decision incorporated in the letter of January 25, 1991.
It was further suggested that the change in the criteria had been made with the oblique notice of making certain favourites eligible and was thus mala fide.
Since the change was actuated by extraneous consideration, the whole process of screening was vitiated.
It was also contended that the number of candidates to be recommended by different Departments was fixed without any regard to the strength of personnel in the Department.
4.
Besides the above-mentioned contentions, submissions were made in petitions on the peculiar facts of the respective cases.
Reference to the contentions regarding individual cases shall be made while dealing with the petitions individually.
5.
It may be appropriate to first consider the general submissions referred to above.
Inevitably, for considering the submissions a reference to the provisions of the rules is essential.
The relevant provisions are contained in Rules 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 17 and 20.
These rules read as under :-  "5.
Members to be appointed by the Governor of Haryana from among accepted candidates - Members of the Service shall be appointed by the Governor of Haryana from time to time as required from among accepted candidates whose names have been duly entered in accordance with these rules in one or other of the Registers of Accepted Candidates to be maintained under these rules : Provided that if in the opinion of the State Government the exigencies of the Service so require, the State Government may make special recruitment to the service by such methods as it may by notification specify, after consultation with the Public Service Commission.
6.
Registers to be maintained - The following Registers of Accepted Candidates shall be maintained by the Chief Secretary, namely :-  (a) Register A-I of District Revenue Officers, Tehsildars and Naib-Tahsildars accepted as candidates; (b) Register A-II members of Class III Services accepted as candidates; (c) Register B of persons accepted as candidates on the result of a competitive examination; and  (d) Register C of Block Development and Panchayat Officers.
7.
Selection of candidates for Register A-I  (1) The Financial Commissioner, Revenue shall, by a date to be determined by the State Government, prepare a list of District Revenue Officers/Tahsildars/Naib-Tahsildars and submit the same for the consideration of a Committee with Chief Secretary as Chairman and two such other officers as members, as may be nominated by the State Government from time to time; provided that unless the Government otherwise directs, the name of a person shall not be submitted who - (a) (i) has not completed five years' continuous Government service; (ii) has attained the age of forty-five years; on or before the date of which the names are required to be submitted before the committee; and (b) is not a graduate of recognised University.
(2) The committee mentioned is sub-rule (1) shall consider all such names and prepare a list, equal to twice the number of vacancies of persons considered suitable for being entered in Register A-I This list shall be sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission for recommending, in order of merit and equal to the number of vacancies, the most suitable persons entered in the list, for being selected as candidates for entry into Register A-I, and thereafter the names of the persons so selected shall be entered in the Register A-I 8.
Selection of candidates for Register A-II.
(1) Each of the authorities specified in the first column of the table below may, by a date to be specified by the State Government, submit, to the State Government in Form 1 attached to these rules the recommendation regarding such number of persons as is specified in each case in the second column of the said table from amongst persons who are members of Class III services in his office or in the offices subordinate to him :- Recommending authority Number of recommendations 1.
Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana 3 2.
Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Haryana 2 3.
All the remaining Heads of Departments in Haryana 1(each) Provided that any nomination already submitted by any of the aforesaid authorities in accordance with the existing rules shall be deemed to be a recommendation validly made.
(2) Unless the State Government otherwise directs, the name of a person shall not be submitted under the provisions of sub-rule (1) who - (a) (i) has not completed five years' continuous Government Service; and (ii) has attained the age of forty-five years; on or before the date by which the State Government has asked for the recommendation.
(3) All the recommendations received from the recommending authorities specified in sub-rule (1) above shall be forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission for recommending, in order of merit and equal to the number of vacancies, the names of persons considered most suitable for being selected as candidates for entry into Register A-II and thereafter the names of the persons so selected shall be entered in Register A-II."
12.
Selection of candidates for Register C :  The Secretary to Government in the Development and Panchayat Department shall, by a date to be determined by the State Government, prepare a list of Block Development and Panchayat Officers and submit the same for the consideration of a committee with Chief Secretary as Chairman and two other officers as members as may be nominated by the State Government from time to time; provided that unless the State Government otherwise directs, the name of a person shall not be submitted who -  (a) (i) has not completed five years' continuous Government service; (ii) has attained the age of forty-five years on or before the date on which the names are required to be submitted to the Committee; and (b) is not a graduate of a recognised University.
(2) The Committee mentioned in sub-rule(1) shall consider all such names and prepare a list equal to twice the number of vacancies of persons considered suitable for being entered in Register C This list shall be sent to the State Public Service Commission for recommending, in order of merit and equal to the number of vacancies, the most suitable person entered in the list, for being selected as candidates for entry into Register C, and thereafter the names of the persons so selected shall be entered in the Register C. 17.
Appointment of registered candidates to Service -  The Governor of Haryana shall ordinarily make appointments to the Service in pursuance of Rule 5 from amongst candidates whose names are entered in the various registers in rotation as follows :-  From Register B two candidates From Register A-I one candidate From Register B two candidates From Register A-II one candidate From Register B three candidates From Register A-I one candidate From Register B two candidates From Register A-II one candidate From Register C one candidate From Register B three candidates From Register A-I one candidate From Register B two candidates From Register A-II one candidate From Register B two candidates From Register A-I one candidate From Register B three candidates From Register C one candidate and thereafter in the same rotation beginning again from Register B  20.
Seniority of members of Service (1) - The seniority of members appointed to the Service shall be determined in accordance with the rotation prescribed in Rule 17, irrespective of the fact whether or not this rotation is actually followed while making appointments :  Provided that the order of merit determined by the Selection Committee or the Public Service Commission as the case may be in respect of persons appointed from various registers shall not be disturbed :  Provided further that in the case of an ex-emergency commissioned officer, an ex-short service commissioned officer, or an ex-serviceman appointed to the service, benefit of seniority on account of military service may be given with due regard to the provisions of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965 :  Provided further that :-  (a) If the name of any candidate is removed from the register of accepted candidates or the list of special recruits or the order of his appointment is cancelled under the provisions of Rule 19, and such candidate is subsequently appointed to the Service, his seniority shall be fixed keeping in view the date of his actual appointment.
(b) In the case of members appointed to the Service through Special Recruitment under the proviso to Rule 5, the seniority shall be fixed by the State Government in the order of merit determined by the Selection Committee or the Public Service Commission, as the case may be, and they shall be placed below the members appointed through regular registers against vacancies in respect of the same year in which the special recruitment is made.
The seniority inter se of persons appointed through special recruitment from various sources shall be fixed in blocks arranged according to descending order of pay scales of the posts from which recruitment is made, in which at least one person from each source shall be included, but if the number of persons appointed from a source is four or more, two persons from that source shall be included in the block.
The second and subsequent blocks shall, if necessary, be repeated to include all available persons from various sources.
If the pay scales of two or more posts from which recruitment is made are the same then the seniority of such members shall be determined by the length of their service in such posts and if the length of their service is also the same the older member shall be senior to the younger member.
(2) If there are any cases which are left uncovered by the principles enunciated above they would be decided by the Government on just and equitable grounds.
7.
The first question that arises is as to whether or not the special recruitment as envisaged under the proviso to Rule 5 is confined to the sources mentioned in Rule 6.
Mr. RK Malik and Mr. HS Hooda, learned counsel for the petitioners have contended that under the proviso the State Govt. is competent to make Special Recruitment "by such methods as it may by notification specify".
The sources for such a Special Recruitment can only be those which are specified in Rule 6.
On the other hand, the contention of Mr. Sushil Mohanta, the learned Advocate General who appeared for the respondents is that under the Rules it was within the competence of the State to not only lay down the procedure for making Special Recruitment but also the sources from which recruitment could be made.
According to him, a harmonious reading of the various rules leaves no doubt that Special Recruitment could be made not only by following the method as laid down in Rule 6 but also by resorting to sources other than those specified in Rule 6.
He further contended that if a restricted meaning was given to the proviso to Rule 5 and services other than those mentioned in Rule 6 were excluded the action of the State may attract the challenge on the basis of Article 16 inasmuch as various categories of employees who may even be higher in rank than Naib-Tahsildars, etc. would be denied equality of opportunity.
He also pointed out that ever since the introduction of the proviso to Rule 5, the State had interpreted the rule in the manner, as it had been done now.
Records were also produced to show that the intention of the Govt. even at the time of introducing the proviso in the year 1970 was to make members of various other services eligible for consideration for Special Recruitment to the Service.
8.
It is useful to refer to the historical background of the introduction of the proviso.
The matter appears to have been considered by the Govt. initially in the year 1970.
It was mentioned that in the erstwhile State of Punjab as it existed prior to the formation of State of Haryana on November 1, 1966, Special Recruitment had been made by introducing temporarily a proviso to Rule 5.
It was further pointed out that even in the IAS (Recruitment) Rules, a provision to the following effect existed :-  "Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), if in the opinion of the Central Government the exigencies of the services so require, the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government and the Commission, adopt such methods of recruitment to the service other than those specified in the said sub-rule as it may by regulations made in this behalf prescribe."
Thereafter, it was also considered as to how many vacancies be filled up by the Special Recruitment and the sources from which the recruitment be made.
It was pointed out that it would be in the fitness of things if members of other Services were made eligible for Special Recruitment.
It was also considered as to whether or not a specific quota be allotted to different sources considered suitable for Special Recruitment.
After a thorough consideration, it was considered appropriate to introduce the proviso in its present form and it was duly notified in the year 1971.
Since then the State Government has made Special Recruitment on a number of occasions.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents by the Joint Secretary to Government, Haryana (Political and Services Deptt.)
in C.W.P.
No. 894 of 1991 (Rajeshwar Dayal v. State of Haryana), details have been furnished to show that ever since the year 1971 Special Recruitment had been made from sources other than those specified in Rule 6.
By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that in the year 1971 itself, 4 persons had been appointed by following the method of Special Recruitment.
Out of these four, two were from the cadre of Block Development & Panchayat Officers and the other two were from the Cadres of Excise & Taxation Officers and Assistant Excise & Taxation Officers.
Similarly, in the year 1973, four persons out of eight were appointed from sources other than those mentioned in Rule 6.
These were from the Cadres of Assistant Registrar of Cooperative Societies, Treasury Officers and District Industries Officers.
In the year 1975 all the persons appointed by way of Special Recruitment were from sources other than those mentioned in Rule 6.
Similar was the position in the year 1976.
9.
An examination of the historical perspective clearly brings out the intention of the State Govt. An intention to consider members of various Services under the State including those who did not belong to the services contemplated under Rule 6 is clearly borne out.
The proviso was introduced on the pattern of the provision in the IAS (Recruitment) Rules, 1954 where under members of various Services under the State were eligible for being considered.
In practice this intention has been duly carried out.
On all occasions when Special Recruitment was made, members of various Services under the State were considered.
The consideration was never limited to the sources contemplated under Rule 6.
10.
Did the State act in violation of the Rule ?
We think it did not.
After all, method is "the mode of operating," or "the means of attaining an object".
The object was to select the best persons out of those serving the State.
For attaining that object, the State has been considering the claims of officers/officials working in different departments.
In doing so, it did not violate the express provisions of the rules.
We are of the view that Rules 5 and 6 only lay down the method of recruitment to the Service and when the various provisions are harmoniously read it is competent for the State to not only to lay down the procedure which has to be followed for selection but also the sources from which the selection has to be made.
If the prescription of method is restricted to mean the procedure only, the State would inevitably be denied the right to consider the claims of the officers from various other services whose experience may be very useful for manning the responsible posts in the Service.
If undue restriction is imposed on the power of the State it would cause avoidable impediment in using the valuable administrative and specialised experience of suitable officers for manning senior posts under the State.
11.
The proviso to Rule 5 authorises the State to make Special Recruitment by "such methods as it may by notification specify".
In Rule 20(b), the method of determination of seniority of persons recruited from "various sources" has been prescribed.
These sources have to be other than those mentioned in sub-clause (a) (viz. those mentioned in Rule 6 whose seniority has to be determined in accordance with the roster prescribed in Rule 17.
A combined reading of the various provisions leaves no manner of doubt in our mind that the proviso to Rule 5 authorises the State to not only lay down the procedure but also the sources from which Special Recruitment can be made.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
A perusal of the rules shows that certain sources are specified in Rule 6.
If the Special Recruitment were to be confined to only these sources, persons working in various other services would be rendered totally ineligible.
While members of the ministerial establishment working under various officers in different services would be eligible for appointment to the Haryana Civil Service, the officers themselves would be ineligible.
Would this be fair ?
Would this not deny equality of opportunity to such senior officers ?
We can visualise no administrative necessity or propriety which may have even remotely impelled the rule making authority to exclude the senior officers while their subordinates were included in the field of choice.
If the interpretation as canvassed for by the petitioners is accepted, the senior persons in the service of the State would be completely denied equality of opportunity in the matter of recruitment to the H.C.S.
The State would be denied the right to have the best personnel to man the posts in the Service.
The personnel would be denied equality of opportunity.
This would violate the guarantee enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is well settled that an interpretation of a rule which can result in conflict with the provisions of the Constitution has to be avoided.
If the proviso to Rule 5 is given the restricted meaning as the learned counsel for the petitioner went us to, the rights of a large number of officers would be seriously prejudiced, and the State would be denied the use of their service.
Such could not be the intention of the Rule 2 enacting authority.
We, thus, entertain no doubt that the State was competent to resort to sources other than those specified in Rule 6.
We regret our inability to lean in favour of a restricted interpretation of the provision as suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
13.
The historical background of the rule and the consistent interpretation placed by the State thereon also support this view.
The official record produced before us shows that the Rule making authority had always intended that members of various services would be eligible for "Special Recruitment".
Ever since its introduction in the year 1971, the State has resorted to sources other than those which had been originally included in the rules.
Detailed reference to the factual position which has already been made above shows that the authorities have understood the rule to mean that officers working in different departments of the State were eligible for appointment to the Service.
Even if two interpretations were possible, the view taken by the authorities is not an impossible one.
Since the view taken by the State is possible one, no case for invoking the writ jurisdiction and quashing the action of the State can be said to have been made out.
14.
It was also suggested that the proviso is always an exception.
It cannot be used to enlarge the scope of the substantive provision.
Reference in this behalf was made to the decisions of different courts.
On the other hand, relying on the dictum of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case Commissioner of Commercial Taxes Board of Revenue v. Ram Kishan, Siri Kishan Jhaver, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 59, it was contended by the learned Advocate General that the proviso can itself contain a substantive provision.
15.
For considering the submission it is useful to consider the context in which the proviso has been enacted in the present case.
Rule 5 provides that the Governor shall appoint members of the service from amongst the accepted candidates whose names have been duly entered in various registers.
Even if the proviso was to be read as an exception, it would mean that there is a departure from the normal rule.
The Governor shall not only be entitled to make appointments from amongst the accepted candidates but also by way of Special Recruitment.
Such Special Recruitment without anything more, cannot be confined to the categories from which the accepted candidates are brought on the Registers.
It would in the normal course of events be from sources besides those contemplated under Rule 5 itself.
Further as held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Commissioner of Commercial Taxes Board of Revenue v. Ramkrishan, Siri Kishan Jhaver, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 59, the provision itself can contain a substantive provision.
If so viewed, the proviso in the present case can be legitimately held to include the sources of services other than those contemplated under Rule 6.
16.
We, thus conclude that the State was competent to consider officers working in different departments and its choice was not restricted to the sources specified in Rule 6.
17.
It is next contended that the proviso to Rule 5 gives totally unguided and unbridled powers to the State Govt.
It is suggested that the State Govt. is left free to choose the source and lay down the procedure for slection.
As such, the provision is totally arbitrary and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
On the other hand, the learned Advocate General points out that the provision has in-built safeguards.
The State Govt. is competent to resort to Special Recruitment only if the 'exigencies' of service so require.
It is not free to resort to this method at its whim and caprice.
He further points out that the decision has to be taken in consultation with the Public Service Commission.
These, according to the learned Advocate General, constitute sufficient safeguards and it is not fair to contend that the power is totally unguided or unbridled.
He also points out that in the present case, the factual position clearly shows that a large number of posts in the service having remained unfilled from the normal sources for a long time, it was considered necessary to make Special Recruitment so that posts did not remain unfilled.
It was also his contention that besides consideration by the Cabinet, the matter was considered in consultation with the Commission, which is a constitutional body.
He also pointed out that similar procedure had been followed in the past.
18.
A persual of the proviso shows that resort can be had to the method of Special Recruitment only if the State Govt. forms an opinion that the exigencies of service so require.
Exigency means "need; imperativeness; emergency; something arising suddenly out of the current of events; any event or occasional combination of circumstances, calling for immediate action or remedy, a pressing necessity; a sudden and unexpected happening or an unforeseen occurrence or condition,".
It has also been held to mean "something arising suddenly out of circumstances calling for immediate action or remedy or where something helpful needs to be done at once, yet not so pressing as an emergency."
(Black's Law Dictionary, 4th Edition).
It thus appears that the State Govt. is not free to resort to the method of Special Recruitment at its whim and caprice but can only do so if the peculiar circumstances arising at a particular point of time so demand.
In the present case, in May, 1990 the matter was placed before the Council of Ministers.
in the Memorandum placed before the Council of Ministers, it was stated as under :-  "MEMORANDUM  Minister-in-Charge, Chief Minister, Haryana  Administrative Secretary, Chief Secretary to Govt., Haryana.
Subject : Special recruitment to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) from Class II officers for the year 1990 - Taking posts of HCS (Executive Branch) out of the purview of Haryana Public Service Commission.
-------  The existing authorised cadre strength of HCS (Ex.
Br.)
is 200, against which only 155 officers are in position and, thus, there is gap of 45 officers.
Due to shortage of HCS (Ex.
Br.)
officers in the State, non-HCS officers have been appointed against the HCS (Ex.
Br.)
posts.
In some cases, arrangements to carry on the work of vacant posts has been made by entrusting additional charge to other officers.
Even then a number of posts are lying vacant due to non-availability of HCS (Ex.
Br.)
officers.
Some posts have been created in the HCS (Ex.Br.)
for the newly created District/Sub Divisions and in other Government Departments.
As a result of retirement of officers and promotion of HCS (Ex.
Br.)
officers in the IAS during the year, the shortage of HCS (Ex.Br.)
officers will further increase and the vacancy position in the cadre will be to the extent of 31 by the end of 1990 (excluding pending recruitment to fillup 25 vacancies for the year 1985 and1989).
Regular recruitment to the HCS (Ex.
Br.)
to fillup 25 vacancies for the years 1985 and 1989 has not materialised so far due to various reasons such as-stay order of the Court, deferring of competitive examination etc. etc.
Since regular recruitment for the years 1985 and 1989 is likely to take considerable time and also in view of the above-stated exigencies of the HCS (Ex.
Br.)
cadre, it is considered expedient that special recruitment be made to fillup 21 vacancies in the HCS (Ex.
Br.)
cadre for the year 1990 under the proviso to Rule 5 of the PCS (Ex. Br. )
Rules, 1930 by taking these posts out of the purview of Haryana Public Service Commission as one time measure.
This will, however, not affect the regular recruitment for 1989 and subsequent years.
Govt. has already decided to recruit officers in a phased manner and accordingly 20 vacancies for 1989, and 14 each for 1990 and 1991 will be filled by regular recruitment including recruitment through Haryana Public Service Commission.
The Haryana Public Service Commission has been requested accordingly to give their concurrence for making the proposed Special Recruitment to the HCS (Ex.
Br.).
Meanwhile, the matter is placed before the Council of Ministers in accordance with the provisions contained in item at serial No. 2 of the Schedule referred to in Rules 5 and 11 of the Rules of Business of the Government of Haryana, 1977, for according approval to take 21 posts of HCS (Ex.Br.)
out of the purview of Haryana Public Service Commission as a special case.
Permission of the Chief Minister, for placing the matter before the Council of Ministers, has been obtained.
Sd/-,  (KULWANT SINGH) Chief Secretary to Govt.
Haryana."
Dated, Chandigarh the 14th May, 1990.
A perusal of the above Memo, shows that the State Govt. was faced with a situation where it could not proceed to finalise recruitment to the service by the normal method.
A number of posts were lying vacant.
It was considered necessary to proceed to make Special Recruitment.
It was in view of this situation that the Council of Ministers has accorded its approval for the making to Special Recruitment.
Only thereafter, the letter of July 17, 1990 was circulated to various departments for inviting recommendations.
Simultaneously detailed correspondence took place between the State Govt. and the Public Service Commission.
The Commission expressed the opinion that Special Recruitment should not be made by the State Govt. exclusively but even the Commission should be involved.
Accordingly, the matter was reconsidered by the Govt. and on November 28, 1990 a Memo was prepared for being placed before the Council of Ministers.
In this Memo, it was, inter alia, observed as under :-  "2.
The Haryana Public Service Commission was requested to give their concurrence for making special recruitment to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) under the proviso to Rule 5 of the PCS (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 which provides as under :- "If in the opinion of the State Government the exigencies of the Service so require the State Government may make special recruitment to the Service by such methods as it may by notification specify, after consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission."
The Commission was not in favour of making special recruitment as per method proposed by the State Government but was of the view that the Commission should also be involved in the process."
This proposal was considered by the Cabinet and it was decided to authorise the Chief Minister to take final decision in the matter.
The necessary approval having been accorded by the Chief Minister, the matter was considered by the Public Service Commission, whereafter, the letter dated December 20, 1990 was issued.
Simultaneously, the State Govt. had received recommendations from different departments which were screened by the Chief Secretary and ultimately vide letter of January 8, 1991 a list of 75 persons along with their record was forwarded to the Public Service Commission for making the necessary selection.
it would thus be seen that there was detailed consideration of the entire case at different levels in the Govt. and in consultation with the Commission before final decision was taken.
A system which ensures all these checks namely forming of an opinion regarding the exigencies and consultation with the Public Service Commission, in our opinion, provides enough safeguards against arbitrary exercise of power.
We are of the opinion that the rule contains checks which are a guarantee against an arbitrary exercise of power.
The provision cannot be held to be leaving the Govt. with a totally unguided and unbridled power.
This view has been further fortified on a perusal of the official records which were produced before us by the learned Advocate General.
The records reveal a thorough examination of the case at different levels.
We, therefore, hold that the provision contained in the proviso is not unguided and does not leave the Govt. with any unbridled power.
It contains sufficient checks on the exercise of power by the State Govt.
It does not leave the State as free as the petitioners contend.
Consequently, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is rejected.
19.
It was next contended that the criterion of eligibility having been altered the process of consideration/screening had to be conducted de novo It was alleged that the criterion had been originally laid down by letter of December 20, 1990 and was altered in January, 1991.
Since the requirement of "Very Good" reports for the last five years was changed to "Very Good" and "Good" reports, more persons would have become eligible and their cases deserved to be considered.
20.
A perusal of the records indicates that originally the State Govt. had decided that the Officer should have an "overall record of "Very Good" category or better than that during the last five years ie from 1985-86 to 1989-90".
In the letter issued in December, 1990 the word "overall" did not occur.
The learned Advocate General points out that the intention of the Govt. basically was that a person who had an overall "Very Good" record for the last 5 years was to be considered eligible.
Lest this should be interpreted to mean that a person who had earned on e'Good' report was to be excluded in spite of the fact that the remaining four reports were 'Outstanding', a clarification had been issued by the Govt. in pursuance to the orders passed by the Chief Minister in January, 1991.
Thereafter the letter of January 25, 1991 was issued in view of the orders passed by the Chief Minister of January 14, 1991.
He further pointed out that in fact the officers/officials whose record is 'Very Good' have been selected.
It is also the contention of the learned Advocate General that the claims of all the petitioners had been considered and consequently they could have no grievance which could be remediable by resort to the present proceedings.
21.
Having given the matter our utmost consideration we find that the claims of all the petitioners were duly considered.
The records produced on behalf of the Govt. before us clearly bear out this fact.
Once their claims have been considered, they cannot have any legitimate claim for de novo consideration of the whole matter.
Still further, since the persons recommended by the Govt. to the Public Service Commission satisfy the requirement of a 'Very Good' record no case for directing the Govt. to go through the time consuming exercise all over again is made out.
22.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Supposing an officer has earned one 'Good' report and four 'Outstanding' reports, he cannot, in our view be held to be ineligible for consideration.
The learned Advocate General appears to be right in suggesting that the letter issued on January 25, 1991 was only calculated to dispel doubts regarding the eligibility of such persons.
23.
We are equally of the view that such hair splitting and niceties have to be left to the Govt. alone.
It is not unknown that certain officers are known to be strict while grading their subordinates.
Equally well known is the fact that certain officers are liberal while recording reports.
The Govt. in aware of all such situations.
As against this, the Court is not in a position to know the exact situation.
Even if the Govt. has chosen to issue the clarification and say that even an Officer with two 'Good' reports and three 'Very Good' report shall be eligible, the Court cannot hold that the whole process of selection has to be gone into de novo, especially when the petitioners who are before it have been duly considered.
A large number of employees have been considered before the final recommendation regarding 75 persons was made.
The process is time-consuming.
We do not find any justification for ordering the Govt. to go through the whole exercise de novo.
24.
Equally untenable is the suggestion that the change in the criteria was actuated by extraneous considerations.
Firstly, no specific instance in support of this contention was brought to our notice.
Secondly, on perusal of record we are satisfied that the action was not actuated by any extraneous consideration and all the persons whose names have been recommended fulfil the criteria as originally made out.
The question of extraneous consideration could crop up only if it was proved that some person(s) who did not fulfil the original criteria had been recommended.
No such case was pin-pointed.
We are also of the opinion that there was no substantial change in the criteria.
We consequently reject any suggestion of extraneous consideration.
25.
It was next contended that while seeking recommendations, different departments were asked to recommend different number of officers/officials without any definite criteria.
The argument is that while certain departments were asked to recommend only one name, others have been asked to recommend more than one.
This, according to the petitioner, was done arbitrarily.
In the petitions before us, no precise data or specific averments were made.
Vague allegations which were not supported by any factual data have been made during the course of arguments.
It is well settled that the burden of proving the charge of discrimination lies heavily on the person who alleges it.
In the present case, the petitioners have not been able to discharge this burden at all.
The petitioners are lacking in material particulars.
Even at the stage of arguments nothing concrete was pointed out.
26.
The learned Advocate General pointed out that number was fixed by the Govt. on a variety of considerations.
Firstly, the strength of department/services from which nomination was sought and secondly, the likelihood of suitable persons being found from that particular source were the dominant considerations while fixing the number of persons to be recommended by each department.
These considerations were, to our mind, neither extraneous nor arbitrary.
We thus reject the suggestion on behalf of the petitioners that the number was fixed arbitrarily.
27.
The broad submissions on the questions of law having been disposed of stage is now set for dealing with the individual cases.
C.W.P.
No.1201 of 1991  Jatinder Kumar Dahiya and eight other persons have filed this petition challenging the decision of the Government for making Special Recruitment to the 21 posts.
It has been averred that the petitioners have a brilliant academic record and are candidates for the direct recruitment to be made through the Haryana Public Service Commission.
It has been further averred that the advertisement had been issued by the Commission and the last date was 3101989.
By this advertisement 12 posts for H.C.S.
(Ex.
Br.)
and certain other posts in the various allied services had been advertised.
The petitioners being eligible for direct recruitment to the service had submitted their applications and were candidates for the examination which was scheduled to be held from February 9, 1991 to February 24, 1991.
They are aggrieved by the action of the State Govt. in deciding to fill up 21 posts by the method of Special Recruitment.
It has been alleged that the respondent-Commission and the Govt. are in collusion with each other for selecting their own kith and in for the posts in question.
It has been further suggested that the actions being taken to accommodate Messrs Rajinder Singh a son-in-law of Shri Hukam Singh who was then the Chief Minister of Haryana, Vijay Singh, Excise & Taxation Officer who is alleged to be a close relation of the Deputy Prime Minister, Prahlad Singh Tehsildar another relation of the Deputy Prime Minister, and Mr. Vidya Dhar, Excise & Taxation Officer who is alleged to be the son-in-law of Shri Ude Ram, a member of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
It has also been averred that criteria for selection was changed to accommodate these persons.
Shri Hikam Singh, former Chief Minister, Haryana has been impleaded as respondent No. 2 and Shri Ude Ram, a Member of the Haryana Public Service Commission has been impleaded as respondent No. 3.
The State of Haryana and the Commission are respondent Nos. 1 and 4 respectively in this petition.
Ch.
Devi Lal, Deputy Prime Minister has not been impleaded as a party.
28.
A detailed written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 The action in resorting to Special Recruitment has been justified on account of facts which have already been adverted to in the opening part of this judgment.
The allegations regarding mala fides have been denied.
It has been further suggested that wild allegations have been levelled recklessly without any basis.
However, no affidavit has been filed by the other respondents.
29.
Mr. HS Hooda, learned counsel for the petitioners besides the legal issues which have already been dealt with has vehemently contended that the action of the State was actuated by extraneous considerations to accommodate the relations of various persons and since no affidavit denying the allegations had been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 the allegations deserve to be upheld.
He had also argued that by the notification of the Govt. issued on November 13, 1990, the cases had to be screened by a selection committee and that this selection committee had been by-passed without any basis whatsoever.
30.
On the other hand, Mr. Mohunta learned Advocate General has raised a two-fold submission.
He vehemently contends that the petitioners are not serving in any department of the Govt.
They have no locus standi whatsoever to challenge the decision of the Govt. regarding the exigencies of the services or making a Special Recruitment.
In any case, the learned Advocate General contends that the petitioners have no right to compete with the persons who are already in service and reckless allegations have been made without any basis whatsoever.
With reference to the record of service of the various candidates, the learned Advocate General has pointed out that Shri Rajinder Singh who is the son-in-law of Shri Humam Singh was working as a Fisheries Development Officer in the State of Haryana.
He was promoted as Project Officer which is a Class II post and had been further recommended for appointment to the H.C.S.
His case had been considered by the Commission earlier and not against 21 posts which are being filed up in the year 1991.
The Commission had recommended the name of Shri Rajinder Singh for appointment to the Service on 121991.
That being the position, the learned Advocate General contends that the grievance made by the petitioners is totally unfounded.
With regard to Shri Vidya Dhar son-in-law of respondent No. 3, the learned Advocate General has pointed out that the officer had earned four 'Outstanding' reports and one 'Very Good' report during the last five years.
he possesses the qualification of MA and was thus considered eminently suitable for being considered by the Commission.
With regard to Vijay Singh, the learned Advocate General has again pointed out from the record that he had earned five 'Outstanding ' reports and one 'Very Good' report (there being two reports viz. one Outstanding and one Very Good for one year only) during the last five years.
Similar was the position with regard to Shri Parhlad Singh.
On the basis of these facts, the learned Advocate General submitted that even though no affidavits had been filed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 respectively as the relationship was not being denied, the facts were apparent from the record that the allegations of extraneous considerations etc. were wholly baseless and false.
He was vehement in contending that the relations of persons occupying high positions could not be denied the right to be considered for recruitment to services under the State.
They had as much right to be considered as the other citizens.
31.
The petitioners in the present case are not candidates for Special Recruitment.
They are candidates only for direct recruitment to the service which is separately under process with the Commission.
They are not similarly placed as the persons who have been named in the petition and are being accused of getting a favourable treatment.
In this situation, the petitioners cannot strictly speaking be allowed to contend that there is any denial of equality of opportunity to them.
Persons in Govt. service being considered for Special Recruitment, in our view, constitute a separate class and the consideration of their claims for recruitment to the H.C.S.
is entirely different from consideration of the claims of the petitioners for direct recruitment.
The petitioners are not candidates for Special Recruitment.
Added to this is the fact that the four persons mentioned above are not even parties to the present petition.
It is extremely difficult to give any decision against them without being heard.
Thirdly, on the basis of the record and the facts as disclosed by the learned Advocate General.
We find that the allegations of extraneous consideration levelled by the petitioners are absolutely unfair and wholly unjustified.
A Chief Minister of a State or a Member of the Public Service Commission cannot under any circumstances be expected to shut out the doors for entry to the public service to the members of his family.
They are as much the citizens of this country as any body else and have a right to be considered for appointment to services under the State in accordance with the rules governing the recruitment.
Having considered the entire matter, we have no doubt in that an totally reckless allegations have been made against the Chief Minister and the Member of the Commission.
It is no doubt correct that these two persons have not filed their affidavits.
The learned Advocate General says the relationship is not being denied and the allegations of extraneous considerations are belied by the facts on record.
We think he is right in his submission.
The officers named by the petitioners we are alleged to be getting the favoured treatment are by all standards such as could not be excluded from consideration.
We cannot persuade ourselves to take the view that any extraneous consideration weighed with the respondents in doing what they have actually done.
We, therefore, hold that any suggestion of mala fides is totally belied when the records of the officers are considered.
The allegations are not proved and are, therefore, rejected.
The petitioners who are at the threshold of their career would do well to eschew the temptation of making totally false allegations against persons occupying high position.
32.
It has been argued on behalf of the petitioner that by an order passed by the Govt. in November, 1990 it had been decided to constitute a selection committee for considering the claim of various candidates for being forwarded to the Commission.
It has been further suggested that this Committee has been wrongly bypassed.
The Advocate General has pointed out to us from the record that on December 4, 1990, the Chief Secretary had put up a note suggesting that there was no need for constituting a committee for the consideration of the claim of the persons recommended by various Heads of Departments or the Secretaries and Financial Commissioners to the Govt.
This proposal of the Chief Secretary was approved by the Chief Minister on December 5, 1990 Thereafter, a circular letter December 20, 1990 was issued in which there was no provision for the constitution of the committee.
This decision had been taken in consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission who had not agreed to the constitution of the selection committee.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has not been able to controvert this factual position.
In view of the position as explained by the Advocate General we have no hesitation in holding that the Govt. had taken a conscious decision doing away with the committee.
This was done in constitution with the Haryana Public Service Commission.
No extraneous consideration was involved.
33.
All the contentions having been rejected, we find no merit in this petition and dismiss it.
34.
C.W.P.
No. 1200 of 1991  The petitioner herein is working as an Assistant Employment Officer.
He lays claim to a distinguished academic and service record.
he further avers that the State of Haryana had called upon the Department of Employment to recommend three persons for being considered for Special Recruitment to the H.C.S.
The petitioner claims that the Department had recommended his name besides those of Messrs Hawa Singh Dhull and Vinod Sharma.
He further submits that his name had not only been recommended by the Administrative Secretary but also by the Minister-in-Charge and the Chief Minister.
Thereafter, his name was suddenly dropped and that of Shri Mohinder Singh Verma (respondent No. 4) was included in the list of three persons whose names were forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The petitioner claims that Shri Mohinder Singh Verma was not even eligible according to the conditions laid down in the circular letter of November 13, 1990.
It is averred in the petition that Shri Mohinder Singh Verma did not fulfil the condition of having "Very Good" reports for the years 1985-86 to 1989-90.
It has been further averred that even the Administrative Secretary had not recommended the name of respondent No. 4.
35.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has, inter-alia, been stated that "the Employment Department was required to recommend the names of three persons but the recommending authority recommended the names including that of the petitioner.
The matter was examined in the office of the answering respondent and the recommending authority was requested to restrict his recommendations to three names as earlier directed by the Government.
Since no reply was received from the recommending authority, the matter was processed in the office of the answering respondent and it was decided that since these persons fulfilled the eligibility criteria, the names of the senior most three officers be forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The name of the petitioner who was junior to those officers was, therefore, not forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission."
It has also been averred that allegation of the petitioners that the Administrative Secretary did not recommend the name of respondent No. 4 is not correct.
36.
During the course of hearing, Mr. HS Hooda, appearing for the petitioner reiterated the contentions noticed above.
As against this, the learned Advocate General appearing for the respondents pointed out that respondent No. 4 was working as an Employment Officer while the petitioner was holding the post of Assistant Employment Officer.
He further pointed out that respondent No. 4 was placed at serial No. 38 while the petitioner was at serial No. 66 in the seniority list of Assistant Employment Officer.
He also produced the file containing the confidential reports of respondent No. 4 which showed that he had earned 'Very Good' reports ever since the year 1981-82.
Particular mention may be made of the fact that in all the reports for the years 1985-86 to 1989-90, respondent No. 4 had been graded as 'Very Good'.
In this view of the matter, it was contended by the learned Advocate General, and we think rightly, that the said respondent was not only eligible but eminently suitable for being recommended to Haryana Public Service Commission for the consideration of his claim for special Recruitment to the H.C.S.
(Ex.
Br.).
37.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we feel that no infirmity can be found with the action of the respondents.
Respondent No. 4 was not only eligible but also far senior to the petitioner.
His record of service is 'Very Good'.
The petitioner's name was duly considered.
Consequently, no infirmity whatsoever can be found with the action of the respondents.
We are satisfied that there was no violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution in the entire process.
The Administrative Secretary had recommended six names and the Chief Secretary had rightly picked up the three senior most persons who were fully eligible.
This being the factual position.
We find no merit to the writ petition which is accordingly dismissed.
38.
C.W.P.
No. 1560 of 1991  Dharmpal Singh, Sub-Divisional Education Officer, had filed this petition claiming that he had been rightly considered for Special Recruitment to service.
He was appointed as Head Master on 521983.
On 1771987 he was selected and appointed to the post of Principal in Class II service.
He claims to have got 'Excellent' reports of the last five years viz. from 1985-86 to 1989-90.
He has further stated that respondent No. 3 had recommended his name to respondent No. 2 along with the names of three other Class II officers for being considered by the Govt.
It has been further pointed out that six names had been recommended to respondent No. 2 by the Director, Higher Secondary Education, Haryana.
The recommendation in respect of the petitioner is alleged to have been made by respondent No. 3 vide his Memo dated 26th November, 1990.
It is further averred that respondent No. 2 failed to recommend names of some other Class-II officers in respect of whom recommendations had been received from the respective Directors before 411991 by which time the last date viz. 18.12.1990 had expired.
The petitioner states that he was not to be claimed for the delay caused by respondent No. 2 and has a right to be considered by the Public Service Commission.
Even though a short written statement was filed contesting the petition, the learned Advocate General, at the hearing of the petition has very fairly conceded the claim of the petitioner.
He stated before us that the name of the petitioner shall be forwarded to the Commission for consideration.
39.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition has become infructuous and is accordingly disposed of as such.
40.
C.W.P.
No.999 of 1991  The petitioner in this case is an Assistant District Attorney.
He claims to be a First Class Law Graduate with 16 years of experience.
Details of the distinctions won by the petitioner in various extra-curricular activities have also been furnished by the petitioner.
He claims to have served as Law Officer in Panchayat Department from 1971 to 1981 prior to his selection and appointment as Assistant District Attorney on 2531981.
In response to a circular issued by the Govt. he claims to have submitted his application for being considered for Special Recruitment to the H.C.S.
It is further averred that the names of those officials/officers who are relatives or near and dear ones of the high -ups have been forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Certain instances like that of Mr. SK Yadav, Excise and Taxation Officer etc. have been quoted to show that persons who were higher in merit had been excluded while others who were of lesser merit like Mr. JS Chahal and others have been forwarded to the Commission.
Reference to the case of Mr. SK Yadav shall be made at the appropriate place while dealing with his petition (C.W.P.
No. 1011 of 1991).
It has also been averred that the petitioner was fully eligible and he has been arbitrarily denied equality of opportunity as guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
41.
On behalf of the respondents the entire position has been stated in the following words of the opening paragraph of the written statement :-  "As regards the criteria mentioned at (i), (ii) and (iii) the petitioners and the 3 candidates whose names have been recommended, are covered by the above criteria.
So far as the criteria laid down at item No. (iv) is concerned, the relative position of overall record of the petitioner and the three recommended candidates is as under :-  i) Sh. Budh Dev Yadav (Petitioner) has four very good and one good report.
ii) Sh. AK Sachdeva has one outstanding and four very good reports.
iii) Sh. PC Bansal has one outstanding, three very good and one good report.
iv) Sh. SL Parwana has all five very good reports."
42.
It would be evident from the above that the candidates whose names have been recommended for consideration for Special Recruitment to H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) has a better record of service than that of the petitioner.
Besides it, the recommended candidates are working as Deputy District Attorneys i.e. on a higher post and in a higher pay scale than the petitioner who is working as Assistant District Attorney.
In view of the above facts, the petitioner has no better claim for consideration than the candidates whose names have been recommended and the writ petition is thus liable to be dismissed and is not maintainable."
(reproduced as in the original).
Furthermore, it has also been averred that the petitioner had not joined as Law Officer in Panchayat Department in the year 1971.
It has been stated that he had passed the LL.B examination in the year 1976 and joined as Law Officer on ad hoc basis in the Panchayat Department on 13.12.1979.
The services of the petitioner in Panchayat Department were dispensed with on 24.2.1981.
He joined the Prosecution Department as Assistant District Attorney on 2531981.
43.
A perusal of the above factual position would show that the Department of Justice has forwarded the names of three officers.
All the three officers are working as Deputy District Attorney while the petitioner is working as an Assistant District Attorney.
They are thus not only senior to the petitioner but are working on higher posts carrying higher scales of pay.
Further, even their record of service is in no way inferior and if at all is better than that of the petitioner.
In this situation, we are of the opinion that the action of the Department cannot be said to be arbitrary or violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
44.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that there is no merit in the writ petition and it is accordingly dismissed.
45.
C.W.P.
No. 1129 of 1991  Petitioner Kadam Singh is working as an Assistant Statistician in the office of the Director, Agriculture Haryana.
He claims to have joined as a Technical Assistant in March, 1971 and was promoted to the post of Assistant Statistician in Haryana Agriculture Service Class-II in December, 1979.
The petitioner claims to have had an excellent record of service and claims that the reports for the years 1985-86 to 1989-90 were 'Outstanding'.
He further claims that respondent No. 5 also holding a Class II post of Subject Matter Specialist in the Department of Agriculture.
The petitioner claims that his record of service is better than that of respondent No. 5.
It has been further averred in the petition that in response to a circular the Director of Agriculture vide his Memo dated August 17, 1990 forwarded the name of the petitioner.
It is his case that respondent No. 2 who is Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Department of Agriculture for wholly extraneous considerations wrote to respondent No. 3 who is Director Agriculture that a panel should be sent including the names of three persons.
As a result the name of respondent No. 5 was also recommended.
The petitioner has further stated that the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana vide his letter dated December 20, 1990 had recommended the names of four persons including those of the petitioner and respondent No. 5.
Out of these four, the petitioner claims that respondent No. 5 alone had been called for interview by the Commission.
The petitioner's basic grievance is that according to the circular issued by the Govt. the name of only one person had to be recommended and that the action of the respondents in sending more than one name and forwarding the name of respondent No. 5 to the Commission in spite of the fact that his record of service was better than that of respondent No. 5 was wholly illegal, arbitrary and liable to be quashed.
46.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents.
While there is no dispute on facts the averments made in paragraphs 6 and 7 deserve to be noticed.
These read as under :-  "6.
In reply to para 6 of the writ petition, it is stated that Director of Agriculture vide his letter No. 46486/E-1(2) dated 1781990 recommended the name of the petitioner.
The respondent No. 2 with a view to ensure that all eligible officers have been considered asked respondent No. 3 to intimate whether the proposal/criteria for recommendation was circulated amongst all eligible officers and also asked for sending a panel of three names.
This was done with a view to ensure justice and fair play to all eligible officers.
A copy of this memo No. 5738-Agri.I(2)-90/21975, dated 31890 is enclosed as Annexure R-II.
This would show that no extraneous considerations were involved in resorting to this step.
The allegations of extraneous considerations are totally false and denied.
This step is also in consonance with well established practice followed in all cases of selection promotion etc.
The Director of Agriculture, therefore, sent the name of three more officers to the respondent No. 2.
7.
In reply to para 7 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the panel of 4 names sent by Director of Agriculture was forwarded to the Chief Secretary since they fulfilled conditions laid down by the Chief Secretary in his letter dated 17790.
It may be emphasised that the name of the petitioner was mentioned at serial No. 1 of the list while recommending the names of officers to the respondent No. 1.
However, in the Gradation List of HAS Class II as stood on 6/80, the name of Sh. Joginder Singh is at serial No. 186 the name of Sh. Chander Parkash is at serial No. 188, the name of Sh. Om Parkash Dhankar is at serial No. 192 and the name of the petitioner Sh. Kadam Singh is at serial No.
208(A)."
The allegations of pressure of extraneous considerations on the part of respondent No. 2 have also been denied.
It has also been stated in the written statement that respondent No. 2 by recommending the names of all the eligible officers to the Govt. had left the final choice in the hands of respondent viz. the Chief Secretary who was the highest functionary in the State.
47.
The written statement also points out that respondent No. 2 is not aware of any political links of respondent No. 5.
The name of the petitioner is stated to have been kept at serial No. 1 of the panel forwarded by the Department in spite of the fact that respondent was senior to the petitioner.
Therefore, the Chief Secretary who had to make the final recommendations to the Commission had preferred the senior persons.
A persual of the above factual position shows that :-  (1) respondent No. 5 has been graded as 'Very Good' during the last five years, while the petitioner was assessed as 'Outstanding'; (2) the name of the petitioner was placed at No. 1 of the panel which was considered by the Chief Secretary and that of respondent No. 5 was placed below him; and (3) respondent No. 5 is senior to the petitioner by 22 steps.
48.
In the background of this factual position, it is clear that the claims of petitioner as well as respondent No. 5 were considered.
It is further clear that even though the record of the petitioner is better than that of the respondent No. 5 both were eligible.
One view could be that in the matter of selection, seniority was wholly irrelevant and therefore, the name of the petitioner alone should have been forwarded to the Commission.
The other possible view could be that both were eligible and suitable and the Govt. has not violated only provision of law by preferring the senior to the junior.
It is in the context of this factual position that the case has to be examined.
Having given the matter full consideration, we are of the view that the action of the Govt. in forwarding the case of the senior in preference to that of the petitioner cannot be said to suffer from arbitrariness or illegality.
49.
We cannot lose sight of the fact that respondent No. 5 is senior to the petitioner by 22 steps.
He was in fact the senior-most person in the panel of 4.
50.
In this context the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Dalpat Abhishek Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, AIR 1990 SC 434 are relevant.
Their Lordships were pleased to obverse as under :-  "It is not the function of the Court of hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinise the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The Court has no such experience.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the committee or its procedure vitiating the selection or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc.
It is not disputed that in the instant case the University had constituted the Committee in due compliance with the relevant Statutes.
The Committee consisted of experts and it selected the candidates after going through all the relevant materials before it.
Therefore, setting aside the selection on the ground of the so-called comparative merits of the candidates, as assessed by Court while sitting in appeal over selection so made would not be permissible."
In view of the above pronouncement of law, we do not find any infirmity in the action of the Govt.  51.
We think, the view taken by the Govt. is one of the possible views.
It is not a case where the view of the Govt. could be such as no reasonable person could have taken the view being one of the possible ones, and not even unreasonable in the context of the facts.
We are not in a position to substitute it by another view which the petitioner has strenuously urged for.
52.
Mr. PS Patwalia was very vehement in contending that he should also be allowed to appear for the interview before the Commission without excluding respondent No. 5.
On the other hand, the learned Advocate General was equally vehement in contending that only one person had to be recommended from the Department of Agriculture and name of respondent No. 5 had been accordingly forwarded to the Commission.
He also pointed out that the petitioner would have the chance to compete even in the subsequent selection and it was considered proper to give the senior person whose reports were 'Very Good' chance to compete this year.
53.
The claims of the petitioner and the respondent having been duly considered and the respondent-State having leaned in the favour of one of the possible views and the respondent being eligible according to the prescribed criteria and especially in view of the dictum of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the above-mentioned case, we regret our inability to accept the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
We, therefore, dismiss this petition.
54.
C.W.P.
No. 664 of 1991  Petitioner Dilbagh Singh is an Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in the State of Haryana.
He claims to have been appointed to this post on 23.8.1982 and had attained the age of about 33 years on 1.1.1990.
He has averred that the State Govt. had arbitrarily forwarded the name of Mr. Hari Singh who was a Junior Auditor to the Haryana Public Service Commission and that in spite of the fact that his name had been forwarded at serial No. 1 on 311991, the Chief Secretary had wrongly ignored his claim and sent the name of Mr. Hari Singh.
He has also averred that the delay on the part of the Department is forwarding his name to the Chief Secretary was in no way attributable to him and he could not be permitted to suffer for somebody else's fault.
55.
On behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that the petitioner has been communicated adverse remarks for the year 1986-87 which had been later on expunged.
It has been further pointed out that originally the name of Mr. Hari Singh alone had been forwarded by the Director, Food & Supplies on 4.12.1990.
Subsequently, on 311991 the Director recommended the name of the petitioner also and suggested that the name of Mr. Hari Singh may be considered as second candidate from the department.
This substitution, it is stated was not allowed by the State Govt. in view of the fact that the Director could recommend only one person.
In a supplementary affidavit dated 1321991 it has been mentioned that the record of Mr. Hari Singh is better than that of the petitioner.
56.
During the hearing of the case the learned Advocate General pointed out from the original record of the Govt. that Mr. Hari Singh has been assessed as 'Outstanding' in all the five years from 1985-86 to 1989-90.
As against this, the petitioner had earned three 'Outstanding' reports, one 'Very Good' and one adverse report which had been expunged could at best be assumed to be 'Good'.
The Advocate General thus submitted that the action of the Govt. was absolutely fair and proper inasmuch as a person with a better record of service had been preferred to the petitioner.
57.
The contention of the counsel for the petitioner is that the post of Assistant Food & Supplies Officer was higher than that of the Junior Auditor as it carried a higher scale of pay and consequently the action of the Govt. in forwarding the name of Mr. Hari Singh to the Commission could not be sustained.
58.
We regret our inability to accept this contention.
Firstly, Mr. Hari Singh is not a party in the case.
The acceptance of the contention of the petitioner would obviously affect his interests adversely.
No order can, however, be passed adverse to his interests in his absence.
Since Mr. Hari Singh is not a party, we cannot give any declaration which may adversely affect his interests.
Secondly, even on merits we are not persuaded to hold that the action of the Govt. in forwarding his name to the Commission suffers from any legal infirmity.
His record of service is certainly better than that of the petitioner.
Thirdly, the Director had originally forwarded only the name of Mr. Hari Singh to the Govt. On 311991 he suggested the name of the petitioner also.
At that stage, the Govt. appears to have taken the view that it was too late and in any case the record of Mr. Hari Singh was better than that of the petitioner.
59.
We, thus, find no infirmity in the view taken by the Govt.
The writ petition is accordingly devoid of merit and is dismissed.
60.
C.W.P.
No. 1011 of 1991  The petitioner is an Excise & Taxation Officer.
He claims that after passing his LL.B examination in the year 1975, he was appointed as Excise & Taxation Officer through the Haryana Public Service Commission on 541976.
Besides claiming that he has a distinguished academic record, he also claims that he had earned 'Very Good' to 'Outstanding' reports in his service career.
He further claims that his name was considered by the competent authority viz. the Excise & Taxation Commissioner and recommended to the Govt. for onward transmission to the Commission.
He further claims that respondent No. 5 did not fulfil the basic criteria for inclusion of his name in the panel.
It is his claim that respondent No. 5 was ineligible as one of the reports earned by him during the last five years was merely, 'Good' while two were 'Very Good' and the other two were 'Outstanding'.
It has been further averred that in fact the name of respondent No. 5 was not recommended by the Excise & Taxation Commissioner in the list of 15 officers forwarded to the Secretary of the Department.
In spite of this factual position, the petitioner alleges that vide his Memo.
of December 12, 1990, the Secretary to Govt. asked respondent No. 3 to recommend the name of the respondent No. 5.
His name was accordingly forwarded to the Government and has even been sent to the Commission.
The inclusion of the name of respondent No. 5 and the exclusion of the name of the petitioner has been challenged by him as being totally arbitrary and illegal.
61.
The petition had come up for motion hearing before the Division Bench on 2111991 when the Court had directed the issue of notice of motion to the respondents.
The matter came up on February 4, 1991, when the writ petition was admitted and ordered to be heard with C.W.P.
No. 894 of 1991.
The written statement was filed on February 13, 1991.
When the matter was listed before the Division Bench for regular hearing, CM No. 1647 of 1991 was moved for the amendment of the petition.
The Division Bench had ordered the application to be put up with the main writ petition.
No further orders were passed by the Division Bench.
When the matter finally came up for hearing, the application for amendment of the writ petition was not pressed.
However, a rejoinder was filed on behalf of the petitioner through CM No. 1999 of 1991 which was allowed by us during the course of hearing.
Yet another affidavit was filed with the petition on April 1, 1991 through CM No. 2167 of 1991.
62.
On the basis of these pleadings, the learned counsel for the petitioner was at pains to point out that the name of the petitioner was originally recommended in July, 1990 when the name of respondent No. 5 was not included.
An adverse report which was later on taken into consideration did not in fact exist on the crucial date and in any case the report could not be relied upon in view of the documents produced with CM No. 2167 of 1991.
In the amended petition, a further plea had been raised that if seniority was a relevant consideration, the petitioner should have been preferred to respondent No. 6.
However, the amendment had not been allowed by the Court when the application was originally considered since the amendment sought involved issue of fresh notice at least to respondent No. 6 and issue of notice etc. would have further delayed the matter.
It was not considered expedient to entertain the amended petition at the belated stage.
Even the learned counsel did not press for the amendment being allowed.
Consequently, the consideration was limited to the issues raised in the original petition.
63.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it was pointed out as under :-  "However, on the grievance of respondent, the case of the petitioner was examined vis-a-vis Shri JS Chahal respondent No. 5 and it transpired that the record of Shri Chahal was better than that of the petitioner and it was decided to recommend the name of Shri JS Chahal, Excise & Taxation Officer in place of Shri SK Yadav whose name was earlier recommended at Serial No. 5.
A copy of this letter dated December 26, 1990 is enclosed as Annexure R-V However, after the recommendations dated December 26, 1990, the reports for the period from April 1, 1988 to September 30, 1988 (1988-89) and for the year 1989-90 of Shri SK Yadav have since been finalised.
For the period from April 1, 1988 to September 30, 1988 (1988-89), he has been adjudged as an average officer with an impression of doubtful integrity and for the year 1989-90 he has been adjudged as outstanding.
Thus no grievance can be found with the recommendation of Mr. Chahal (respondent No. 5) to the exclusion of the petitioner.
Even otherwise the interview having already taken place, the petition deserves to be dismissed.
"On merits  2.
That para 2 of the petition is admitted to the extent that the petitioner is possessing degree of Law (non-professional).
In regard to the rest of the para, it is stated that so far as Special Recruitment to the post of H.C.S.
is concerned, relevant period is 1985-86 to 1989-90 and in this period he has earned '+A' report for one year and 'A' reports for two and a half years.
Reports for April 1, 1988 to September 30, 1988 and 1989-90 were yet to be finalised at the time of recommending the name of Jagmal Singh Chahal respondent No. 5.
A comparative chart of the reports of the petitioner and that of respondent No. 5 at the time of recommendations is enclosed as Annexure 'R-VII'.
However, later the recommendations dated December 26, 1990, the reports for the period from April 1, 1988 to September 30, 1988 (1988-89) and for the year 1989-90 of Shri SK Yadav have since been finalised.
For the period from April 1, 1988 to September 30, 1988 (1989-90), he has been adjudged as an average officer with an impression of doubtful integrity and for the year 1989-90, he has been adjudged as outstanding.
Thus no grievance can be found with the recommendation of Mr. Chahal (respondent No. 5) to the exclusion of the petitioner.
Thus at the time of making recommendation and even at present Mr. Chahal respondent No. 5 has definite edge over the petitioner so far as the service record for relevant period is concerned.
An up-to-date comparative chart of the service record of the petitioner and that of the respondent No. 5 is enclosed as Annexure R-VII."
The summary of the record as given at Annexure R-VII is as under :-  "Comparative chart of the A.C.R.s of the petitioner and respondent No. 5.
Name of the petitioner.
Name of the respondent No. 5 SK Yadav JS Chahal Year Remarks Year Remarks 1985-86 Outstanding 1985-86 Good 1986-87 Very Good 1986-87 Very Good 1987-88 Very Good 1987-88 Very Good 1.10.88 to 31.3.89 & 1.4.88 to 30988 Average with the impression of integrity doubtful 1988-89 +A (Outstanding) 1989-90 Outstanding 1989-90 +A (Outstanding) Total : Outstanding 2 Outstanding 2 Very Good 2-1/2 Very Good 2 Average/Adverse 1/2 Good 1 In view of the above factual position as stated in the written statement the basic issue that arises for consideration is as to whether or not the action of the respondents in recommending the name of Shri JS Chahal in preference to the petitioner was justified.
64.
The learned Advocate General during the course of hearing pointed out that Mr. Chahal had been directly recruited as an Excise & Taxation Officer in the year 1984 and that his name was placed at serial No. 115 in the seniority list.
As against this, the petitioner had been promoted to the post of Excise & Taxation Officer on purely ad hoc basis in the year 1986 and his service had not been regularised so far.
It was further pointed out that the name of the petitioner had not yet even been included in the seniority list.
65.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the adverse reports given to the petitioner having not been communicated to him could not have been relied upon for the purposes of determining his suitability.
As against this, the learned Advocate General relied upon; the Supreme Court decisions reported as Parkash Chand Sharma v. The Oil and Natural Gass Commission, 1970 S.L.R.
116 and BL Butail v. Union of India, 1970 S.L.R.
926 to contend that the adverse confidential report could be taken into consideration and in case the petitioner submits a representation and the report expunged, the Government could be called upon to review the matter.
66.
We have considered the matter.
A persual of the record of the case shows that the petitioner's name was not even included in the seniority list of Excise & Taxation Officers while that of respondent No. 5 appeared at serial No. 115.
This shows that respondent was far senior to the petitioner.
Even otherwise, the facts show that the respondent No. 5 has been working as Excise & Taxation Officer since the year 1984, after his selection through the Haryana Public Service Commission while the petitioner was promoted as Excise & Taxation Officer in the year 1986 on purely ad hoc basis.
67.
So far as the record of service is concerned, respondent No. 5 has earned two 'Outstanding' two 'Very Good' and one 'Good' reports.
In the case of the petitioner, even if the adverse report is excluded it would be found that he had earned two 'Outstanding' and 2-1/2 'Very Good' reports.
The record of service of the petitioner was not such that he may be entitled to supersede the petitioner who is far senior to him.
Even if the record of two Officers is assumed, for the sake of arguments, to be almost at par, the Government cannot be accused of having acted arbitrarily so as to attract the wrath of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The authorities could have said that the record of the two Officers even if assumed to be equally good, a senior is entitled to be recommended.
In this way, no rule, regulation or constitutional guarantee can be said to have been violated.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the action of the State Government does not suffer from any fatal infirmity.
68.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner was at pains out that Excise & Taxation Commissioner had not recommended the name of respondent No. 5 while the name of the petitioner had been duly recommended in the first instance prior to December 26, 1990.
It was pointed out that it was only on the representation of respondent No. 5 that his name was included while that of the petitioner was dropped.
Even if that be so, we do not see any infirmity in the action of the State Government.
If the claim of respondent No. 5 deserved to be considered and had been wrongly ignored, nothing stopped the State Government from reconsidering the matter and including the name of respondent No. 5 in the list of persons whose names it had chosen to recommend.
It only did what was warranted by law.
Its action was just and fair.
It did not violate any provision of law and consequently, no infirmity can be found in its order.
69.
It was also contended that the effect of the adverse report was nullified by the documents produced by the petitioner.
This contention is of no consequence.
Even if the adverse report is excluded, as mentioned above, the record of the petitioner, in our opinion, was not such, as to warrant him being preferred to respondent No. 5.
A suggestion was also made that the reports of respondent No. 5 were later on improved.
It was pointed out to the Court by the learned Advocate General during the course of hearing that the final authority had given the reports mentioned in Annexure R-7 and the action was perfectly valid.
We think learned Advocate General was right in his contention.
It has not been shown to us that the reports were actuated by any extraneous consideration.
We have even perused the documents produced with CM No. 2167 of 1991.
We do not think any case of mala fides is at all made out.
Finding no merit in the writ petition, we have no option but to dismiss it.
70.
C.W.P.
No. 1221 of 1991  Mr. Shiv Narain Singh Sidhu, the petitioner herein is the Secretary of Municipal Committee, Ambala Cantonment.
He joined as Secretary on June 27, 1978 and has continued to hold this post to-date.
71.
While considering the cases for Special Recruitment to the Service, the claims of the petitioner and other Secretaries working in different Municipal Committees in the State of Haryana were, it is alleged, considered on the ground that they are not Government employees.
This has been challenged as wholly illegal and untenable.
Mr. Ajay Lamba, learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the various provisions of Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 as also the rules framed thereunder.
He has also relied upon the judgment of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Mathuradas Mohan Lal Kedia, A.I.R. 1984 SC 161 to contend that a Secretary working in a Municipal Committee is a civil servant and is entitled to be treated at par with other Government employees.
The learned counsel who had laboriously prepared his case was vehement in his contention that the action of the State Government amounted to denial of equality of opportunity to the petitioner.
72.
The learned Advocate General appearing for the respondents has fairly stated that even though the Government had taken the view that the petitioner and others of his class were not eligible, as a one time exception and without going into the merits of the controversy, the Government was willing to consider the claim of persons recommended by the Department of Local Government including the petitioner.
He said out of all the eligible persons recommended by the Department, the name of one person considered suitable shall be forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission for necessary consideration.
The learned counsel for the petitioner was satisfied with the undertaking given by the learned Advocate General.
73.
In view of this, the petition is rendered infructuous and is disposed of as such.
Of course, the State Government would consider the names of various persons recommended to it by the Secretary, Local Government and forward the name(s) of the person(s) considered suitable to the Public Service Commission.
74.
C.W.P.
No. 1269 of 1991  Messrs Hari Singh and Sulekh Chand who are working as Assistants in the Haryana Civil Secretariat have approached this Court through the present writ petition claiming that the Government is bound to make reservation for the members of scheduled castes, backward classes and ex-servicemen in the matter of Special Recruitment to the Service.
75.
Petitioner No.1 claims to be a Law Graduate and is a member of the scheduled castes while petitioner No. 2 who is a graduate claims to be a member of the backward classes.
He also claims to be an ex-serviceman.
It is claimed in the petition that Special Recruitment is in substance a direct recruitment.
Relying on the previous advertisement for direct recruitment issued vide Annexure P4, it is claimed that reservation for members of scheduled castes has to be made.
Reference has also been made to the executive instructions issued by the Government vide their letter of February 9, 1979.
The action of the Government in not making reservation in the present case has been challenged as discriminatory and arbitrary.
The claim has been controverted in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
76.
Mr. GS Mann, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that Special Recruitment is no promotion.
It is either direct recruitment or appointment by transfer.
in either event, the learned counsel contends the Government was bound to make reservation.
He has placed reliance on the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter at Annexures P-9/A and P-9/B.
77.
On the other hand Mr. Mohunta, learned Advocate General appearing for the respondent has contended that Special Recruitment is neither direct recruitment nor by way of transfer.
It is 'Special'.
He has relied upon two decisions of this Court reported as Shri Amar Singh v. The Chief Justice of Punjab and Haryana High Court, 1976(2) SLR 71 and Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab, 1989(2) SLR 61.
In the alternative, he has also contended that Article 16(4) contains only an enabling provision.
It is mandatory for the Government to make reservation while resorting to the method of Special Recruitment.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, the Government had chosen not to make any reservation for the purpose of Special Recruitment.
Consequently, no infirmity whatsoever an be found with this action of the State.
He has placed reliance on the dictum of law as laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in CA Rajendran v. Union of India, AIR 1968 SC 507.
78.
We have considered the matter.
A perusal of the rules would show that appointment to service is made from various registers.
The names of the aspirants for recruitment to the Service are placed on the respective registers in accordance with the procedure laid down in various rules.
So far as the register 'B' is concerned, the appointment is for all intents and purposes by way of direct recruitment.
Posts are advertised.
The selection is made by the Commission.
The names of the persons selected are placed on register 'B' and thereafter the orders of appointment are issued in accordance with roster prescribed in Rule 17.
So far as the other categories/registers are concerned, the appointment is made by selection from amongst members of specified services.
It is not direct recruitment.
It is not even promotion.
It is not even transfer.
It is pure and simple method of selection.
By way of illustration, person working as Naib Tehsildars and Tehsildars are considered in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
The names of those considered suitable are brought on register 'A'.
Consequently, it is wrong for the petitioners to contend that it is either direct recruitment or by transfer.
It is, of course, 'Special'.
In view of earlier decisions of this Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) it is not promotion.
In such a situation, it is for the State to consider and decide as to whether or not reservation should be made.
Since it has chosen not to make any reservation, its action can neither be dubbed as arbitrary nor as discriminatory.
This is all the more so in view of law laid down by their Lordships in CA Rajendran's case (supra).
Reference in this behalf may be made to the following observation :-  "Our conclusion therefore is that Article 16(4) does not confer any right on the petitioner and there is no constitutional duty imposed on the Government to make a reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, either at the initial stage of recruitment or at the stage of promotion.
In other words Article 16(4) is an enabling provision and confers a discretionary power on the State to make a reservation of appointments in favour of backward class of citizens which, in its opinion, is not adequately represented in the Services of the State.
We are accordingly of the opinion that the petitioner is unable to make good his submission on this aspect of the case."
The dictum of law is clear.
Article 16(4) embodies only an enabling provision.
The action of the State in the present case is not in violation of the provision of Article 16(4).
79.
Consequently, we find no merit in the petition which is hereby dismissed.
80.
C.W.P.
No. 894 of 1991  Rajeshwar Dayal and three others, Block Development and Panchayat Officers have filed this petition praying for the issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the notification dated December 20, 1990 by which the Govt. has decided to make Special Recruitment to the 21 vacancies in the Service.
It has also been prayed that the respondents be directed to make selection and appointment from only such candidates who are eligible under the statutory rules.
81.
The case in support of the above prayer was argued by Mr. RK Malik, at the outset.
All the legal submissions made at the hearing had been considered and rejected.
Thereafter he had raised a contention to suggest that the petitioners who were eligible have been illegally left out while three other persons have been recommended who in fact did not have a better record than the petitioners.
Further it was contended by Mr. Malik that according to the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2, petitioners were treated as ineligible while in fact they were eligible.
An ancillary contention suggesting that the whole process of selection be gone into de novo was also made.
The factual premises for these contentions is based on the averments in the written statement and the summary of record produced by the department as Annexure R-2/1.
The relevant extract from this document is reproduced below :-  "Sh. Raj Kumar Ravish 1985-86 Good 1986-87 Good (Partly V. Good) 1987-88 Partly V Good Part Outstanding 1988-89 V. Good 1989-90 V. Good Sh. Rajeshwar Dayal 1985-86 Good 1986-87 Good 1987-88 Good 1988-89 Good 1989-90 Not received Sh. Ram Kishan Malik 1985-86 Outstanding Charge-sheet under Rule 7 pending.
1986-87 V.Good 1987-88 Outstanding 1988-89 Good 1989-90 V. Good Sh. Vijay Parkash Sharma 1985-86 V. Good 1986-87 Good 1987-88 Outstanding 1988-89 Not received 1989-90 do Recommendees Sh. Balwan Singh Bhakar 1985-86 V Good Recorded warning issued on 6689.
1986-87 V. Good 1987-88 V. Good 1988-89 V. Good 1989-90 V. Good Sh. Dalbir Singh 1985-86 V. Good Adverse remarks conveyed.
1986-87 V. Good 1987-88 Outstanding 1988-89 V. Good 1989-90 V. Good Sh. Roshan Lal 1985-86 V. Good 1986-87 Outstanding 1987-88 V. Good 1988-89 4/88 to 7/88 .
(V. Good) .
8/88 to 3/89 .
(outstanding) 1989-90 Outstanding On the basis of the above factual position it was vehemently contended by the counsel that the names of the petitioners should have been recommended to the Public Service Commission.
According to the counsel, a perusal of the return showed that the petitioners were in fact considered ineligible while in fact they were eligible.
Accordingly, it was suggested that the recommendation made the Govt. was vitiated and a fresh selection ought to be made.
82.
The learned Advocate General contended that none of the selected persons has been impleaded as respondent in the writ petition.
He further pointed out that no prayer whatsoever has been made in the written statement for quashing the recommendations made by the Govt.
It was emphasised by the learned Advocate General that the petitioners had merely contended that Special Recruitment had to be made only from all the sources specified in Rule 6 and not from all the sources mentioned in Annexure P-3.
It was, therefore, submitted by the learned Advocate General that the petitioners could not be allowed to make any challenge of the recommendation made by the Govt.
He further pointed out that in fact the claims of the petitioners had been duly considered and that the action of the Govt. in recommending the three persons cannot even be assailed on any legal tenable ground.
83.
We have considered the submission made on behalf of the petitioners.
Even if the technical objection regarding the prayer in the writ petition is to be ignored, the fact remains that none of the selected persons whose names have been recommended to the Commissioners have been impleaded as respondents.
If the contention of the petitioners that the selection is vitiated and the whole process is to be gone into de novo is accepted the rights of the three persons whose names have been recommended to the Commission are bound to be adversely affected.
They have a right to be heard.
They cannot be condemned unheard.
In our view they are a necessary party.
Since none of them has been impleaded as a respondent, no order to their prejudice can be passed in their absence.
Further, even on perusal of the record which has been summarised above, we are not satisfied that any injustice has been done to the petitioners.
The petitioners as well as the persons whose names have been recommended have 'Good' record of service.
The Govt. which is better aware of the performance and competence of its officers had chosen to recommend three names it considered suitable.
In such a situation, the Court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the Govt. or authority.
It has neither the means nor the expertise which may entitle it to say that one is better than the other.
The Court interferes any if a patent case of arbitrariness is made out.
In the circumstances of this case, we are not satisfied that any case of arbitrary exercise of power is made out.
It is all and more so because there is nothing on record to suggest that the Secretary to the Govt. had any ulterior motive in selecting one and rejecting the other.
84.
Mr. RK Malik repeatedly drew the attention of the Court to the averments in the written statement that the petitioners were ineligible.
The learned Advocate General points out that the expression had been loosely used.
Be that as it may, keeping in view the above factual position, we are not satisfied that a case for setting aside the recommendations of the Govt. is made out.
The question of making the selection de novo does not as such arise.
We, therefore, dismiss this petition.
85.
In CWP Nos. 10946 of 1990, 1246 of 1991 and 1610 of 1991 no arguments besides what has been considered above were addressed.
The contentions raised are only of a general nature which have been dealt with in the opening part of the judgment.
These petitions are consequently dismissed.
86.
Before parting with the Judgment, we would like to observe that in a case where contending claim of a large number of persons have to be considered the Court cannot insist upon scientific precision or mathematical exactitude.
We also cannot forget that judicial review has to be only 'judicial'.
Even though, we have gone through the record in fair amount of detail, we cannot forget the warning given by the Apex Court in DA Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, AIR 1990 SC 434 that "the decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered within only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the committee or its procedure vitiating the Selection".
Judged by these standards, we find no infirmity in the action of the respondents.
87.
As a result, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1560 of 1991 and 1221 of 1991 are dismissed as infructuous while Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10948 of 1990, 664, 894, 999, 1011, 1129, 1200, 1201, 1246, 1269 and 1610 of 1991 are dismissed on merits.
Petitions dismissed.