SB Sinha, J - This Writ Petition arises out of an order dated 2.7.98 passed in OA No. 1357 of 1997 passed by Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench whereby and whereunder the application filed by the writ petitioner was dismissed.
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.
2.
The petitioner joined the services of Eastern Railway Administration of Union of India as `Gangman'.
He was posted on `regular basis' as "Carpenter khalasi" in the scale of pay of Rs. 750-940/- against an existing vacancy.
He joined the said post on 41088.
3.
The said order of posting had been passed by a Senior Divisional Personnel Officer.
It is further admitted that the said post became vacant owing to retirement of one Sri Lalbehari Routh.
However, the petitioner was not allowed to draw the officiating higher pay and allowances to which he was entitled to.
He, therefore, filed an application before the learned Tribunal questioning non-payment of officiating pay and allowance for the period from 11094 to 10497.
4.
The Ld.
Tribunal relying on or on the basis of a Judgment in Mohd.
Swaleh v. Union of India, reported in 1997(6) SCC 200 : 1997(3) SCT 117 (SC), inter alia, held that as the petitioner had not been appointed by a competent authority he is not entitled to the aforementioned scale of pay.
However, our attention had been drawn to a clarificatory letter as contained in Annexure `A' to the writ application which is in question and answer from the relevant portion whereof reads thus :-  "Q.26(ii).
Will it be permissible to arrange for officiating promotions in exceptional cases even for short periods?
Ans.
to Q.26(ii).
In exceptional cases, when it is considered essential, officiating arrangement may be made against a vacancy which is more than 21 days with the prior approval of the HOD, which power may also be exercised by DRMs and Workshop-in-charges in respect of non-gazetted staff irrespective of whether the posts concerned are controlled by the Division/Workshops or by the Head Quarters (1), the possible examples of posts where such officiating promotions are permissible being Dy.
Controllers in Scale Rs. 2000-3200, Telephone Operators etc. Officiating arrangements will also be admissible in vacancies of 14 days if a change of category is involved in certain cases, viz. YM, Head Signaller, Chargemen working in sheds, Asst.
Foremen of Elect.
Dept.
in specified scales of pay, etc. etc.
Moreover the posts which cannot remain unmanned even for short periods and there is no scope for these being filled in even by employment of Leave Reserves, where these are provided, as for instance, the posts of ASMs, Pointsmen, Cabinmen, AYMs.
Enquiry Clerk, Mistries, Hospital Dresser, etc. etc. and in many other posts, officiating arrangement may be made without restriction of any time-limit.
This is permissible even for a day, but not against absence of staff of the higher grades on Casual Leave, Special Casual Leave, Court attendance.
For short periods of officiating arrangements, officiating pay will be fixed at rates per day as prescribed for each category of posts.
In case where officiating arrangements are not permissible under the rules as above, other staff in the office/establishment may be entrusted to look after the routine nature of duties of a post falling vacant without any extra remuneration.
In special circumstances, however, when no arrangement for officiating promotion has been made for some reason or other against a vacancy but at the same time it is felt that responsibilities of the post should be entrusted to an employee, a competent authority may appoint a railway servant already holding a post, to officiate, as a temporary, measure, in one or more of other posts at one time allowing him dual charge allowance as per rules governing payment of such allowance."
5.
Unlike the decision of the Apex Court in Mohd.
Swaleh (supra) there does not exist any statutory rule governing the posting on 'officiating' basis.
As would appear from the aforementioned policy decision, it is evident that a person can be asked to officiate in higher post where a vacancy arises for period of more than 21 days with the prior approval of the Head of the Department which power may also be exercised by DRMs and Workshop-in-charges in respect of non-gazetted staff irrespective of whether the posts concerned are controlled by the Divisions/Workshops or by the Head Quarters.
The letter of appointment dated 3rd October, 1989 had been issued in favour of the petitioner with the approval of the competent authority.
In that view of the matter, in our opinion the decision of the Apex Court in Mohd.
Swaleh (supra) cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
Once the petitioner had been appointed to a higher post and had discharged the duties and functions attached thereto, in terns of the aforementioned clarificatory letter he is entitled to the scale of pay attached thereto.
The respondents have disputed the factual matrix.
Thus, a presumption can also be drawn to the effect that the official act has been made in accordance with law.
6.
For the reasons aforementioned the impugned order cannot be sustained which is set aside accordingly.
This application is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay the difference of salary and other allowances admissible to the petitioner for working in the post of Carpenter for the period from 11094 to 10497.
However, in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Application allowed.