NK Sodhi, J - Petitioners and respondents 4 and 5 are working as Patwaris.
These respondents are junior to one or the other of the petitioners.
Promotion from the post of Patwari is to that of Kanungo and a Patwari becomes eligible for promotion only after he has qualified the departmental examination prescribed in Appendix `C' to the Punjab Kanungo Service (State Service Class III) Rules, 1976 (hereinafter called the 1976 Rules).
Since no person who had passed the departmental examination under the 1976 Rules was available for promotion, the State Government dispensed with the condition of passing the departmental examination and issued instructions dated December 20, 1982 in this regard.
These instructions were challenged in this Court in a large number of writ petition including Civil Writ Petition 6849 of 1994 filed by Navinder Singh and others which were allowed on March 29, 1995 and the following directions were issued :-  "(i) The instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated December 20, 1982 are not in conformity with the Rules.
These are, consequently, quashed.
The promotions which have been made during the pendency of these petitions without holding a test, are illegal.
These will now be made on the result of a test to be held in accordance with the provisions of the 1976 Rules.
All the vacancies which may have occurred during the pendency of these petitions up to November 8, 1994, shall be filled up on the basis of this test.
(ii) The respondents are directed to hold a test in respect of these vacancies and promotions made during the pendency of these petitions, are set aside."
During the pendency of the aforesaid writ petitions the 1976 Rules were repealed on 9th November, 1994 by Rules called the Punjab Kanungos (Class-III) Service Rules, 1994 (for short the 1994 Rules).
Under these Rules a Patwari can be promoted to the post of Kanungo on the basis of seniority-cum-merit subject to his having undergone a refresher course as provided in Appendix `B' to the Rules.
The vacancies which existed prior to the coming into force of the 1994 Rules had to be filled up in accordance with the 1976 Rules as was directed by this Court in Navinder Singh's case (supra).
In pursuance to the directions of this Court, a departmental test was held from 2531996 to 2731996 under the 1976 Rules in regard to the vacancies which existed up to November 8, 1994.
Petitioners who are senior to respondents 4 and 5 did not appear in this examination.
Respondents 4 and 5 took the departmental test and they were successful only in two out of the four papers and could not clear the same.
Since no eligible Patwari was available for promotion and the work of the department was suffering, the Deputy Commissioner by his order dated 1091998 promoted respondents 4 and 5 as Kanungos.
It is this order of the Deputy Commissioner which is now under challenge before us in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution Petitioners who are senior to these respondents have prayed that the promotion of respondents 4 and 5 be quashed and instead they be promoted as Kanungos.
2.
In response to the notice of motion, the respondents have filed their written statements.
The fact that respondents 4 and 5 are not eligible for promotion has not been controverted by any of the respondents.
Respondent 3 in his reply has admitted that respondents 4 and 5 are ineligible but they were promoted as no eligible candidate was available and because these respondents had cleared some of the papers of the departmental examination.
He has further averred that these respondents have been served with a notice to show cause why they should not be reverted as they have not been able to clear the departmental examination.
3.
Respondents 4 and 5 have also filed their written statement justifying their promotion and it is pleaded that they were promoted by relaxing the condition of passing the departmental examination and this relaxation, according to them, was granted under Rule 8 of the 1976 Rules.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is common case of the parties that respondents 4 and 5 have not passed the departmental examination under the 1976 Rules, and they are, therefore, ineligible for promotion to the post of Kanungo.
The order dated 1091998 promoting them does not indicate that they were promoted in relaxation of the condition regarding the passing of the departmental examination.
Even if it were to be assumed that these respondents were promoted in relaxation of the said condition under Rule 8 of the 1976 Rules as pleaded by them, their promotion could be valid only for a period of two years which period is now over.
Notice has already been issued to these respondents by the competent authority to show cause why they should not be reverted as they have failed to pass the departmental examination.
We are, therefore, satisfied that respondents 4 and 5 are ineligible and they cannot continue on the promoted post of Kanungo.
In this view of the matter, they are liable to be reverted for which a show cause notice has already been issued to them.
The prayer made by the petitioners that they be promoted instead of respondents 4 and 5 cannot be accepted as they are also ineligible inasmuch as they have not passed the departmental examination under the 1976 Rules.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1091998 promoting respondents 4 and 5 as Kanungos quashed.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.