Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - We have six writ petitions.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the facts as averred in C.W.P.
No. 11790- CAT-1999.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners claim that they were appointed as Security guards on different dates during the period from May 21, 1998 to October 31, 1998, at the Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh.
The petitioners allege that the college is their principal employer and that the contractor is only a middle man.
Apprehending termination of services they approached the Central Administrative Tribunal with the prayer that their services be regularised.
The Tribunal having dismissed their petition, they have approached this court through the present writ petition.
Even in the petition the prayer is that the order dated August 13, 1999 passed by the Tribunal may be quashed and that the respondents be directed to regularise their services.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 by Professor NK Goel.
In this written statement it has been inter alia averred that the respondent institution "has been registered as a principal employer for engaging man power on contract basis as envisaged under the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
It has entered into an agreement with the Contractors for the supply of man power."
A copy of the agreement has been produced as Annexure R2/1 with the written statement.
In this agreement it has been inter alia provided that "the persons deployed by the contractor for the work shall be the employees of the contractor for all intents and purposes.
There shall be no relationship of employer and employee between the said persons and the College and Hospital, either implicitly or explicitly".
It was also postulated that the persons so deployed shall be under the "over all control and supervision of the contractor and the contractor shall be liable for their service etc..." It has been further provided that "any obligation and/or formalities which are required to be fulfilled under the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 as amended from time to time or any other Act for the purpose of entering into and/or execution of this contract shall be carried out by the contractor at his own expenses etc. and the contractor shall report the compliance thereof to the Director Principal."
4.
Besides the agreement, the respondents have also placed on record a communication dated August 17, 1994, from the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, in which it was inter alia provided that "an effort should be made to reduce the creation of posts" and to "engage staff on contract basis which would cut down all permanent liability."
Even in the note for expenditure prepared for the consideration of the Finance Committee, it was stipulated in para 7 that the College "is utilising contractual services for some Group C and Group D employees including Drivers, Junior Laboratory Technicians, Security Staff, Peons, Helpers, Safaiwalas, Delivery Attendants, Gardeners, Barbers etc".
5.
On the basis of these facts, it is maintained by the respondent institution that the petitioners in all these cases are the employees of the respective contractors.
The contractors have engaged them.
There is no relationship of employer and employee between the petitioners and the institution or the Chandigarh Administration.
The salary is being paid by the contractors and not by the Administration or the College.
Thus, the claim as made by the petitioners against the institution or the Administration is not tenable.
6.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. SD Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the petitioners have been working exclusively for the Engineering Department.
It is not registered as a principal employer.
The contractors are not licensed under Section 7.
Thus, they are the employees of the Administration and have a right to be regularised on their posts.
7.
On the other hand Mr. Jaskirat Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondents has submitted that the petitioners have not worked even for a day with the Engineering Department of the Chandigarh Administration.
They have performed their duties at the Government Medical College and Hospital only.
The College is registered as an employer under the provision of the 1970 Act.
It had entered into a contract with the contractor.
The contract was for a limited period of one year.
It had expired in March 1999.
It was extended.
The extension too had expired in March 2000.
It is only on account of the interim order of stay regarding termination of services passed by a bench of this Court that the contract was extended for a short duration.
Otherwise, the contract has not been renewed so far.
It is further contended by the learned counsel that the contractors are duly registered.
Mr. Jaskirat Singh has further submitted that the contentions have been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners without any pleadings in that behalf.
8.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Are the petitioners in these cases the employees of the Engineering Department of the Chandigarh Administration ?
(ii) Are the petitioners entitled to regularisation of service ?
Regarding (i) :- A perusal of the writ petitions filed by the petitioners shows that they have described themselves as under : In CWP 11785-CAT-1999 :- There are eight petitioners.
All are shown to be "working as Electricians in Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh."
In CWP 11786-CAT-1999 :- There are five petitioners.
All the five are shown to be working as Helpers in the Government College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh."
In CWP 11787-CAT-1999 :- There are four petitioners, who are stated to be "work charged employees of the Engineering Department, Chandigarh Administration, working in the Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh."
In CWP 11788-CAT-1999 :- There are four petitioners.
Out of these, petitioner Nos. 1, 2 and 4 are working "in the Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh, as Sub Station Attendants."
No. 3 is stated to be posted in the "Governor's House, Punjab."
In CWP 11789-CAT-1999 :- There is only one petitioner, who is "working as a Helper at the Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh."
In CWP 11790-CAT-1999 :- There are seven petitioners.
All the seven are shown to be posted as Security Staff "working in the Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh."
On a perusal of above, it is clear that except petitioner No. 3 in CWP 11788- CAT-1999, all the petitioners are factually posted at Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh.
Even though an attempt has been made to describe the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 11787-CAT-1999 as "work charged employees of the Engineering Department", yet even these employees are posted at Government Medical College and Hospital Chandigarh.
Still further, no order of appointment, which may have been issued by the Engineering Department of the Chandigarh Administration, has been either pleaded or produced.
It has not even been suggested that any of the petitioners was ever employed by the issued of any letter by any authority in the administration.
The petitioners have, for obvious reasons, not been able to place anything on record to show that there was any relationship of employer and employee between them and the Engineering Department, the administration or even the Medical College.
In this situation, we find that the inference is obvious.
There is nothing on record to suggest that there is any relationship of employer and employee between the petitioners and the Engineering Department.
Even with regard to the solitary petitioner, who is working at the Punjab Governor's House, it has not been shown that he was employed by the Engineering Department.
Thus, the contention that the petitioners are the employees of the Engineering Department or that there is any relationship of employer and employee between the Administration and the petitioners cannot be sustained.
It is rejected.
9.
The pleadings on the record clearly show that the petitioners have been engaged by the different contractors.
The contractors have entered into an agreement with the Government Medical College and Hospital, Sector 32, Chandigarh.
The college is registered under the 1970 Act as a "principal employer".
It has entered into an agreement with the contractors.
These agreements are explicit and clearly provide that the relationship of employer and employee shall be between the contractor and the employee and that the college shall have nothing to do with this.
It is also clear that the petitioners are in fact working in the college at the instance of the contractors.
In this situation, it is clear that the relationship of employer and employee exists only between the contractor and the employees.
10.
In view of these facts, we are not surprised that the Central Administrative Tribunal has clearly come to the conclusion that the petitioners "cannot be taken to be Govt. servants or engaged by the Union of India and remain to be the employees of the contracts under the contract system which, by now, has become a well-recognised system".
It has been further found that "they, thus, are not holders of civil posts under the respondent Government and their present disputes do not fall under the definition of service disputes/matters defined under Section 3(q) of the Administrative Tribunals Act and this Tribunal, thus no jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicative upon the present petitions...".
We find no material to take a different view.
11.
In view of the above, we answer the first question against the petitioners and hold that they are not employees of the college or the Engineering Department.
The petitioners are the employees of the contractors only.
Regarding (ii) :-  The petitioners claim that they are entitled to the regularisation of their services.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioners are not the employees of the Chandigarh Administration in the Department of Engineering or the Government Medical College and Hospital, we find no ground to issue any direction that their claim for regularisation should be considered.
Thus, the relief deserves to be declined on this short ground alone.
12.
Irrespective of the above, we also find that the counsel has not referred to any Rule, Instructions or Order, which may even remotely suggest that the petitioners have any right to the regularisation of their services.
Admittedly, as mentioned above, the petitioners in CWP 11790-CAT-1999, had joined service during the period from May to October 1998.
Even before the expiry of a year, they had all approached the Tribunal with the prayer that the directions for regularisation of their services be issued.
Under which rule ?
Is there any law, making it incumbent to the employer to regularise their services.
Learned counsel has pointed out nothing in this regard.
No ground for the grant of relief as claimed by the petitioners is, thus, made out.
13.
Mr. SD Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Food Corporation of India, Haryana Region, Sector 17, Chandigarh v. The Presiding Officer, Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh and another, 1950-88(1) R.S.J.
526.
This was a case where the services of the workmen had been terminated by the contractor.
The workmen were invoking Section 25.
The factual position in the case was totally different from that in the present case.
The decision has no application to the facts of the present case.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in these petitions.
Consequently, all the six petitions are dismissed.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioners are low paid employees, we make no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.