RL Anand, J - Bhola Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and he is seeking the directions of this court for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for the quashment of Annexures P-12 and P-13, issued by respondent No. 6, vide which the amount of Rs. 1,03,794/- on account of payment of service element w.e.f.
111986 to 3181999 was ordered to be recovered from the petitioner.
The petitioner has further prayed for the issuance of a direction to the respondents to release the benefit of service element and for restraining the respondents from realising the above amount.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was an ex-serviceman and he served the Indian Navy from 641974 to 3041984.
After serving for 10 years and 24 days, he was discharged on completion of the tenure of service on medical grounds.
As per the petitioner, he is presently employed in the State Bank of Patiala in District Ropar.
When the petitioner was serving in the Navy, he suffered from the disease `Bronchial Asthama'.
Nearing the completion of his service tenure, the petitioner applied for re-engagement of service but was not agreed to by the authorities as he was placed in the Medical Category S3 A3.
On the recommendations of the Release Medical Board, the petitioner was placed in the lower Medical Category S3 A3 and was discharged from service on completion of his first tenure of service on 3041984.
As per the petitioner, his release was attributable to the Naval service and he was granted disability pension at the rate of Rs. 18/- per month vide PPO No. 2571 of 1985 w.e.f.
151984 to 2941986.
An additional amount of Rs. 22/- was also payable so as to make it Rs. 40/- per month, the minimum pension.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the service element of the disability was not notified in the original PPO issued by the defence authorities.
In short, the grouse of the petitioner is that since he has been discharged from the Naval service on medical grounds, therefore, he is entitled to the benefits of disability element as well as service element.
He has got the disability element but he has been deprived of the service element illegally and, in this manner, the order of recovery passed by respondent No. 6 is illegal.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
4.
The stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was granted service gratuity on account of terminal benefit.
He was discharged "on medical ground but was released on completion of his term of engagement of 10 years service, therefore, he is not entitled for service element as per rules laid down in Navy Instructions No. 8/66".
Further, it is the stand of the respondent- authorities that the petitioner was granted disability element @ Rs. 18/- per month.
151984 to 2941986 vide PPO No. N/D/2571/85 with a note that an extra sum of Rs. 22/- per month is also payable to make the pension to the minimum level of Rs. 40/- per month, which was granted to him.
Keeping in view the note on the PPO, Rs. 22/- were presumed to be service element and Rs. 18/- as disability element to make the disability pension Rs. 40/-.
Consequently, his pension was erroneously revised to Rs. 375/- as service element w.e.f.
111986 while he was entitled to the disability element only.
On receipt of PPO No. ND/RA/73/1998, it was mentioned that all payments made on account of PPO quoted under reference are liable to adjustment.
It was a case of wrong calculation of the benefit of service element, therefore, the orders were passed for the recovery of the amount.
In short, the defence of the respondent-authorities is that since the petitioner was not discharged from the Naval service on account of his medical category but on account of the expiry of the contractual period of engagement, therefore, he is only entitled to the benefit of the disability element and not the service element.
5.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
It is fairly conceded at the Bar by the counsel for the petitioner that the initial engagement of the petitioner was contractual for a period of 10 years.
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that on the expiry of the engagement period of 10 years, the petitioner offered his services to the department for his re-engagement and this is evident from the document, Annexure P-1.
7.
I am not in a position to accept the argument raised by the counsel for the petitioner.
There is no document on the record to show that the petitioner ever expressed his willingness to re-engage himself into the service.
Rather, the letter, Annexure P-1, indicates that it was issued to the Commanding Officer with reference to his letter dated 7.12.1983 and it was stated in this document that the petitioner was unfit for service due to his medical category S3 A3 (Permanent) and, therefore, his re-engagement is not considered beneficial from service point of view.
It is the specific case of the respondents in the written statement that the petitioner was not discharged from the Naval service on account of his disability.
Rather, he was released on completion of his term of engagement of 10 years.
In such a situation, the petitioner is only entitled to the benefit of disability element and he is not entitled to the benefit of service element.
8.
The ancillary point which survives for determination is that if a wrong payment has been made to the petitioner, whether the authorities have the right to get it adjusted or recovered from the petitioner or not.
Every pension order is subject to calculations and it is so indicated in the pension order itself, which does not create estoppel against the respondent- authorities and, therefore, they have rightly issued the order for the recovery of the amount.
9.
Faced with this difficulty, counsel for the petitioner relies upon 1992(2) SLR 512 and a decision of this court in L.P.A. No. 5 of 1997.
10.
I have gone through the contents of the judgments and in my opinion, these judgments are distinguishable on facts.
It is not clear from these judgments whether the appointment of the petitioners therein was contractual or otherwise.
In the present case, it is proved that the appointment of the petitioner at the initial stage was contractual for a period of 10 years and the petitioner was not shunted out from the service on account of medical reasons.
Rather, he was discharged on account of the completion of his tenure.
Every person who goes out from the service of the armed forces, he is bound to produce himself for medical check up.
If the petitioner has been reduced in the medical category that does not mean that he was discharged from the service on account of medical reasons.
Even the discharge certificate placed by the petitioner on record as Annexure P-2, indicates that he was discharged on the expiry of period of engagement and not on medical grounds.
11.
Another argument of the counsel for the petitioner is that it should be deemed that the petitioner was discharged from the service on medical grounds because he has been placed in a lower medical category at the time of his release.
12.
The argument is not acceptable to the court.
The petitioner has to prove his case by standing on his own legs.
There is no such deemed discharge as is propounded by the counsel for the petitioner.
13.
Resultantly, I am of the considered opinion that this writ petition lacks merit and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
The interim order regarding the stay of recovery, stands vacated.
Petition dismissed.