NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions 10717 and 11399 of 2000 in which common questions of law and fact arise.
Arguments were, however, addressed in Civil Writ Petition 10717 of 2000 and the facts are being taken therefrom.
2.
After passing his 10+2 examination from the Central Board of Secondary Education the petitioner appeared in the year 1997 in the entrance test for seeking admission to the 3 years Diploma Course.
He was successful in the test and was admitted to the course in the discipline of Electronics and Communication Engineering.
He was admitted to the Government Polytechnic, Narnaul, District Mohindergarh.
In the prospectus that was published by the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana for the academic session 1997-98 in which Session the petitioner was admitted, the duration of the course was mentioned as 3 years.
Petitioner successfully completed the first five semesters of the course and appeared for the 6th semester examination in June, 2000.
In the meantime, YMCA Institution of Engineering, Faridabad issued a notice in the press that it would conduct the Lateral Entry Engineering Test- 2000 (LEET) on July 23, 2000 for admission to the second year third semester of Bachelor of Technology/Bachelor of Engineering courses in various engineering institutes/colleges in the State of Haryana for the academic sessions 2000-2001.
Candidates who had passed the diploma course of duration of 3 years or more in the relevant discipline from Haryana Board of Technical Education or its equivalent with at least 60% marks in the aggregate were eligible to appear in this entrance test.
Candidates who had appeared in the diploma examination and whose results had not by then been declared were also eligible to appear in the LEET.
Petitioner appeared in LEET and was successful therein.
His rank in the merit list is 57 and there were in all 155 seats in all the institutions in the State of Haryana which were to be filled up from amongst the diploma holders.
He avers that his result of the 6th semester examination held in June, 2000 has not been declared by the Director, Technical Education, Haryana without which he could not be admitted to the engineering course.
He approached respondent No. 2 to declare his result but he did not receive any positive response and, therefore, he filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus directing respondent No. 2 to declare the result of the 6th semester examination so that the petitioner is able to seek admission to the engineering course under the Lateral Entry Scheme.
3.
In response to the notice of motion issued by this Court the respondents have filed their reply.
It is pleaded that the result of the 6th semester examination of the diploma course was declared on 1882000 and even though the petitioner has been successful therein he does not become eligible to seek admission to the engineering course because he has not yet completed the diploma course the duration of which is 3-1/2 years consisting of 7 semesters.
It is also averred that the petitioner took admission in the diploma course in the session 1997-98 when the duration of the course was 3-1/2 years consisting of 7 semesters.
It is further averred that the 7th semester consists of in-plant training and the diploma is awarded by including the marks obtained by a candidate in this training after the 7th semester.
It is contended that the duration of the course was inadvertently mentioned as 3 years in the prospectus issued for the session 1997-98 though actually it was 3-1/2 years.
4.
We have heared counsel for the parties and are of the view that there is no merit in the writ petitions.
The only argument advanced by the counsel for the petitioner is that when his client joined the diploma course in the year 1997 the prospectus made it clear that the duration of that course was 3 years and the respondents could not change the duration till the students who joined the course in the academic session 1997-98 had completed the same.
He has placed reliance on Full Bench judgments of this court in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab etc., 1993(4) SLR 673 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB) and Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(2) SLR 14 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H)(FB).
We are unable to agree with the contention of the petitioner.
From the stand taken by the respondents it is clear that the competent authority decided in the year 1995 to revise the curriculum of Electronics and Communication Diploma Course to 3-1/2 years consisting of 7 semesters.
The 7th semester includes the in-plant training and the marks awarded to a candidate in this training have to be included in the diploma awarded to him.
It is further clear that the Director, Technical Education, Haryana by his communication dated 18101995 informed all the Principals of the Institutes in the State of Haryana which impart such education that the duration of the course had been increased to 3-1/2 years and that the revised curriculum was to be implemented with effect from the academic session 1995- 96.
What happened was that when the prospectus was issued for the academic session 1997-98 there was an inadvertent error therein and the duration of the course was shown to be of 3 years.
When this error was noticed the Director, Technical Education, Haryana sent another communication to all the Principals of the Institutes imparting education in Electronics and Communication Diploma Course that the revised curriculum was to be implemented with effect from the academic session 1995-96.
This is not a case where the duration of the course was changed mid-stream.
The duration of the course had already been increased to 3-1/2 years in the year 1995 and the petitioner is only trying to take advantage of the error that crept in the publication of the prospectus for the academic session 1997-98.
We are further of the view that even after the commencement of the course which was earlier 3 years it was open to the competent authority to change the duration by amending the Rules as has been observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Panjab University v. Subhash Chander and another, AIR 1984 SC 1415.
When a course stretching over a period of 3 years commences and the students join that course the authorities make no promise that there would be no alteration of the duration and that the Rules in regard thereto which were in force at the time of admission would continue to be applied until the whole course is finished.
In the case before us, as already observed, there was only an error in the publication of the prospectus on the basis of which the present petition has been filed.
We are satisfied that the duration of the course had been extended to 3-1/2 years stretching over 7 semesters even before the petitioner joined the same.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner who has cleared the 6th semester examination did not become eligible for admission to the engineering course.
He is yet to complete the in-plant training in the 7th Semester and the marks obtained by him in that training would be taken into account before the diploma is awarded to him.
In the result, the writ petitions fail and the same stand dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.