RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Parminder Singh son of Major Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus quashing the selection and admission of respondent No. 5 Miss Renu Bala to the Elementary Teacher Training Course for the academic year 1998-2000 pertaining to Muktsar district.
He has further sought the direction of this Court against respondents No. 1 to 4 to give him admission in the said Course.
2.
The undisputed facts are that petitioner Parminder Singh and respondent No. 5 Renu Bala belonged to Muktsar district.
They applied to the Elementary Teacher Training Course for the academic year 1998-2000.
Both these candidates secured 78% marks.
The date of birth of the petitioner is 5.8.1981 while that of Renu Bala is 791980.
As per the prospectus, every district of the State has been allocated 100 seats.
50% go to the general category and the division of 50% is to the reserved category.
Further there is a division of 50% like this :  Category No. 52 5 seats Category No. 53 2 seats Category No. 54 2 seats Category No. 55 2 seats Category No. 56 1 seats Category No. 57 1 seats Category No. 58 1 seats Category No. 59 1 seats Category No. 60 1 seats Category No. 61 3 seats Category No. 62 2 seats Category No. 63 2 seats Category No. 64 2 seats The description of each category has been given in the prospectus issued by the authorities itself and I need not give its detail.
Further, out of 50 seats which have been reserved for general category, 25 seats will go to the male category and 25 to female category.
3.
It is also the rule that if any seat remains vacant from reserved category, it will switched over to the general category.
In this Course 7 seats became vacant from Categories No. 56 (1 seat), 58 (1 seat) (though it is disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioner that one seat has become vacant from Category No. 59), 61 (3 seats) and 63 (2 seats).
4.
The case set up by the petitioner is that the principle of 50% has to be maintained with regard to the seats which have come to the general category by way of transfer.
His interpretation is that out of the 7 seats, 3 will go to the male category, 3 to the female category and the 7th seat shall go on the principle of merit and if the merit is the same, then it will go to the candidate who is elder in age.
His further interpretation is that ratio of 50 male and 50 female has to be maintained in all respects and no undue advantage can be given to a female candidate with the transfer of seats.
Elaborating his argument he further stated that with the transfer of 7 seats there is an imbalance in the division of seats.
According to him 30 seats have gone to the female candidates.
while 27 have gone to the male candidates, whereas it should be 28 to the male candidates and 28 to female candidates and the last seat should go on the principle of merit and seniority in age.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(3) PLR 691 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H)(DB).
5.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
We all know that we are to be guided by the prospectus.
The prospectus has made the rationals.
It was always the intention of the authorities that so far as the original quota is concerned, there should not be any imbalance, meaning thereby that in the general category there are 50 seats and out of those 25 must go to the male candidates and 25 must go to the female candidates.
To this extent this principle has been adopted because it is conceded at the Bar even by the learned counsel for the petitioner that 27 male candidates have been accommodated in this Course.
With regard to transfer seats no such criteria can be adopted.
Rather those 7 seats have to go according to the merits and if the merit of the candidates is the same, then it will go by seniority in age irrespective of the fact that it will disturb the ration of 50 : 50.
This is clear from the prospectus itself and especially Clause No. 4 under the head "Distribution of Seats".
The authorities were well aware that this disturbance can come.
It is conceded at the Bar by the counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 2 is elder in age than that of the petitioner.
Therefore, she has the higher merit than that of the petitioner.
Otherwise also, this Court is not in a position to give any relief to the petitioner because the challenge is to the academic year 1998-2000.
It is stated at the Bar by the learned counsel for the respondents that this Course is going to be completed in December, 2000.
In this view of the matter, I would not like to disturb the admission of respondent No. 5 Miss Renu Bala.
Otherwise on merits, I have stated above that the petitioner has no better merit than that of respondent No. 5.
The distribution of 7 seats is in accordance with the prospectus.
The judgment which has been relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not applicable to the facts in hand because in the judgment cited above there are no guidelines with regard to the seats which have been transferred to the general category from the reserved category.
6.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.