Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner and respondent No. 4 were contenders for the post of Extra Departmental Delivery Agent.
The Department selected respondent No. 4.
The petitioner challenged the selection before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
After consideration of the matter, the Tribunal has rejected the petitioner's claim vide its order dated January 31, 2000.
Aggrieved by the order, dated, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that the order be quashed.
2.
We have heard Mr. VS Rana, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that the petitioner had the experience of working on the post in question.
If weightage for experience was given, the petitioner would have been selected.
He further contends that according to the decision of the Tribunal in an earlier case, the qualification of Matriculation was wholly illegal and could not have been prescribed for appointment to the post of Extra Departmental Delivery Agent.
Thus, the Tribunal has erred in giving preference to the fourth respondent on the basis of his marks in the Matriculation Examination.
3.
It is true that the petitioner had been appointed on the post of Extra Departmental Delivery Agent in September 1997.
This appointment was made on a purely ad hoc basis.
The petitioner had to compete for regular selection.
When he was not selected, the petitioner was relieved from the post on April 12, 1999.
The Tribunal has observed that the petitioner was not entitled to be given any weightage for the experience, as it had not been acquired after having been validly appointed to the post.
In case of direct recruitment to a post, the experience acquired by way of ad hoc appointment has been excluded from consideration.
In support of this view, the Tribunal has placed reliance on the decision of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Kanwar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) SLR 430 : 1997(2) SCT 292 (SC).
This view of the Tribunal has not been shown to be wrong.
4.
Mr. Rana, however, points out that the Tribunal could not have given weightage to respondent No. 4 for his higher score in the Matriculation Examination.
For this purpose the counsel has placed reliance on the decision of the Tribunal in A Sankar v Union of India and others, 1999(3) Administrative Total Judgments 576.
5.
So far as this contention is concerned it deserves notice that the basic qualification for appointment to the post of Extra Departmental Delivery Agent is Middle.
Primarily, the selection is made on the basis of the score of a candidate in the Middle Examination.
In the present case the petitioner as well as the fourth respondent had scored equal marks.
In this situation, the Tribunal noticed that while the petitioner had secured 41 per cent marks in the Matriculation Examination, the fourth respondent had a score of 6191 per cent.
On this basis the selection of respondent No. 4 was sustained.
We find no infirmity in the view taken by the Tribunal.
Counsel for the petitioner has not referred to any rule or instruction to show that the order passed by the Tribunal suffered from any illegality.
6.
Mr. Rana has, however, contended that the Tribunal had in A Sankar's case (Supra) taken the view that Matriculation was not the relevant qualification.
7.
In this behalf it may be noticed that immediately after the passing of the order dated January 31, 2000, the petitioner had approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 2975-CAT of 2000.
This writ petition was withdrawn by him on May 22, 2000.
Thereafter the petitioner had filed a review application before the Tribunal.
This review application was dismissed by the Tribunal on July 10, 2000.
It was held that no ground for review was made out.
We think that the order passed by the Tribunal was legal and valid.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.