Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in these two writ petitions were working as Laboratory Attendants.
Vide order dated October 29, 1987, they were ordered to be removed from service.
The appeal having been dismissed, they have approached this Court through these two writ petitions with the prayer that the orders of removal be set aside and that they be ordered to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the controversy may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners were recruited as Laboratory Attendants in the year 1976.
On October 20, 1982, the State Government revised the pay scales of its employees w.e.f.
April 1, 1979.
Certain anomalies were subsequently ordered to be removed w.e.f.
February 1, 1981.
So far as the Laboratory Attendants are concerned, they were initially in the pay scale of Rs. 90-140.
With effect from April 1, 1979, the pay scale was revised to Rs. 350-500.
With effect from February 1, 1981, the Government had ordered the revision of their scale from Rs. 350-500 to Rs. 400-600.
3.
So far as the employees working in the Haryana Agro Industries Corporation were concerned, the pay scale of Laboratory Attendants was revised from Rs. 90-140 to Rs. 350-500.
However, the benefit of the scale of Rs. 400-600 was not given by the Corporation to its employees.
4.
On April 9, 1986, the petitioners visited the Head Office.
They met Mr. SN Bhardwaj who was working as a Superintendent.
An office order was issued by which the pay scale was revised from Rs. 350-500 to Rs. 400-600 w.e.f.
February 1, 1981.
The petitioners got cyclostyled copies of this order and came back to their respective places of posting viz. Shahabad and Kaithal.
On April 23, 1986, they were charge-sheeted.
It was inter alia alleged that they had conspired.
"They had a dishonest intention and with a view to commuting fraud... prepared a false document purporting to revise the scale of Laboratory Attendants w.e.f.
1.2.1981... and "had it issued bearing No... dated 941986 without obtaining orders of the competent authority."
The petitioners denied the charge.
On July 26, 1986, the Enquiry Officer held the charge to have been proved.
The petitioners were served with a show cause notice.
They submitted their replies.
On October 29, 1987, the competent authority, after consideration of the matter, ordered that the petitioners be removed from service.
On November 30, 1987, an appeal was filed.
On not getting any reply, the petitioners approached this court through a writ petition.
Vide order dated March 3, 1992, the court disposed of the writ petition with a direction to the appellate authority to decide their appeal.
Vide order dated May 28, 1992, the Chairman of the Corporation rejected the appeal filed by the petitioners.
Hence these petitions.
5.
Mr. Surya Kant, counsel for the petitioners has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that the petitioners had got the alleged order regarding the revision of their pay scales on April 9, 1986.
They had derived no advantage whatsoever in spite of the fact that they had the opportunity to do so till April 23, 1986.
Thus, it is apparent that the petitioners had not derived any benefit on account of the order dated April 9, 1986.
That being so, no intention to defraud can be attributed to them.
Secondly, it has been submitted that there is no evidence of their having conspired to derive any undue advantage.
6.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
It has been pointed out that the petitioners had made every possible attempt to derive the benefit flowing from the order dated April 9, 1986.
It is only because they had been placed under suspension vide order dated April 11, 1986 that their effort was thwarted.
That having happened, the petitioners had failed in their mission.
Secondly, it has been pointed out that the very fact that the petitioners had gone together from their respective places of posting to the Head Office and got the order dated April 9, 1986 issued from Mr. SN Bhardwaj, Superintendent, the factum of conspiracy is apparently established.
7.
The facts in the present case speak for themselves.
There is nothing on record to show that any order granting the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 had been passed by the competent authority.
In fact, nothing has been produced to even remotely suggest that the Corporation had taken any decision to revise the pay scale of Rs. 350-500 and to raise it to Rs. 400-600 w.e.f.
February 1, 1981.
In this situation, the issue of the order of the Superintendent on April 9, 1986 at the asking of the petitioners was wholly unjustified.
In the absence of any order by the competent authority, the action was an attempt to defraud the Corporation.
The petitioners were likely to derive an undeserved benefit.
Normally, they would have succeeded in their attempt but for the fact that the truth had come to light and soon after the issue of the order, they were placed under suspension on April 11, 1986.
The mere fact that the petitioners failed to derive advantage cannot result in condonation of their misconduct.
Still further, the fact that both of them had gone from different places to the Head Office and had met same officer, shows that they shared a common intention and the purpose was to derive an undeserved benefit.
The competent authority has considered the evidence on record and come to a definite conclusion.
The charge has been held to have been proved.
No ground to interfere with the finding is made out.
Resultantly, the contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioners are rejected.
8.
It also deserves mention that in spite of being asked, counsel for the petiteness has not been able to point out any procedural irregularity by the Enquiry Officer or at any subsequent stage.
The procedure as prescribed under the rules was duly followed.
The principles of natural justice were duly observed.
No infirmity having been pointed out, no fault can be found with impugned orders.
9.
Mr. Surya Kant made a faint attempt to contend that the punishment was totally disproportionate to the proved misconduct.
10.
The contention is misconceived.
The petitioners made a clumsy attempt to derive an undue advantage to get the pay scale to which they were not legally entitled.
The mere fact that their attempt was thwarted, does not mean that they had not committed the misconduct or that they were not guilty of attempting to defraud the Corporation.
11.
No other point has been raised.
12.
In view of the above, no ground for interference is made out.
Resultantly, both the writ petitions are dismissed.
Since the petitioners are no longer in service, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.