Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner was "temporarily as a make shift arrangement appointed as VLW in the scale of Rs. 410-700" and posted as such in Rafiabad block of Rural Development Department of the J&K State (Vide order 137/83 dated 26121983).
Petitioner was asked to produce the matric certificate and other required certificates on 4-1-1984 (Annexure-B).
Petitioner joined in Rafiabad block on 28121983 and while examining his date of birth certificate, Assistant Commissioner Development Baramulla found petitioner over aged by two years 10 months and 8 days and recommended relaxation of his age to the Director Rural Development Srinagar Respondent No. 3 (annexure C).
Petitioner alleges that his case for relaxation of age been declined by respondent No. 2, whereas the age bar of many other persons has been relaxed.
2.
Petitioner has cited annexure-D and annexure-E to show that the Government has exercised the powers to relax the age of the other persons employed in Agriculture Rural Development Department.
Though, the petitioner has not placed on record any order to demonstrate that his age bar is declined, but in para 5 of the petition is referred a note allegedly recorded on the file of the case, in terms as under :-  "It is found that regularisation of appointment of Shri Kumar by way of relaxation of age is not justified.
It is hereby ordered that the services of the said Shri Ghulam Ahmad Kumar stand terminated."
This note petitioner treates as an order declining relaxation in age, is challenged in this petition on the ground that the petitioner rendered six years continuous service with the department and refusal to relax his age after such a long period is discriminatory.
Moreso, when the age bar of other persons referred in annexures `D' and `E' has been relaxed.
Petitioner could not be thrown out of service at his back and in violation of law.
Petitioner prays for a relaxation of his age bar an to restrain respondents from terminating his services and for quashment of referred alleged order of respondent No. 2, which order, without specifying the order as such or its contents is stated "yet to be issued."
3.
Respondents despite opportunities at pre and post admission stage have failed to file reply/counter.
Respondents have not even appeared to argue the matter.
4.
Mr. Sogami, counsel for the petitioner has been heard.
5.
Matter is examined and record perused.
6.
As per petitioner's own case at the time of his initial appointment vide order dated 26121983 he was over age and consequently lacked eligibility on that ground.
It is not also denied that the petitioner was temporarily appointed as a make shift arrangement as VLW against an available post in Rafiabad bloc.
It is a conditional order of appointment providing that the appointees before joining were required to produce the required certificates under rules for verification.
It was at this stage that the petitioner was found, on verification of the certificate, overage.
This is even clear from annexures B and C of the petition.
Petitioner has not shown how the three other persons who are all class IV employees referred in Annexure-D bore similarity with this case in the matter of relaxation of age.
Similarly the fourth case of relaxation of age of a Gram Sevika of Rohama block bears no similarity with the petitioner's case in the matter of relaxation of age.
These cases are quite dis-similar to the petitioner's case.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner was similarly situated and circumstanced as other cases in whose favour the Government has exercised the powers and relaxed ages.
Merely because the government relaxed the age in a particular case is per se no ground to claim relaxation of age of another person.
After all by relaxation of age of a person(s) rights of another person whose age is not relaxed, like the petitioner, are not violated or infringed.
7.
From record, one finds that in contempt petition 213/89 filed by the petitioner regarding alleged violation of the interim direction dated 23589 qua petitioner's continuance in service (conversely restrain to terminate the services of petitioner), Secretary Commissioner Agriculture Rural Development Department J&K Srinagar, respondent No. 2 to this petition and respondent- contemnor to the contempt petition has filed his affidavit.
In the affidavit by way of reply to the motion, respondents have asserted that services of the petitioner have been terminated vide order No. 339-Agri-89 dated 1251989 after the Government refused to relax his age as well as qualification after it was found that he lacked both these eligibility criteria for the post of VLW.
It is further averred that the petitioner is appointed temporarily in a make shift arrangement and did not hold any substantive post.
His case is governed by J&K Civil Service (Temporary Service) Rules, 1961 and has been terminated under Rule 5 of these rules, after allowing him one month's pay in lieu of notice.
No right of petitioner has been taken away thereby.
The case of petitioner for relaxation of age as also the qualification bar was examined by the Government and pending such examination, he was allowed to continue.
But once the age and qualification bar was not relaxed, his service was terminated on 1251989.
This statement on oath of respondents is fully covered by Government order No. 329-AGRI-89 dated 12589 which shows that the petitioner's case of age bar and qualification bar was examined but was found not justified and rejected, resulting in loss of his employment.
8.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner continued in service under direction of court dated 23589 and, therefore, petitioner's service cannot be terminated.
The counsel further canvasses that the petitioner's case was not considered by Govt., in the manner and mode provided by law.
This contention of the counsel is not supported by record.
Though, the court ordered "petitioner's service shall not be terminated till further orders on 23589", but the record shows that the services of the petitioner had been in fact terminated much earlier to this court order on 12589.
Petitioner has not placed any proof or material on record to demonstrate that the petitioner is or has been working after 12589.
The petitioner has not even specifically challenged the order of termination and even has not mentioned the required details and particulars thereof, in the petition.
It is seen that the services of the petitioner have been terminated for the reason that he lacked eligibility age-wise and qualification-wise and that on his representation his case for relaxation of age and qualification were examined by the competent authority.
On such examination/consideration competent authority found the relaxation of the age and qualification bar was not justified and declined the relaxation.
With the result services of the petitioner came to an end.
The petitioner was not holding any substantive post.
In fact he was working in a make shift arrangement and his services were terminated in accordance with the rules and the law.
Merely because competent authority has refused to relax age and qualification bar in his case while allowing relaxation of age bar in other cases, on its own is no ground to vitiate the discretion exercised by the competent authority not to allow to relax the said bar(s), moreso, when in the facts and circumstances of the case, no similarity or likeness in the fact situation and circumstances of petitioner's case with referred instance of relaxation(s) (annexures D and E) is made out.
In result, for the above reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.