Mehtab S Gill, J - Petitioner has filed a writ of certiorari praying for the quashing of order dated March 21, 1997 (Annexure P-20) whereby his appeal was dismissed by upholding the order of dismissal dated June 4, 1996.
He has further prayed that the order No. 1268 dated June 4, 1996 (Annexure P-18) be also quashed and further a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing respondents No. 1 to 3 to reinstate him with full back wages along with 18% interest.
2.
Petitioner has alleged that about eight years ago from the filing of the petition, he was appointed as a constable (driver).
He was allotted Constabulary No. 565/Mansa and continued in service since April 24, 1989.
In the year 1995, the petitioner was posted as a Constable (driver) in the police Line, Mansa.
Mukhtiar Singh, Sub-Inspector, respondent No. 4, who was also working on the post of Motor Training Officer (M.T.O.
), became inimical towards the petitioner because he personally saw Mukhtiar Singh removing the tyres of jeep No. PB-03-3020 and another jeep No. PH-03-3021.
Both these jeeps had been declared condemned.
This was also witnessed by Constable Gurcharan Singh No. 150 and driver C-11 Baljit Singh No. 428.
The petitioner along with these two constables tallied the history-sheet of tyres and found that these typres were fitted in the jeep of the Sub-Inspector.
It was a clear case of misappropriation.
However, Mukhtiar Singh, Sub-Inspector, respondent No. 4 came to know that the petitioner along with his two colleagues has come to know about the misappropriation of tyres and apprehending that they may disclose this to the superior officers, he, then removed typres from his own jeep and fitted them back on the government jeeps.
3.
Further it is alleged that Mukhtiar Singh-respondent No. 4 did not enjoy good reputation in the police department.
On April 20, 1995, he was found in a drunken condition lying on the road in the bazar near the railway crossing, Mansa.
He was in uniform and the Senior Superintendent of Police had got himself picked up through the Station House Officer, Police Station, City Mansa.
He was medically examined and his one year's service was confiscated permanently.
Constable Baljit Singh No. 428 was driving the vehicle of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Mansa, that day.
Mukhtiar Singh-respondent No. 4 suspected that the information of his being in a drunken condition and lying near the bazar, was reported to the Senior Superintendent of Police by the petitioner.
4.
It is further alleged that SPO Karamjit Singh was deputed to carry out necessary check up and repair of Gypsy Jeep No. PB-31-6419 and the petitioner assisted him.
During the course of checking of the vehicle, the carburettor of the jeep caught fire and the petitioner then put off the engine and extinguished the fire.
On the following day, i.e., May 4, 1995.
Mukhtiar Singh, Sub-Inspector, respondent No. 4 concocted a story and levelled serious allegations against the petitioner that he has been extracting petrol from Gypsy jeep and that he had deliberately put it on fire on the previous day.
5.
It is further alleged that on May 11, 1995, Shri Iqbal Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sardulgarh, was appointed as Investigating Officer.
A gist of charges along with the list of witnesses was supplied to the petitioner.
The Investigating Officer during the course of enquiry examined as many as seven departmental witnesses.
The gist of charges and the witnesses is annexured with the petition as Annexure P-1.
6.
It is further alleged that the Enquiry Officer Shri Iqbal Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sardulgarh, without taking into consideration the statements of the witnesses, which are annexed as Annexure P-2 to P-8, issued a formal charge-sheet dated July 9, 1995 to the petitioner on July 27, 1995 and directed him to produce the witnesses in his defence.
The petitioner produced four witnesses in his defence.
These witnesses gave their statements before the Investigating Officer that they did not see any fire.
In pursuance of the investigation report (Annexure P-15) submitted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sardulgarh, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Mansa-respondent No. 3 issued a `show cause notice' (Annexure P-16) to the petitioner vide letter No. 503 dated March 12, 1996 as to why he should not be dismissed and asked to submit his reply within 10 days.
In reply to show cause notice (Annexure P16), the petitioner submitted a detailed reply and clearly stated that the Sub-Inspector Mukhtiar Singh-respondent No. 4 was inimical towards him and he was being falsely implicated in the alleged occurrence.
The Senior Superintendent of Police-respondent No. 3 after receiving the reply, dismissed the petitioner from service relying on the investigation and the report of the Investigating Officer.
7.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1, 2 and 3, while respondent No. 4 Mukhtiar Singh, Sub-Inspector, against whom mala fides were alleged, though served, did not file any reply.
The respondents stated that the petitioner never reported the alleged misconduct of Sub Inspector Mukhtiar Singh to his superiors and has now cooked up a false story to save himself.
It is further alleged in the written statement that the petitioner purposely started the engine of the Gypsy to remove petrol, but in this process, the engine of the Gypsy caught fire and it was not the carburettor which had caught fire, but it is due to spilling of the petrol on the live wires and the hot silencer that caused fire on that day.
It is further alleged that the Enquiry Officer Iqbal Singh examined seven witnesses and the charges against the petitioner stand fully proved.
8.
I have heard Shri.
MM Kumar, Advocate, for the petitioner and Mr. Lakhinder Bir Singh, Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab for respondents No. 1 to 3 and have also perused the petition along with annexures attached thereto.
9.
The eye witnesses produced in this occurrence were Constable Hardial Singh, PW-2, Head Constable Balwant Singh, PW-6 and Head Constable Gurdip Singh, PW-7.
10.
Going through the statement of Hardial Singh, PW-2, he has stated that the wires on that day sparked all of a sudden.
The relevant part of his statement is reproduced as under :  "Q.1 Did you see any pipe or any bottle or any canny near the vehicle ?
A. No.
There was not seen any rubber-pipe, or bottle or canny or any other vessel which may have been containing the petrol or the petrol being put into it.
Q2 Did you make any effort for bringing the fire under control or did you see the vehicle having caught the fire ?
A.
On hearing the voice of SI Mukhtiar Singh, M.T.O., I rushed immediately to the vehicle No fire had broken out of the vehicle.
Q3 What thing you had seen near the vehicle ?
A. I had seen a four wheeler pressure jerk near the vehicle ?
Q4 Did you see that the vehicle had started thereafter ?
A.
In my presence Mechanic SPO Karamjit Singh had checked the vehicle by starting, there was no spark and the vehicle had started."
11.
Going through the statement of Head Constable Balwant Singh, PW-6, he has also stated that there was no fire upon the vehicle.
The relevant portion of his statement is reproduced as under :  "Q.1 When you came near the vehicle did you see near the vehicle or with me any pipe or any vessel meant for taking out the petrol or any container or bottle etc. ?
A. I did not see any vessel, container etc. Q2 Did you see any flame of fire coming out of the vehicle ?
A. No. Q3 Did you see any loss having accrued to the vehicle afterwards ?
Did the vehicle start immediately thereafter ?
A. I did not see any loss having accrued to the vehicle and the starting of the vehicle was in the right condition."
12.
The third eye-witness produced was Head Constable Gurdip Singh, PW-7, who has also denied having seen any fire upon the vehicle.
His statement is reproduced as under :  "Q.1 When you came near the vehicle did you find any thing meant for taking out the petrol ?
A. No. At that time you were not having anything with you meant for taking out the petrol.
Q2 Did you see any flame of fire coming out of the vehicle ?
A. when we went near the vehicle we did not see any fire upon the vehicle.
The vehicle was stand-still.
Q3 Did you not see any loss having accrued to the vehicle ?
A.
No loss had accrued to the vehicle.
Subsequently, the mechanic started the vehicle again, which was found to be perfectly alright.
Q4 Did M.T.O.
Mukhtiar Singh take into custody in your presence the machines etc. meant for revolving the meter after taking the same out of the vehicle on 451995 ?
A.
In my presence the M.T.O.
did not take out any machine etc. from the vehicle."
From the statements of the aforesaid eye-witnesses, it is clear that the occurrence though had taken place in the police line, Mansa, which had a lot of police officials roaming around, yet no one saw the Gypsy jeep catching fire nor anyone saw the petitioner taking out petrol from it.
13.
Further going through the file, Mukhtiar Singh, Sub-Inspector, respondent No. 4, though served, has not filed written statement.
As has been pointed out above, the allegations of mala fide have been attributed to him and these accusations and allegations have gone un-rebutted as respondent No. 4 did not come forward to file written statement so as to make the picture clear as to whether these allegations were false or truthful.
The only presumption which one can draw is that Sub Inspector Mukhtiar Singh, respondent No. 4, wanted to hide the truth from the court and that is why, he did not file written statement.
14.
Going through Annexure P20, the order passed by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Faridkot, Range Faridkot, it is clear that he has not taken into consideration all the evidence which has been placed before him and apart from agreeing with the order of the Senior Superintendent of Police, Mansa he has not recorded the reasons on his own regarding the dismissal of the petitioner from service.
15.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has next contended that the impugned orders, Annexures P-18 and P-20 were liable to be set aside as the procedure prescribed in sub-rules (1) and (2) of Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the `Rules') had not been followed.
In support of the contention, he has placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Ram Kishan, 1972 SLR 11.
Sub- rules (1) and (2) of Rules 1638 of the Rules read as under :-  "1638.
Criminal offences by police offices and strictures by Courts - Procedure regarding.
- (1) Immediate information shall be given to the District Magistrate of any complaint received by the Superintendent of Police, which indicates the commission by a police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public.
The District Magistrate will decide whether the investigation of the complaint shall be conducted by a police officer, or made over to a selected Magistrate having Ist class powers.
(2) When investigation of such a complaint establishes a prima facie case, a judicial prosecution shall normally follow; the matter shall be disposed of departmentally only if the District Magistrate so orders for reasons to be recorded.
When it is decided to proceed departmentally the procedure prescribed in rule 1624 shall be followed.
An officer found guilty of a charge of the nature referred to in this rule shall ordinarily be dismissed."
A plain reading of the above quoted Rule shows that the District Magistrate has to be informed and sanction has to be taken before passing the order of dismissal from service.
This was not complied with by the police authorities.
16.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has next contended that there was breach of Rule 1631 of the Rules in the order passed in appeal, Annexure P- 20, and as such, it was not sustainable in the eye of law.
Rule 1631 of the Rules is reproduced as under :  "1631.
Orders on appeals :- Every order passed in appeal shall contain the reasons therefor.
A copy of every appellate order and the reason therefor shall be given free of costs to the appellant."
17.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has also relied in this behalf on a decision of this Court in the case of Paramjit Singh, Ex-Head Constable v. State of Punjab, 1995(8) SLR 741 : 1996(1) SCT 709 (P&H).
The learned Single Judge while allowing the writ petition had made the following observations :  "The order passed in appeal too cannot be sustained.
Rule 1631 of the 1934 Rule specifically provides that the order passed in appeal shall contain the reasons therefor.
The Appellate Authority is required to give a reasoned order while disposing of the appeal.
According to the petitioner, as is evident from the grounds of appeal which has been annexued to the petition as Annexure P-2, he had raised more than 11 points for consideration of the appellate Authority in addition to his past record and also commendation certificates which he had obtained during the course of his services.
The impugned order in this case shows hardly any application of mind on the part of the Appellate Authority.
Appellate Authority has totally ignored the points raised by the petitioner for its consideration and the appeal has been disposed of by a very brief order."
18.
During the course of arguments, petitioner's counsel stated that if the petitioner is reinstated in service, he is ready to forego 75% of the back wages.
19.
For the reason recorded above, petition is allowed with all consequential reliefs to be awarded to the petitioner and the orders dated June 4, 1996 (Annexure P-18) and March 21, 1997 (Annexure P-20) are quashed.
The petitioner will forego 75% of the back wages and is entitled to 25% of the same, which will be payable to him.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 are directed to take the petitioner back in service on his furnishing a certified copy of this judgment to them.
Petition allowed.