RL Anand, J - Rifleman Shambu son of Shri Ram Singh, resident of village Palewala, Tehsil Radaur, District Yamunanagar through this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, is praying for the issuance of the directions in the nature of mandamus against the respondents directing them to grant service pension to the petitioner with effect from 1.4.1966 being discharged from the Army after fulfilling the term on 3131966, after serving the army for 15 years 3 months and 26 days.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Territorial Army on 14121950.
After serving more than 15 years in the Army, the petitioner was discharged on 3131966, on fulfilling the term.
According to the petitioner, as per Regulation 132 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 Part-I, he is entitled for service pension since he has completed more than 15 years of service.
His claim for pensionary benefit has been declined by the respondent-authority in an illegal manner.
Further the case set up by the petitioner is that in the year 1985, amendment in the regulations were made but in spite of that, the petitioner has not been granted the pensionary benefits on the plea that the petitioner has only completed 8 years and 72 days of embodied service.
This is the premise made out by the petitioner for the grant of the relief.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
According to the respondents, there is an inherent distinct difference between Regular Army and Territorial Army.
The Territorial Army is a part-time force and personnel enrolled are called up for training for a prescribed period for attending courses for attachment with regular army formation or units for service on the permanent instructions of territorial army or for military service as and when ordered by the Central Government.
The petitioner was enrolled under T.A.
Act, 1948 and his service was to be governed as per Territorial Army Act.
The period from the date of enrolment to the date of discharge is not treated as qualifying service for pension as physical service (known as embodied service or paid service) rendered by an individual in Territorial Army would be much less depending on the actual requirement of his service in the Territorial Army.
Hence on the embodied service rendered by a person, his claim for pension is calculated and not upon his total service from the date of enrolment.
According to the respondents the embodied service of the petitioner was 8 years and 72 days and, therefore, he was not entitled to the pensionary benefits.
Moreover, the amendment made in the year 1985 in the Regulations was prospective in nature.
Respondents have also taken the plea that petitioner has approached the Court after a lapse of 33 years, therefore, the petitioner is estopped by his own act and conduct in filing the present writ petition and the writ is also liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
5.
It is the case of the petitioner that he retired from Territorial Army on 3131966.
The present writ has been instituted in the year 1999 after a lapse of 33 years.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the cause of action, if any arose to the petitioner, is successive, still the petitioner cannot be granted the benefit of pension of more than 3 years and 2 months.
6.
The point for determination is whether the petitioner has completed 15 years of embodied service in the territory Army or not and the answer of this Court is in the negative as is clear from annexure P-1, relied upon by the petitioner.
According to this annexure, the embodied service of the petitioner is 8 years and 72 days.
In these circumstances, it cannot be held that the petitioner has completed 15 years of embodied service so as to entitle him to claim of pensionary benefits.
It is the case of the petitioner himself that the Rules were amended in the year 1985.
The petitioner has retired from service with effect from 3131966 much earlier to the enforcement of the Rules, 1985.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show to this Court that the Rules of 1985 were made effective with retrospective effect.
It is the basic law that while interpreting the effect of any Rule, statute or regulation, then every Act or Regulation or Rule is to apply prospectively unless specifically made effective from the back date.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that the Rules of 1985 were made effective qua those army personnel who retired from the Territorial Army prior to 1985.
I have stated above that the petitioner has not completed 15 years of embodied service and as such he is not entitled to the pensionary benefits.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.