RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Ex-JWO Hari Singh has filed the present civil writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for a writ of certiorari quashing Annexure P1 vide which his disability pension was rejected.
He also sought the quashment of Annexure P3 and prayed that the disability pension which was assessed at 50% be released to him w.e.f.
1011993.
2.
The petitioner joined the Indian Air Force in the year 1964 and it is a common case of the parties that vis-a-vis the petitioner his disability was assessed to the extent of 50%.
According to the petitioner, this disability is attributable to his service and in these circumstances he is entitled to the disability pension.
3.
The claim of the petitioner, on the contrary, was rejected by the respondent authorities on the ground that the disease of which the petitioner has suffered is a constitutional one and it is not attributable to his Air Force service.
In these circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to any disability pension.
4.
During the course of submissions the learned counsel for the respondent drew my attention to the findings of the Medical Board in which it is stated that the diseases 1, 2 and 3 are constitutional one, though the Board has certified that the extent of disability is 50%.
The learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to show me any record from which an inference can be drawn that at the time of admission of the petitioner into service he was suffering from any disability.
Rather the petitioner served the Indian Air Force for a period of 19 years before he became disabled.
In these circumstances, the proposition has been settled in various pronouncements of this Court as well as Hon'ble Supreme Court and the ratio of the pronouncements is that if at the time of admission in service and in the service-book of the petitioner, there is no note about his disability, it will be inferred that every disability suffered by him is after his joining the service and attributable to the same whether such personnel may be in the active discharge of his duties or he may be even on casual or long leave.
5.
In these circumstances, I strike down and quash Annexures P1 and P3 and allow this petition with the direction to the respondents to release the disability (pension) to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @12% per annum on the amount.
It may be clarified that the petitioner will be entitled to the disability pension as declared by this Court and he shall also further appear before the Re-survey Medical Board, if called by the respondents.
Petition allowed.