N Pandey, J - Heard Counsel for the parties.
2.
This appeal has been filed against the order dated 551999 passed in CWJC No. 11470 of 1998 whereby the State Government was directed to make payment of the arrears of salary of the respondent including the period when he was under suspension and further payment of the retirement benefits including pension etc.  3.
It appears from the impugned order that the respondent was involved in a murder case and ultimately, convicted by the trial Court and the appeal was also dismissed before this Court.
The respondent was also placed under suspension because of his involvement in the criminal case and a departmental proceeding was also initiated, but before any final order could be passed in the departmental proceeding, he was superannuated with effect from 3111997.
By means of the writ petition, the prayer was made for payment of the salary and the retirement benefits as no order was passed in the departmental proceeding.
4.
Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants contended that admittedly in this case a departmental proceeding was already initiated, therefore, even if the concerned respondent retired from service such proceeding would not automatically lapse rather an order can be recorded by the competent authority after applying the provisions of Rule 43 of the Bihar Pension Rules.
He, therefore, contended that the order of the Court directing the State Government to make payment of the salary and retirement benefit is not justified.
5.
Admittedly, in this case, as yet, no order has been passed by the competent authority either to impose any punishment against the respondent or to withhold his retirement benefits in the departmental proceeding.
This is also admitted that the day the respondent retired from service, the order of suspension lapsed.
Therefore, in our view, the respondent is certainly entitled for arrears of salary for the period he was placed under suspension.
6.
Learned Counsel for the appellants, however, while referring to the provision of Rule 97 of the Bihar Service Code, contended that it will be prerogative of the competent authority of the State Government to pass an order for payment of salary in such cases.
Therefore, unless and until an order is recorded by the competent authority, for payment of salary for the period the respondent was under suspension, no order should be passed.
7.
In our view, the provisions of Rule 97 of the Bihar Service Code, as referred to above, is not applicable to the present case.
Because, admittedly, in this case, neither any order for revocation of the suspension was passed nor any order for reinstatement of the concerned respondent had been recorded.
Therefore, in our view the learned Judge, has rightly directed the appellants to make payment of the salary to the respondent for the period he was under suspension.
8.
Now coming to the question regarding payment of retirement benefits, true it is the State Government in appropriate cases can pass order under Rule 43 of the Bihar Pension Rules, even if the concerned Government servant is superannuated pending a departmental proceeding.
But in this case, admittedly till this date no order has been passed under that provision to withhold the pension and other retirement benefits of the respondent although he retired from service w.e.f.
3111997.
Therefore, we are not inclined to interfere with the impugned order under appeal.
The State Government is always at liberty to pass appropriate order under Rule 43 of the Bihar Pension Rules in accordance with law.
9.
With the above liberty to the Government, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.