RS Mongia, J - The significant questions of law which arise for our determination in this case are, as to what is the scope of power of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to interfere with an administrative order of the Government transferring an employee from one place to another ?
What are the grounds on which interference with such an order is permissible ?
2.
Before adverting to the facts of the case, to which a detailed reference shall be made hereinafter, let us first clear the deck as to the scope of power of interfernce of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution against an order of the Government transferring an employee from one place to another.
The Apex Court has considered this matter recently in Union of India and others v. Shri HN Kirtania, 1989(3) JT 131 : 1989(4) SLR (SC), wherein it has been observed :-  "Transfer of a public servant made on administrative grounds or in public interest should not be interfered with unless there are strong and pressing grounds rendering the transfer order illegal on the ground of violation of statutory Rules or on ground of mala fides."
3.
The Supreme Court while dealing with the scope of interference in an administrative order in Sardar Partap Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 72, Ayyangar, J speaking for the majority observed as follows :-  "Pausing here, we might summarize the position by stating that the Court is not an appellate forum where the correctness of an order of Government could be canvassed and, indeed, it has no jurisdiction to substitute its own view as to the necessity or desirability of initiating disciplinary proceedings for the entirely of the power, jurisdiction and discretion in that regard is vested by law in the Government.
The only question which could be considered by the Court is whether the authority vested with the power has paid attention to or taken into account circumstances, events or matters wholly extraneous to the purpose for which the power was vested, or whether the proceedings have been initiated mala fide for satisfying a private or personal grudge of the authority against the officer.
If the act is in excess of the power granted or is an abuse or misuse of power, the matter is capable of interference and rectification by the Court.
In such an event the fact that the authority concerned denies the charge of mala fides, or asserts the absence of oblique motives or of its having taken into consideration improper or irrelevant matter does not preclude the Court from enquiring into the truth of the allegations made against the authority and affording appropriate reliefs to the party aggrieved by such illegality or abuse of power in the event of the allegations being made out."
Next his Lordship said :-  "The Constitution enshrined and guarantees the rule of law and Article 226 is designed to ensure that each and every authority in the State, including the Government acts bona fide and within the limits of its power and we consider that when a Court is satisfied that there is an abuse or misuse of power and its jurisdiction is invoked, it is incumbent on the Court to afford justice to the individual......" 4.
Again, Supreme Court in P.V.
Jagannath Rao and others v. State of Orissa and others, AIR 1969 Supreme Court 215, Ramaswami, J speaking for the Court, observed as under :-  " ..........
It is well settled that if a statutory authority exercise its power for a purpose not authorized by the law the action of the statutory authority is ultra vires and without jurisdiction.
In other words, it is mala fide exercise of power by a statutory for a purpose other than that which the Legislature intended (See The King v. Minister of Health, 1929-1 K B 619).
But the question arises as to what is the legal position if an administrative authority acts both for an authorised purpose and for an unauthorised purpose.
In such a case where there is a mixture of authorised and unauthorised purpose what should be the test to be applied to determine the legal validity of the administrative power exercised.
To put it differently, if the administrative authority pursues two or more purposes of which one is authorized and the other unauthorized the legality of the administrative act should be determined by reference to the dominant purpose........." 5.
From the above, it is evidence that an employee has no right to continue at a particular place of posting and he is liable to be transferred anywhere within the jurisdiction of the employer.
The employer can transfer an employee any time on administrative grounds or exigencies of service.
However, there is a limited scope of the Courts to go into this administrative order of transfer if the same is tainted with mala fides or it is passed for collateral purposes in the garb of a legal purposes as in such an eventuality it would amount to colourable exercise of power.
6.
Let us examine now the facts of the case in hand :-  Petitioner No. 1 Shri N.s.
Bhullar was posted with Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the Board) as Assistant Engineer, Distribution, Industrial Estate, Ludhiana and was posted as such on 31st May, 1990.
Petitioner No. 2 Shri B.S.
Sekhon, who was working as an Assistant Executive Engineer, Distribution, Industrial Area 'A', Ludhiana, was transferred in September, 1990, as Assistant Executive Engineer, West Sub-Division, Ludhiana.
It is alleged that respondent No. 3, Shri SS Johal, Superintending Engineer, who is not well disposed of towards the petitioners, stayed the transfer verbally, as Shri Johal was interested in getting one Shri Mehar Singh at that place and petitioner No. 2 was asked not to relinquish his charge and thereafter he continued at his original place of posting i.e. Assistant Executive Engineer, Distribution, Industrial Area 'A', Ludhiana, Vide office order No. 1579/EG dated 27th November, 1990, the Board made certain transfers, including those of the petitioners.
Petitioner No. 1 was transferred as Assistant Engineer against the post of SSE, Kalanaur; whereas petitioner No. 2 was transferred against the Post of SSE, Ajnala (Fatehgarh Churian).
A copy of the order has been attached as annexure P-1.
It is this order of transfer which has been impugned by the petitioners on the ground that the same is malafide and has been passed at the instance of Sh. SS Johal, Superintendent Engineer, respondent No. 3, who is allegedly inimically disposed of towards the petitioner and the same has been passed for collateral purposes to accommodate those persons who are close to respondent No. 3.
It has been further averred in the writ petition that the mala fide intentions of respondent No. 3 towards the petitioners can be gauged from the fact that he got orders of transfer of the petitioners in utter disregard of the policy of the Board regarding transfers, inasmuch as this was not the time of general transfers or mid-terms transfers.
Normally, a person is allowed to work against a particular post for about three years.
Though one Shri Mehar Singh had served at Ludhiana continuously for the last 6-1/2 years, yet Shri SS Johal, respondent No. 3 being interested in him, wanted to bring him in place of one of the petitioners.
It has been further averred that the transfer in fact is in the form of punishment.
There was no immediate necessity to transfer, inasmuch as in place of petitioner No. 1, one Ravinder Singh, who is being posted as Assistant Engineer, Distribution, Industrial Estate, Ludhiana, is just on training but an independent charge is being given to such a person just to replace petitioner No. 1, who has much longer service to his credit.
According to the petitioners, there were no extraordinary circumstances or compelling reasons to immediately order transfers.
7.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the Board as well as by Shri SS Johal, respondent No. 3.
It has been disputed that petitioner No. 1 was posted at the Industrial Estate, Sub Division, Ludhiana, on 1st June, 1990; whereas petitioner No. 2 was posted at Industrial Area 'A' Sub Division with effect from 6th June, 1988.
It has been denied that the transfer have been done at the instance of respondent No. 3.
It has been admitted that the Chief Engineer and the Superintending Engineer, Ludhiana made request for the transfer of the petitioners along with one SS Gill, AEE.
However, the places of posting were decided by the Chairman of the Board in consultation with the Director (Personnel).
The administrative reasons given by the Board in its written statement for transferring the petitioners are that since there were complaints against the petitioners and because of the adverse remarks, they were transferred from the present places of postings.
In para 2 of the written statement, it has been averred as under :-  ".......On account of numerous complaints, it was deemed in the interest of public and the Board to transfer the petitioners on administrative reasons.
Chief Engineers, Superintending Engineers, Executive Engineers under whom the petitioners had been working, assessed the work and conduct of the petitioners, from time to time, and they have opined in favour of transfer of the petitioners for administrative reasons.
Mr. Jagtar Singh Sandha, the then Superintending Engineer, Ludhiana wrote to the Chief Engineer (Central) on 22.5.90 (Copy Annexure R-2) and detailed the complaints against the petitioner Nos. 2 and 17 heads.
The conclusion portion of the note of Superintending Engineer, insofar it is relevant is reproduced for facility of reference :- " ............ From the above details, it can easily be derived, the officer is not, at all, fit for industrial Sub Division like Industrial Area 'A'.
It is, therefore, recommended in the Board's interest that he may kindly be got transferred out of this circle, to avoid further deterioration of work under technical and non-technical wings of the Sub Division ......." "Besides this there are numerous adverse reports made by the various officers, such as Chief Engineers, Ludhiana dated 5789, 11.8.89, 19390, 22390.
The Executive Engineers under whom the petitioner No. 2 was working also made adverse reports dated 27289 and 5390.
It would be clear from the said reports that the petitioner No. 2 was found to be disobedient, negligent and inefficient in the discharge of his duties and it had become essential in the public interest to transfer him."
"As regards petitioner No. 1, adverse reports were made by the then Chief Engineer on 201289 and 6.2.90, the then Superintending Engineer (II) on 15390 (copy Annexure R-3) and the present Superintending Engineer also on 91090.
The Executive Engineer also made several adverse reports including the ones dated 13689 and 19390.
The present Executive Engineer also made various adverse reports dated 19990 (Annexure R-4) and on 26990, 211090 and 24.10.90.
The flying squad also made reports against petitioner No. 1 on 25.5.1990.
These reports speak volumes of inefficiency and negligence of petitioner No. 1 in the discharge of his duties."
In para 4 of the Written Statement, the Board has averred as under :-  "The contention of para 4 are wrong and denied.
As submitted above, the transfer of the petitioners have been recommended only on the basis of administrative reasons and on account of complaints, details of which have been given in para 2 (supra).
Since the transfers have been made by the Chairman, on the recommendations of the Chief Engineer, the allegations regarding bringing his own people by respondent No. 3 are without any substance.
In view of the above submission, the present transfer orders Annexure P1 which were necessitated on account of the administrative exigencies and the complaints detailed in para 2, cannot possibly be assailed."
In para 5 of the written statement, it has been stated as under :-  "The contents of para 5 are wrong and denied.
Engineer Ravinder Singh is a Degree holder and has already undergone training for about 9 months and, as such, he is fully qualified to hold the charge of Industrial Estate Sub Division, Ludhiana.
The petitioner No1 is being removed from there on account of complaints, details of which have been given in para 2 (supra)."
Again in para 7 it has been averred as follows :-  "The contents of para 7 as stated, are wrong and incorrect.
Transfers of the petitioners have been made in compelling circumstances and on the basis of materials contained in complaints/adverse reports, some of which are detailed in para 2 above."
8.
In Annexure R2 with the written statement some discrepancies regarding the working of petitioner Bhupinder Singh have been highlighted, but almost each item of discrepancy or alleged negligence, his explanation is still under consideration.
Similarly, in Annexure R4, which is letter from one Shri VK Virmani to petitioner NS Bhullar, he has been apprised of his faults regarding the performance of his duties.
9.
It may be stated here that in his affidavit, respondent No. 3, Shri SS Johal has denied the allegations of mala fides against him but has admitted that the transfers were recommended on the basis of complaints/adverse report against the petitioners.
10.
The admitted position that emerges from the above facts is that the transfers have been ordered on the recommendations of the Chief Engineer and the Superintending Engineer because of complaints/adverse reports against the petitioners.
It is also not disputed that the explanation of the petitioners had been called regarding the alleged discrepancies/complaints in performance of the duties and no finding has as yet been given.
The question then arises, is the transfer because of administrative exigencies or any compelling reasons or in routine or has it been ordered for collateral reasons ?
The transfer is not during the period when general transfer are ordered.
It is mid-term transfer.
Petitioner No. 1 had worked on the post for about 2-1/2 years; whereas petitioner No. 2 had just worked for about six months.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that if the transfer is made on the grounds of complaints, which are subject-matter of investigation, then the transfer is by way of punishment and it is for a collateral purpose.
According to the learned counsel, the court should not hesitate to interfere with Law an executive or administrative order which has been passed in violation of any or of any statutory rule or in the colourable exercise of powers or mala fides.
For this proposition, he has relied upon a judgment of the Patna High Court in Ramanek Choudhary v. The State of Bihar and ors., 1975(2) SLR 67.
In the above noted case after noticing the case law on the point, the above proposition was enunciated.
For the proposition that if the transfer is made on the ground of complaints then it is by way of punishment, the learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon a judgment of the Gujarat High Court Sahadeo Narain Chitravensi v. Chairman, Board of Governors Sainik School Society, New Delhi and others 1981(3) SLR 181, wherein it has been observed as under :-  "In case of the appellant it was not on his representation.
It was not on the recommendation of the Principal.
It was not a case of promotion nor was he transferred because of availability of vacancies and administrative ground is forthcoming.
It was, therefore, on account of the complaint against the appellant that he was sought to be transferred.
If the transfer was made on the ground of complaint then it was definitely by way of punishment and hence an opportunity should have been given to him."
11.
The counsel also drew our attention to a judgment of the Calcutta High Court in SV Singh v. Union of India and others, 1988(2) S.L.R.
545, to contend that a transfer cannot be used as an alternative to disciplinary proceedings or the order of suspension.
It was observed by the Calcutta High Court as under :-  "While it is true transfer is an incidence of the service of the petitioner but that does not mean and imply that the same be applied without any just cause or reason.
There must be cogent administrative reasons for such an order of transfer, in the absence of which the Law Courts will strike down the same.
It is a powerful weapon in the hands of the administration, but that does not clothe the administration, to use it at random and to suit the convenience of same.
It must be fair, reasonable and for administrative reasons.
As noted above, it ought not to be used as an alternative to disciplinary proceedings or the order of suspension.
If the facts warrant issuance of an order of suspension and initiation of a disciplinary proceeding, the authority ought not to use the strong weapon in its hand by ordering a transfer in lieu thereof and if the Law Courts permit such an action, it cannot but lead to a social catastrophe."
12.
Madhya Pradesh High Court in Prakash Chandra Sexena v. State of M.P. and others, 1980(1) SLR 788, held that transferring an employee merely to accommodate some particular official, the transfer would be held to be mala fide.
It was also held that if the Authority entertains suspicion about the employee without holding an enquiry in transferring the person, the action would not be bona fide.
13.
We are in respectful agreement with the dicta laid down in the judgment referred to above.
The Apex Court in EP Rayappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1977 SC 555, observed as under while dealing with a case of transfer of a Government employee :-  "We must, therefore, proceed to consider whether the transfer of the petitioner first to the post of Deputy Chairman and then to the post of Officer on Special Duty was arbitrary, hostile and in mala fide exercise of power.
What was the operative reason for such transfer.
Was it the exigencies of public administration or extra administrative consideration having no relevance to the question of transfer ?
Was the transfer to the post of Deputy Chairman or Officer on Special Duty so irrational or unjust that it could not have been made by any reasonable administration except for reason ?
These are the questions which fall for our consideration.
In my view, the order of transfer in the facts of the case cannot be termed to be an exigency of public administration but for extra-administrative consideration and the order of transfer has been pased for purpose other than the administrative exigency."
14.
In the present case, it would be seen that admittedly the transfers have been made on the basis of some complaints and adverse remarks.
No enquiry has been held and simply on the basis of complaints and suspicion, the petitioners have been transferred; whereas the stage regarding those allegations is only that explanation has been called and the matter is pending final disposal.
There does not seem to be any public interest in transferring the petitioners, but as noticed above, the power to transfer seems to have been used for collateral purposes to avoid disciplinary proceedings.
Shri Mehar Singh has been working at Ludhiana for the last more than six years.
He is being retained in place of one of the petitioners and for the other just a fresher is being brought, but it is claimed on behalf of the Board that the posts to be manned by the petitioners are very important ones, but still a fresher is being brought in place of one of the petitioners.
15.
As already observed in the beginning, the scope of interference by the High Court in such matters is very limited but where facts which are admitted are patent then the Court would certainly interfere it is comes to the conclusion that the administrative order was passed for a collateral purpose.
We hold that the order of transfer, Annexure P-1, qua the petitioners was not straight and simple administrative order of routine transfer but was for collateral purpose and by way of punishment.
16.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow this writ petition and quash the order of transfer dated 27th November, 1990 (Annexure P-1) so far as it relates to the petitioners.
While issuing notice of motion, on 30th November, 1990, we had ordered status-quo to be maintained.
Since we are quashing the order, Annexure P-1, qua the petitioners, the petitioners would continue to work at the places where they were working prior to the passing of the impugned order.
This, however, will not mean that for all times to come the petitioners would work against the posts manned by them.
They can be transferred in accordance with law.
There will be no order as to costs.