H.K.K.
Singh, J - A short though interesting point to be decided in this writ petition, is, whether the married son living separately from the family would be treated as a member of the family of the deceased Government employee for the purpose of giving kith and kin appointment in the State of Tripura.
2.
Nanda Dulal Deb was serving under the Agriculture Department in the post of Agriculture Inspector.
He died on 931997 while in service leaving behind him his wife, two sons and one un-married daughter.
The petitioner is the un- married daughter.
One of the two sons got married and has been living separately in another place under different Gaon Panchayat.
The petitioner approached the authority concerned by filing an application dated 1141997 seeking a compassionate appointment.
As no appointment has been given the petitioner has approached this Court by filing this application under Art. 226 of the Constitution for giving a direction to the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
3.
Under Memo dated 861988 a revised employment policy of the Government was framed and instruction thereof was given.
At paragraph No. VI it is provided that appointment should be given to one of the dependent son/daughter or a relative who looks after the family of the deceased employee under the die-in-harness Scheme.
Thereafter, by another Memo dated 811992 a clarification was made with regard to the definition of the term `family' which reads as follows :-  "* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *  2.
It is hereby clarified that the definition of `family' as mentioned in the Memoranda under reference shall be as under :- `Family' means a Government servant - Wife and Husband, as the case may be, and legitimate children.
Note :- (a) The term `Children' includes sons and un-married daughters.
(b) Married sons even if they live separately should be treated as members of the family.
* * * * * * * * * * *" 4.
On 3151995 another Memo was issued and it was revised employment policy and paragraph 4 of which relates to employment under die-in-harness Scheme, is also reproduced below :-  "(4) EMPLOYMENT TO DEPENDENTS OF PERSONS WHO DIE-IN-HARNESS.
In order to ensure that the `family' of a Government Servant who dies while in service does not suffer from extreme financial difficulties, employment would be provided to one of the dependents of the deceased Govt. servant.
Such employment would be provided only if there is no other member of the family already in the employment of the State Govt. or the Central Govt. or Corporations, undertakings or such other bodies of the State Government.
The intention is to ensure that the family gets the benefits of having at least one salaried person.
Subject to the availability of services of the appropriate category and having regard to the roster point, the educational qualification, age etc., prescribed in the relevant Recruitment Rules, qualified candidates may be appointed by the concerned appointing authority provided that where the dependent does not have the requisite qualification prescribed in the relevant Rule, appointment may be made only after the required relaxation of the provisions of the R/Rs.
duly approved by the appropriate authority."
5.
The aforesaid Memo was modified by another Memo issued on 1381996 which contained detailed guidelines/Instructions regarding assistance to the family members of the employees, who died-in-harness.
This is also reproduced below :-  "MEMORANDUM Subject :- Assistance in the event of death of the State Government employees while in service (Die-in-harness Cases).
In partial modification of previous instructions on the subject mentioned above, the Governor is pleased to order that the following procedure should be observed in providing employment/assistance to an eligible member of the family of an employee, who dies while in service : (1) (i) Employment may be provided to one member of the family provided there is no earning member in the family, in an existing vacant post in the Department without any relaxation of recruitment rules and reservation roster.
(ii) The eligibility shall be determined as on the date of death of the concerned employee.
(2) (i) Supernumerary posts should be created with Finance concurrent in the Departments where eligible member of a family cannot be provided employment for want of posts, which fact is to be certified by the Head of the Department personally.
These posts would be personal to the incumbents and shall lapse with the vacation of the posts by the persons concerned.
(ii) While filling up the Supernumerary posts created reservation/roster/norms need not be followed.
(iii) However, the persons appointed against the Supernumerary posts should be absorbed against regular posts/vacancies, as and when the first vacancy arises in the Department against appropriate category i.e. SC/ST/UR following reservation/roster norms.
The supernumerary posts shall stand abolished on such regularisation against regular posts.
A register of supernumerary posts created should be maintained in each Department and the abolition of the post should be certified in the register by the Head of the Department personally.
(3) (i) Financial assistance should be paid to the family in case where no (persons) could be provided employment due to absence of eligible (persons).
In such cases an amount of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand) will be provided as financial assistance and will be kept in fixed deposit with a post office and interest from which can be earned by the family.
(ii) The financial assistance as mentioned above will be paid by the Department to which the employee who died-in-harness belonged.
In the case of the Government employee of the Secretariat, SA Department will make the payment.
II.
This shall be effective from 1st June, 1996 but will be extended to all pending cases where employment has not been provided so far.
Sd/- U Venkateswarlu Secretary to the Government of Tripura."
6.
Mr. AK Bhowmik submits that the concerned authorities have denied benefit of the Scheme of giving assistance to the petitioner only on the ground that one of the sons of the deceased employee was in gainful employment working as Junior Engineer (Electricity) in the Government of Tripura.
According to the learned counsel as the brother was married and living separately from the family of the deceased Government servant he cannot be treated as a family member for the purpose of die-in-harness Scheme.
The learned counsel submits that the definition of the term `family' as given in the Memo dated 811992 (Annexure-5 to writ petition) had been superseded by the Memo dated 3151995 (Annexure-3 to the writ petition).
7.
Mr. BR Bhattacharjee, learned Advocate General, Tripura on the other hand, has submitted that the definition of `family' as contained in Memo dated 811992 will apply in the present case and in this regard learned Advocate General attempted to make a difference between the policy of the Government and the practice to be followed in the Government.
According to learned Advocate General, Memo which was issued subsequently was with regard to the procedure only.
8.
Mr. UB Saha in this regard also submitted that factually the other son of the deceased viz. Sankar Lal Deb was not living separately at the time of the death of his father on 931997.
The learned Government Advocate has also invited my attention to Memo dated 10111997 (Annexure R/1) to indicate that the definition of `family' as given in Memo dated 811992 (Annexure-4) is still in force.
This Memo is reproduced below :-  "MEMORANDUM Subject :- Providing of employment/financial assistance in the event of death of the State Government employees while in service (Die-in-harness cases) - Extending of benefits to the members of bachelor Government employees and in case of death in extremist violence.
The undersigned is directed to refer to the Appointment and Services Department Memo No. F. 19(2)-GA/77(L), dated 811992 wherein the term `Family' for the purpose of `Die-in-harness cases' has been defined as follows :- "`Family' means a Government servant's wife and husband as the case may be, and legitimate children.
Note :- (a) The term `Children' includes sons and un-married daughter; (b) Married sons, even if they live separately should be treated as members of the family.
2.
It has now been decided that the term `Family' under the `die-in-harness' scheme shall also include dependent parents and dependent unmarried brothers/sisters in the case of bachelor Government employees.
Similar definition of `Family' shall also be applicable to benefits being extended in the cases of death due to extremist violence.
3.
It has also been decided that the benefits under the `Die-in-harness' Scheme shall be extended to the teaching and non-teaching employees of the privately Managed Government Aided Schools in Tripura.
4.
All Department/Heads of Departments are requested to follow the above guidelines rigidly to regulate the case under `Die-in-harness' Scheme.
Sd/- DM Mukherjee Joint Secretary to the Govt. of Tripura."
9.
Again the definition of the term `family' as given in paragraph 2 of the Memo dated 19111997 was given retrospective effect from 1041993 by Memo dated 19th Sept, 1998 (Annexure R/2).
10.
Regarding factual controversy as to whether the son who is now serving as Junior Engineer (Electrical) had separated from the family before the death of the father or not will become relevant in the present case if we come to the conclusion that a separated son will not be taken to be a member of the family in view of the various Memos issued by the Government from time to time.
Thus, the point regarding definition of "family" would be taken up first.
11.
At the outset Mr. UB Saha, the learned Senior Government Advocate has referred to a single Bench decision of this Court in the case of Nanda Dulal Acharjee v. State of Tripura, 1998(1) Gauhati LT 418 in which this Court has held that although technically the Memo dated 811992 is not in force as superseded by later Memo dated 3151995, the spirit of the said Memo dated 811992 defining the term `family' will have to be taken into consideration while making appointment on compassionate ground.
12.
As against this, Mr. AK Bhowmik has submitted that when the Memo dated 811992 is not in force then nothing remains, thus according to the learned senior counsel general meaning of the term `family' has to be applied and the learned counsel has invited my attention to various definitions of `family' given in various Judicial Dictionaries including Judicial Dictionary by KJ Aiyer to bolster up his argument that a man living separately cannot be taken as a member of the family.
13.
The whole idea of giving benefit under the `Die-in-harness' Scheme is only to help the bereaved family when facing the crisis upon the death of the sole earning member of the family and in order to avoid complications and confusion in determining as to whether the person is a member of the family of the Government employee who `Die-in-harness' the Government came out with the aforesaid Memo dated 811992 defining the term `family' for the purpose of `die-in-harness'.
May be the married son who had separated from the original family also get the benefit of the die-in-harness Scheme and the benefit is further extended to the dependent parents and dependent un-married brothers and sisters in the case of bachelor Government servant.
14.
The idea of giving benefit of the family members of a Government employee who died-in-harness has been introduced in the State of Tripura by making policy decision by the Government and from time to time Memoranda are issued.
No statutory enactment has been made in this regard.
These Memos issued for giving benefit in respect of die-in-harness have been changed from time to time as noted above.
The definition of the `family' was clarified by Memo dated 811992 (Annexure-5 to the writ petition) as quoted above.
Thereafter, subsequent Memos were issued on 1351995 and 1381996 and again those Memos were modified by subsequent Memos dated 19111997 and dated 1991998 (Annexure-R/1 and R/2) respectively).
15.
Here my considered opinion is that Memo dated 3151995 will be deemed to have eclipsed and cancelled only those provisions which are inconsistent with the superseding Memos.
It may be seen that the definition of the word `family' was given in the Memo dated 811992 (Annexure-5 to the writ petition).
But no new definition is given in the subsequent Memo dated 3151995.
Thus, the only logical and harmonious interpretation should be that the definition of the term `family' which was given in Memo dated 811992 will still hold good even after passing of the Memo dated 3151995.
This view of mine also finds support from the Memo dated 18111997 (Annexure-R/1) which provides that the term `family' which had been defined in Memo dated 811992 shall include parents, dependent un-married brothers and sisters in case of bachelor Government employees.
Again if the definition of family as given in the earlier Memos is deemed to have been cancelled then it will again cause confusion with regard to the meaning of this word `family'.
The term used in the Memorandum has got to be interpreted strictly keeping in view the object sought to be achieved by the policy decision of the Government.
There are millions of destitutes in the country besides the family of the deceased (if the family is also a destitute family).
In our present case, one of the sons is in gainful employment under the Government.
Even the mother may claim maintenance from such a son under the personal law of the party, if provided for.
Thus, even if the scheme is a welfare scheme, benefit should not be extended to those who are not expressly or by necessary implication, covered by the Scheme.
16.
From the above conclusion, I am of the opinion of the learned single Judge in the case of Nanda Dulal Acharjee, 1998 Lab IC 2835 (supra) that the aforesaid definition of `family' given in Memo dated 811992 will still to be applicable in the light of the aforesaid conclusion arrived at by me and as such in our present case as one son of the deceased employee was in gainful employment under the Government, the benefit of die-in-harness Scheme shall not be available to the petitioner.
17.
In the result, the writ petition has no merit and accordingly it is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.