Vijender Jain, CJ.
- The present appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against judgment dated 2212003 of the learned Single Judge passed in C.W.P.
No. 4579 of 1983.
2.
The appellant, who was appointed as Foot Constable in the erstwhile State of Pepsu, was charge-sheeted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police and was subjected to a departmental enquiry which culminated in his dismissal from service.
He filed a civil suit in which his only prayer was for recovery of arrears of pay and allowances amounting to Rs. 5400/-.
The said suit was decreed on 19.4.1963 and a decree in the sum of Rs. 2850/- with costs was passed in favour of the appellants.
Thereafter, he filed C.W.P.
No. 4579 of 1983, inter-alia, praying for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to allow him to resume duties at the appropriate rank with full back wages.
3.
By the impugned judgment, the learned Single Judge has negated the plea raised by the appellant by observing that when the civil suit was filed, he did not raise any challenge to the order of dismissal and confined his prayer to the recovery of arrears of the salary alone.
It was also observed that in the absence of any declaration having been sought by the appellant to declare the order of dismissal as null and void, the provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure (for short, 'the CPC') read with Rule 32 of the Writ Jurisdiction (Punjab and Haryana) Rules, 1976 (hereinafter described as 'the Rules') would be attracted and not only a fresh suit for claiming such a declaration would be barred, but even the writ petition would be barred by the same principle.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that there was no bar to the appellant's raising of the plea in the writ petition with regard to the declaration of the order of dismissal as null & void and the provisions of the CPC were not attracted qua the same.
He contended that the observation of the learned Single Judge that the writ petition is barred by the principle of res judicata on account of the appellant's failure to raise a similar plea in the civil suit is, therefore, erroneous.
To support his submissions, he placed reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court reported as AIR 1962 SC 1334 - Devendra Pratap Narain Rai Sharma v. State of UP and others and AIR 1977 SC 1466 - The State of MP v. The State of Maharashtra and others.
5.
The relevant observations made in Devendra Pratap Narain Rai Sharma's case (supra) are reproduced below :  "The High Court has disallowed to the appellant his salary prior to the date of the suit.
The bar of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Civil Procedure Code on which the High Court apparently relied may not apply to a petition for a high prerogative writ under Article 226 of the Constitution, but the High Court having disallowed the claim of the appellant for salary prior to the date of the suit, we do not think that we would be justified in interfering with the exercise of its discretion by the High Court."
Paragraph 25 of the judgment in The State of MP v. The State of Maharashtra and others, (supra), which has specifically been relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant, reads as under :  "The contention of Madhya Pradesh cannot be accepted.
The plaintiff will be barred under Order 2, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure only when he omits to sue for or relinquishes the claim in a suit with knowledge that he has a right to sue for that relief.
It will not be correct to say that while the decision of the Judicial Committee in Lal's case (supra) was holding the field the plaintiff could be said to know that he was yet entitled to make a claim for arrears of salary.
On the contrary, it will be correct to say that he knew that he was not entitled to make such a claim.
If at the date of the former suit the plaintiff is not aware of the right on which he insists in the latter suit the plaintiff cannot be said to be disentitled to the relief in the latter suit.
The reason is that at the date of the former suit the plaintiff is not aware of the right on which he insists in the subsequent suit.
A right which a litigant does not know that he possesses or a right which is not in existence at the time of the first suit can hardly be regarded as a "portion of his claim" within the meaning of Order 2, Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
See Amant Bibi v. Imdad Hussain, (1885)15 Ind App 106 at p.112(PC).
The crux of the matter is presence or lack or awareness of the right at the time of first suit."
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the appellant's claim is hopelessly barred by time as his services were terminated in the year 1955 and the civil suit that he had filed was in the year 1961 and even this suit was confined to the prayer of recovery of the arrears of salary and allowances.
Besides, the writ petition was filed on 3091983 and even if he had continued in service, assuming the order of dismissal had been set aside, he would have retired in the year 1982 and the prayer for reinstatement, in any case, could not have been answered in his favour in the writ petition which was instituted after he had attained the age of superannuation in 1982.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
7.
There is no quarrel about the proposition that the provisions of the CPC are not applicable to the proceedings initiated under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The provisions of the CPC cannot be imported into the proceedings under the writ jurisdiction of the High Court and, therefore, the findings of the learned Single Judge on the said issue holding that the claim in the writ petition was barred by the principle of res judicata under Order 2 Rule 2 of the CPC read with Rule 32 of the Rules was clearly erroneous.
8.
The High Court Rules and Orders with reference to the provisions of the CPC are merely to augment the procedure to be adopted in the course of proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, can the two be integrated in one stream, more-so when the powers of the High Court under Article 226 flow from the Constitution of India and are much wider in import and construction.
9.
The erroneous reasoning adopted by the learned Single Judge, however, does not, in any manner, vary the conclusion that has been arrived at by him for the reason that the appellant's right to challenge the order of dismissal had become available to him at the time of filing of the civil suit wherein he consciously chose to confine his prayer only to the arrears of salary and as a consequence, he willfully abandoned his right to assail the order of dismissal.
Even the civil suit was filed after six years of the order of dismissal.
The writ petition was filed again after an inordinarily long period of delay in 1983 and the learned counsel for the respondents has rightly pointed out that even if the impediment of the order of dismissal had been erased completely, even then the appellant would have superannuated in the year 1982 rendering his claim for reinstatement negatory and meaningless.
Hence, the learned Single Judge was right in dismissing the claim of the appellant and in the appeal, we do not find any reason to interfere with the same.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.