ML Singhal, J - Bhana Ram plaintiff-respondent was Assistant in the Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar (hereinafter referred to as HAU).
Dalip Singh defendent-respondent was also Assistant in HAU.
He was promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent by the appellant-HAU vide order No. Admn.
82/89/8746-50 dated 581989 in supersession of Bhana Ram respondent.
Bhana Ram filed suit for declaration whereby he challenged the promotion of Dalip Singh defendant in supersession of him.
It was alleged in the plaint that he was senior to Dalip Singh.
He joined as Assistant in HAU on 1791985.
He was allowed to cross the period of probation by the order of Director of Farms, HAU, Hisar with effect from 1791987 through letter dated 841988.
Dalip Singh was promoted as Assistant by the order of Registrar dated 16101985.
It was further alleged by Bhana Ram that his service record was good.
No adverse remarks had ever been conveyed to him.
While promoting Dalip Singh to the post of Deputy Superintendent, his claim to promotion was not considered.
2.
HAU, Hisar contested the suit of Bhana Ram plaintiff urging that he was considered for promotion as promotion was to be made keeping in view the principle of seniority-cum-merit.
Dalip Singh was promoted and Bhana Ram was superseded because his service record was not good and it was replete with adverse remarks.
Adverse remarks were duly conveyed to him.
3.
Dalip Singh defendant contested the suit urging that he was rightly promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent as he had good service record while that of Dalip Singh (Bhana Ram ?)
was replete with adverse remarks.
It was also urged that non-conveyance of adverse remarks gave no cause of action to Bhana Ram to claim promotion and challenge his promotion.
4.
On these pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order No. 82/89/8746-50 dt. 5.8.89 is illegal, null and void and bad in law ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is false, frivolous and liable to be dismissed with special costs ?
OPD  3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 4.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the suit by his act and conduct ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD 7.
Relief.
Learned Sub Judge IInd Class, Hisar vide order dated 18.9.1993 dismissed the suit of the plaintiff in view of his findings that Dalip Singh was rightly promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent when Bhana Ram was not found suitable for that post in view of his bad service record.
5.
Bhana Ram went in appeal.
His appeal was allowed by the learned Additional District Judge, Hisar vide order dated 21.3.1996 in view of his findings that Bhana Ram should have been promoted because adverse remarks could not be used against him as these had not been conveyed to him and uncommunicated adverse remarks could not recoil upon him.
6.
HAU, Hisar has assailed the order of the learned Additional District Judge, Hisar through this Regular Second Appeal.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and also have gone through the record.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant-HAU, Hisar submitted that Dalip Singh respondent was promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent in supersession of Bhana Ram respondent-plaintiff because the service record of the latter was containing adverse entries.
In the face of those adverse entries, he could not be promoted.
Dalip Singh was promoted because his service record was good.
It was submitted that at the time, when Dalip Singh was promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent, his service record was evaluated and service record of Bhana Ram was also evaluated by the Selection Committee.
Bhana Ram was not recommended for promotion due to poor service record.
Dalip Singh was recommended for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent against the quota of Scheduled Castes.
In the proceedings of the Selection Committee meeting for the post of Superintendent and Deputy Superintendent held on 671989 at 9 A.M. in the office of Registrar, HAU, Hisar, on the basis of the service record and according to the prescribed criteria, the Selection Committee made the said recommendation, Vice Chancellor approved the proceedings of the Selection Committee.
Criteria for promotion laid down by the Haryana Government vide Memo No. Admn.
E-2/86/2551-71 dated 7.3.1986 requiring that a person can be considered for promotion if he has earned seven good or more than seven good reports in the last ten years was adopted by the HAU.
A person, who has got adverse entry regarding his integrity in the last ten years should not be recommended for promotion/selection grade.
This criteria is required to be kept in view while granting promotion or selection grade.
So far as Bhana Ram is concerned during the following period, his performance as reflected in his Annual Confidential record was as follows :-  7.12.82 to 31383 i) Over-all performance during the period - Below average.
ii) Capacity & Intelligence & Acquaintance with rules and orders with special reference to accounts -- Deficient.
iii) Quickness in the despatch of business -- Slow.
iv) Defects, if any -- slow, grasp of work is poor.
17.6.83 to 31.3.84 i) Capacity & Intelligence -- Average  ii) Defects, if any -- A habitual late comer and slow in disposal of routine work.
Also defaulted in timely reconciliation of accounts.
1485 to 9.10.85 i) Punctuality & regularity -- Always late comer and early goe.
Did not improve even after issuing letters.
ii) Reputation for honesty -- Not a devoted worker.
Does not do work in time & was found careless in discharging the duties which resulted into excess expenditure over the allotted provisions.
10.10.95 to 31385 i) Industry & Consciousness -- Poor  ii) Punctuality & Regularity - Not punctual Habitual late comer.
iii) Defects--Should improve in punctuality.
1986-87 i) Acquaintance with rules and orders with special reference to accounts -- Average ii) Punctuality & regularity -- Average iii) Over-all remarks -- He was not dependable worker.
1987-88 i) Industry & Consciousness, handwriting & neatness, Capacity & Intelligence, Acquaintance with rules and orders with special reference to accounts, quickness in despatch of business and punctuality and Regularity -- Average.
9.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted how could respondent Bhana Ram be promoted when his service record was replete with adverse entries.
Adverse remarks do not get washed out with confirmation and can be taken into consideration for the purpose of promoting an officer or prematurely retiring him.
In support of this submission, he drew my attention to Daulat Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1996(1) SCT 322 where it was held that on confirmation the adverse remarks regarding integrity do not get washed out and can be taken into consideration for promoting an officer or prematurely retiring him.
"Criteria and considerations for considering a case of an officer for crossing the efficiency bar, confirmation, promotion and premature retirement are quite different.
Adverse entry of "integrity doubtful", which as per instructions of the State Government, usually effects the service career for about 10 years."
He drew my attention to RD Goyal v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1994(8) SCT 703, where it was held that "an average report is not an adverse report.
However it is certainly below or inferior to a good report.
Mere fact that it is not conveyed does not mean that it is to be treated as good."
RD Goyal was found to have earned 6875% good reports and respondent No. 2 was found to have earned 866% good reports during the past 10 years and the promotion of respondent No. 2 was found to be in order.
It was held that mere fact that the average report was not conveyed does not mean that it is to be treated as good or that selection of respondent No. 2 is vitiated.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that if the adverse report is not communicated, uncommunicated adverse report cannot be treated as "good report".
For the period 1485 to 9.10.85, he was graded as average.
In the column of honesty, it was recorded that he was not a devoted worker.
Does not do work in time and was found careless in discharging the duties resulting into excess expenditure over the allotted provisions.
In the column of punctuality and regularity, it was recorded "always a late comer, and early goer, did not improve even after issuing letters."
For the period 101085 to 31386 he was graded as average, in the column of punctuality and regularity.
It was recorded that he was not punctual and habitual late comer.
For the year 1986-87, he was graded as not dependable.
On the whole, his work was found satisfactory.
For the year 1987-88, he was graded as average.
For 1488 to 31389, he was graded as average.
10.
Learned counsel for Bhana Ram respondent submitted that promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent was governed by "senority-cum-merit principle".
Average report is not an adverse report and, therefore, he should have been promoted when he was senior to Dalip Singh.
He submitted that if promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent had been governed by principle of merit-cum-seniority, it could have been said that as his service record was inferior to that of Dalip Singh, Dalip Singh could be promoted.
Suffice it to say, at the cost of repetition, this Court must hold that Bhana Ram could claim promotion only if he had earned more than 70% good reports during the last 10 years preceding the date when he came to be considered for promotion.
Promotion cannot be claimed as of right.
All that a person, who is within the zone of consideration can claim, is to be considered for promotion.
No body has an indefeasible right to be promoted.
On such consideration, Bhana Ram was found unfit to be promoted.
11. faced with this position, learned counsel for Bhana Ram respondent submitted that Bhana Ram was promoted as Assistant on 17985 and, therefore, his service record prior to 17985 could not have been taken into account.
It was submitted that annual confidential remarks for the period 1485 to 9.10.85 could not have been considered.
In Mukhtiar Singh Bal v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) SCT 222 it was held that "adverse entry prior to the date when a public servant is allowed to cross efficiency bar is not completely wiped out and can be taken into consideration for judging his suitability for promotion to the next higher rank.
Adverse entry which is not considered as deterrent for crossing the efficiency bar cannot be treated to have been obliterated and can be taken into consideration for negativing the claim for promotion to he next higher rank."
12.
Deputy Superintendent's post is a post of much higher responsibility while the post of Assistant is not of that higher responsibility and, therefore, it was for the selection committee to judge his suitability for the post of Depurty Superintendent.
He was not found suitable for the post of Deputy Superintendent due to poor record of service.
In the years 1986-87 and 1987- 88, he was graded as average.
In the year 1986-87, he was found not dependable.
For the period 101085 to 31386, he was graded as average but was found not punctual rather habitual late comer.
In support of his argument that uncommunicated adverse remarks should not recoil on the career of a public servant particularly relating to integrity, Learned counsel for Bhana Ram drew my attention to Gurdial Singh Fijji v. State of Punjab & others, 1979 All India Services Law Journal 299 where it was held that "if adverse remarks had been communicated he could have represented.
In para 16 of the judgment, it was observed that "the principle is well settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for one reason or another, not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant, though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified.
In these circumstances, it is difficult to support the non- issuance of the integrity certificate to the appellant.
The chain of reaction began with the adverse report and the infirmity in the link of causation is that no one has yet decided whether that report was justified.
We cannot speculate, in the absence of a proper pleading, whether the appellant was not found suitable otherwise, that is to say for reasons other than those connected with the non-issuance of an integrity certificate."
13.
In 1979 All India Services Law Journal 299 (supra) adverse remarks had been communicated to him and he had represented but no decision had been taken on this representation.
Hon'ble Supreme Court directed the State Govt. to dispose of his representation in regard to the adverse report in his confidential roll for the year 1966-67.
14.
In Punjab State and others v. Kulwantbir Singh, 1993(2) SCT 307 it was held that "adverse remarks prior to promotion to a higher post particularly where it is based on merit and not seniority alone would lose their significance and such promotion would take away the sting of the adverse remarks against the government servant concerned.
It was a case where Kulwantbir Singh was sought to be prematurely retired and the question arose whether the previous adverse report stood obliterated with the crossing of the efficiency bar and that he could not be compulsorily retired.
There is a qualitative difference in emphasis in considering a case of crossing of the efficiency bar and retention in service on completion of the requisite qualifying service.
Past performance being the yard-stick for the former while with regard to the latter, it is dependent upon an assessment of the usefulness and quality of an employee for continued service with the dominant consideration there being that of public interest.
In other words, for crossing of the efficiency bar, we look to the past and for retention in service, to the needs of the future.
15.
Promotion, on the other hand, is a matter which stands on an entirely different footing with the essential characteristic thereof being that of comparative merit, which has no role to play in the crossing of the efficiency bar and only occasionally in retention in service on completion of the qualifying service."
16.
It is thus clear that when a person is to be promoted the comparative merit of the persons falling within the zone of consideration has to be seen.
Dalip Singh emerged more meritorious vis-a-vis Bhana Ram and he (Dalip Singh) was promoted.
17.
For the reasons given above, this appeal succeeds and is accepted and the judgment and decree passed by learned Additional District Judge, Hisar is set aside and that of Sub Judge IInd Class, Hisar are restored.
Plaintiff's suit is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.