GD Sharma, J - Through the medium of this petition, the petitioner has prayed that writ of certiorari may be issued for quashing the Govt. order No. 295-HME of 1998 dated 7-4-1998.
In pursuance to the said order, the petitioner has been adjusted from the post of Principal, Govt. Medical College, Jammu as Head of the Department of Pharmacology, Govt. Medical College, Jammu.
Simultaneously, the order had up-graded the post of Professor and Head of the Department, Pharmacology to the level of Principal and the petitioner was allowed to hold the said post in his personal capacity till his superannuation.
Dr. HL Goswami (respondent No. 3) Professor and Head of the Department, Surgery, Govt. Medical College, Jammu was adjusted as Principal, Govt. Medical College Jammu vice the petitioner.
2.
The impugned order has been challenged on the grounds that the petitioner stands lowered in his status as while working as Head of the Department of Pharmacology, Govt. Medical College, Jammu he has to work under the administrative control of respondent No. 3 who is junior in service to him.
Mala fide intentions have also been attributed to respondents No. 1 & 2 as according to him, he had not obliged them in giving admission to additional 20 candidates than the duly sanctioned capacity of 100 candidates in the MBBS Course for the academic year 1998-99.
The competent authority which could pass the impugned order was the cabinet of Ministers but it is has been issued by the Under Secretary to the Govt.
The order, as such, is void ab initio.
3.
Respondents No. 1 & 2 in the objections have stated that the order in question was passed by the State Cabinet and is an order issued by the Govt. of Jammu and Kashmir.
In the cabinet, the item covering the order in question was referred, under sub-rule (3) of Rule 19 as non-agenda item which was permissible under Government Business Rules.
Mala fides are denied and annexure R-2 is placed on the record, which is a letter addressed by the petitioner to respondent No. 2 regarding the admission of 120 MBBS students in the Govt. Medical College, Jammu wherein he candidly had expressed no difficulty in giving admission to 120 candidates in the MBBS Course.
According to him, deficiencies pointed out by the Medical Council of India had been rectified except the establishment of infrastructure which would require 1-1/2 years to 3 years.
The allegation of lowering the petitioner in status has been denied as according to Cabinet order (Annexure R-1) his pay scale and status as Principal, Govt. Medical College had been retained.
He has been made administratively answerable not to respondent No. 3 but directly to respondent No. 2.
4.
Heard the arguments.
5.
The counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned order has the effect of lowering the status of the petitioner, because the post of the cadre of Principal, Medical College is of higher pedestal than the post of a Head of the Department of Pharmacology, a discipline in the same institution.
To buttress his contention the learned counsel has cited the case or Dr. SK Kacker v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 1996(10) SCC 734 : 1996(4) S.C.T.
600.
In rebuttal, the counsel appearing for the respondents have contended that it is a case of pure transfer from the post of a cadre to the post which has been up-graded of equal cadre and on facts it is not a case where it can be said the petitioner has been lowered in rank.
Rule 5 of the J&K Medical Education (G) Service Recruitment Rules, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as 'Medical Rules') has been referred which deals with recruitment to the Gazetted service.
It is provided therein that the appointment to the service shall be made (a) by direct recruitment; or (b) by promotion by selection in the manner as indicated against each post in Schedule-III.
Schedule II of these rules provides the minimum qualification and minimum teaching/research experience.
For the post of Principal/Dean the same qualification as prescribed for a Professor/Head of the teaching department is prescribed.
A minimum of 10 years teaching experience as Professor/Associate Professor in a Medical College out of which at least five years should be as a Professor in a department has been prescribed.
Schedule-III under Rule 5-B (promotion by selection) gives the method of recruitment by promotion from Schedule-II.
In the instant case, the petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 stand selected by promotion.
In other words, their selection was by adopting the mode of recruitment as prescribed in sub-clause (b) of Rule-5, which does not fix any tenure for holding such a post.
Annexure R-1 is the decision of the Cabinet bearing No. 65/5 dated 30-3-1998 which is a non-agenda item and states that the Cabinet had approved the appointment of respondent No. 3 (Professor and Head of the Department of Surgery) as Principal, Medical College, Jammu in place of Dr. RK Raina (petitioner).
The latter was posted as Head of the Department of Pharmacology retaining the pay scale and status of Principal, Medical College, Jammu.
The order is under the signatures of the Secretary to the Cabinet and was sent to the General Department for record.
A copy of the order was sent to the Secretary to Govt., Health and Medical Education Department for further action.
This order is dated 30-3-98 and there-after the impugned order was issued by respondent No. 2 on 7-4-1998 (Annexure P-7).
The Cabinet order in question deals with the appointment of respondent No. 3 by promotion method to the post of Principal, Govt. Medical College, Jammu and transfer of the petitioner as Head of the Department of Pharmacology retaining his pay scale and status of Principal, Govt. Medical College, Jammu.
The case of the petitioner does not fall within the category of reversion to his previous post but it is a case of simple transfer wherein his status and pay have been protected.
In other words, the petitioner is not being reverted to that post from where he was selected as the Principal of the Govt. Medical College, Jammu.
These are the distinguishable facts of the present case from the facts of Dr. SK Kakkar's case (supra) and hence the law laid down by the Apex Court in that case has no bearing to the facts of the present case.
The counsel appearing for the respondents cited the cases of Union of India v. SL Abbas, AIR 1993 SC 2444 : 1995(4) SCT 455 (SC) and Mohd.
Sikandar Bhat v. State of J&K, 1989 KLJ 186.
In SL Abbas's case (supra) it has been held that order of transfer made without following the guidelines cannot be interfered with by the court unless it is vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of statutory provision.
In the case of Mohd.
Sikandar Bhat (supra) the Division Bench of this court has held that it is the prerogative of the State Government to post and transfer its employees and posting and transfer of employee would not relate to the condition of service of an employee.
Only those orders are justiciable which are framed in relation to governance of conditions of service and which are inconsistent with rules already framed.
The facts constituting mala fides must have direct nexus with ill-will.
The plea of mala fide cannot be said to be established merely because petitioner's alleged activities had taken place prior to issuance of the order.
6.
The transfer in question in the instant case does not violate any statutory provision nor is inconsistent with rules governing the conditions of service.
As already held it has not lowered him in status as his cadre stands protected.
The allegation of mala fide is not borne out from any evidence.
The record reveals that the petitioner in his letter No. JMC/FAC/2524 dated 17-2- 1998 (Annexure R-2) addressed to respondent No. 2 herein had stated that all the deficiencies pointed out in the report (regarding the admission of additional number of 20 students in the MBBS Course) would be rectified during the year 1998-99 subject to the timely release of funds during the next financial year.
He had even pointed out that these defects were not likely to hamper the additional quota of 20 students in any manner and suggested that by the time the batch of students to be admitted in March 1999 would come to these phases, the said deficiencies would have been removed.
In the back-drop the such suggestion and admissions how it could lie in the mouth or the petitioner to say that he was not succumbing to the pressure of respondents No. 1 & 2 in giving admission to 20 additional students and for his up-right and straight forward puritan conduct he stands victimised on the basis of ill-will and mala fides.
Rather, the petitioner had guided and helped respondents No. 1 & 2 in accommodating the additional quota of 20 students in the MBBS Course.
On facts it is found that it is a case where the pot is calling the kettle black.
It is an accusation levelled for the sake of own convenience and not based on any material to be taken into account.
Equally, the allegation that the order in question was passed by an incompetent person is found baseless as it is an order of the Cabinet (Annexure R-I) issued under the signatures of respondent No. 2 (Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Govt. Health and Medical Education Department).
7.
Taking a global view of all the facts and circumstances of the case, it is found that the allegations made in the petition could not be substantiated by the petitioner and as such, the petition is meritless and consequently dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.