OP Sharma, J - The petitioner is an officer of Indian Police Service against whom a case under Sections 409/201 Ranbir Penal Code was registered in Police Station Bahu Fort, Jammu.
The investigation of the case revealed that while posted as Commandant of 13 Batallion.
Jammu Kashmir Armed Police from January to July, 1991, he had misappropriated an amount of Rs. 6,31,576/-.
Since the petitioner is an officer of the Indian Police Service, sanction to prosecute him under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has been accorded by the Government of India.
2.
The petitioner challenges the order of sanction dated 13061995 on the ground: (i) that the Indian Penal Code is not being applicable to the State of J&K, so the sanction is bad, and secondly, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1998) having been repealed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central), a reference to the repealed Code speaks of non-application of mind by the sanctioning authority.
Moreover, even the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is not applicable to the State of J&K and as such the sanction is bad because it could be issued only under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 13 of 1933 AD).
3.
The contention of Mr. Raina is that: (1) the order impugned is invalid because the petitioner cannot be prosecuted under the Indian Penal Code; (ii) the prosecution has been sanctioned under the repealed Code of Criminal Procedure; and (iii) at the time of commission of alleged offence the petitioner was removable by the State Government, which alone could accord sanction.
Mr. Pant, on the other hand, argued that the petitioner being a member of Indian Police Service is removable from office only by the Government of India and, therefore, his prosecution could be sanctioned only by the Government of India.
Regarding the offence committed by the petitioner, his contention is that it is the substance of the charge and not the wrong mention of the Penal Code which is germane.
4.
Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure reads as under :-  "Prosecution of Judges and Public servants.
- (1) When any person who is Judge within the meaning of section 19 of the Ranbir Penal Code or when any Magistrate, or when any Public Servant who is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the State Government or the Government of India, is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, no court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction - a) in the case of persons employed in connection with the affairs of the Union, of the Government of India, and b) in the case of persons employed in connection with the affairs of the State, the Government".
The expression "who is not removable from the office save by or with the sanction of the State Government of India" occurring in the section means the Government with whose order the public servant can be removed from service in case the offence is proved against him.
Any other view would be possible only by doing violence to the provision.
So the argument of Mr. Raina that sanction to the prosecution has reference to the date of commission of crime, is without substance and is rejected accordingly.
This takes us to the contention that no charge can be framed under the provisions of Indian Penal Code and the sanction accorded under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 is invalid because it stands replaced by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The order of sanction reads as under :-  "Whereas it has been alleged that Shri Mohammed Amin Shah, IPC (SPs-93), while functioning as Commandant 13 Bn JKAP between January 1991 to July 1991 with the connivance of other four persons, misappropriated an amount of Rs. 6,31,576/- in 13th Bn JKAP and took away some necessary records deliberately with ulterior motive.
And whereas the said acts constituted an offence punishable under Section/sections 189, 409, 467, 468, 471 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act 45 of 1860).
And whereas the Central Government, after carefully examining all the available material before it in regard to the said allegations and the circumstances of the case, considers that the said Shri Mohammad Amin Shah, IPC should be prosecuted in a court of law for the said offence/offences.
Now, therefore, the Central Government doth hearby sanction under Section 197 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) for the prosecution of the said Shri Mohammad Amin Shah, IPS for the said offence/offences and other offence(s) punishable under other provisions of law in respect of the acts aforesaid and for the taking of cognizance of the said offence(s) by a court of competent jurisdiction.
By order and in the name of the President."
Admittedly, the offences have been alleged committed within the State and, therefore, charge can be framed only under the Ranbir Penal Code and not under the Indian Penal Code.
But since charge has to correspond with the order sanctioning prosecution, the petitioner cannot be charged under the Ranbir Penal Code, the only penal code under which he can be charged and tried.
Since the sanction to prosecution has to be under Section 197 of the State Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and not under the Central Code of Criminal Procedure, so the order impugned is bad and liable to be quashed.
5.
In view of the above, this petition is allowed and the order impugned quashed with liberty reserved to the Union of India to pass fresh orders according sanction to the prosecution of the petitioner.
Petition allowed.