VS Aggarwal, J - Deepak Arora a minor through his elder brother Mukesh Arora has filed the present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking quashing of admission of respondents 3 and 4 who are lower in merit than the petitioner and for directing respondents 1 and 2 to grant admission to the petitioner in Computer Science and Engineering against the seat having become vacant after quashing the admission of respondents 3 and 4.
2.
The facts alleged are that petitioner applied seeking admission to four years BTech/BE Engineering course as per terms and conditions of the prospectus.
The petitioner had qualified the entrance test and his rank was 4287.
He attended the counselling in the college of respondent No. 2 (Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra).
He was granted admission in Electronics and Instrumentation in Haryana College of Engineering at Jagadhari.
He deposited the fee.
After the said admission, respondents 1 and 2 kept on issuing advertisements because the respondents kept on recognising fresh colleges.
In other colleges now being recognised, extra seats were given even after the closing the date of the admission.
The real merit was ignored.
The petitioner contends that his rank was 4287 whereas the rank of respondent No. 3 was 4957 and of respondent No. 44 was 5845.
Despite they being lower in rank, they were given admission in Computer Science and Engineering which is a better and preferential discipline in Engineering.
The petitioner also challenges the condition of the respondents in change of the discipline that no objection certificate must be obtained.
Because of non-availability of `No Objection Certificate', the petitioner could not attend the second, third, fourth and later counselling.
On these facts, it is claimed that admissions of respondents 3 and 4 in Computer Science and Engineering course may be cancelled and in the vacancy that would be caused, the petitioner should be admitted.
3.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 2 the said petition had been contest.
There is no controversy in broad facts.
It has been pointed that advertisements were issued since admission to new colleges were not made initially.
The admission, however, were made strictly in accordance with the merit as per rules and procedure given in the advertisement.
Respondent No. 3 is stated to have been admitted in Daronacharya College of Engineering, Gurgaon.
The counselling was held on 24.9.1999.
Respondent No. 4 was admitted in Hindu College, Sonepat and counselling was held on 20.10.1999.
It was mentioned in the advertisement that candidates already admitted to any of the Engineering Colleges in Haryana will have to produce No Objection Certificate/Original certificates if they desire to seek recounselling for admission.
The petitioner did not produce the original certificates or No Objection Certificate, therefore, he was not eligible to be considered.
It was further pointed that admissions made to the new colleges were separate and independent.
They were made strictly in accordance with rules and procedures laid in the advertisement.
4.
In the separate written statement filed by respondent No. 3, it was asserted that though the petitioner had challenged the entire process of selection authorities after his own selection whereunder about 900 students were given admissions in the subsequently created seats in various colleges/courses.
The petitioner is only seeking quashing of admission of respondents 3 and 4.
It was further asserted that all the students who are admitted after the first counselling would be necessary parties.
Many other seats were filled up in this regard.
It was denied, therefore, that any injustice has been done to the petitioner.
5.
In the separate reply filed by respondent No. 4 also the similar defence had been offered.
It was alleged that advertisement had been issued since the admissions to new colleges were not made initially.
When the counselling took place, respondent No. 4 was admitted and now the admission as such could not be cancelled.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his contention that petitioner had a preferential right to be admitted to Computer Science and Engineering course as against respondents 3 and 4 whose rank is lower than the petitioner urged that in accordance with the Brochure such a right was with the petitioner.
He referred to Information Brochure for Admission through CEET issued by respondent No. 2.
The relevant portion of the same reads :-  "For any seat falling vacant after the counselling and upto the last date of admission at this College, the candidates will be allowed re-adjustment of branches within State quota/respective category in order of merit and on the criteria with which they were admitted.
For subsequent vacancies, the readjustments will be allowed only before the start of 3rd semester on the basis of the result of 1st semester irrespective of the State quota/category.
In no case the strength in a discipline will be allowed to fall below 75% of the sanctioned strength of that branch."
However, indeed the plea is without any merit because these instructions form part of Part-D of the Brochure which is only applicable to Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra and other Regional Engineering Colleges.
It does not apply to other colleges and consequently the petitioner cannot take advantage of the said instructions.
7.
In that event it was contended that still in terms of the merit, the petitioner had a better claim.
He relied on the following instructions of the Brochure :-  "B.
In the Private Engineering Colleges, 5% (50% ?)
seats will be `Free Seats' (Normal Fees) and the remaining 50% will be `Payment Seats'.
However, FOR PAYMENT SEATS first preference will be given to the candidates who pass qualifying examination from schools in Haryana or have a Haryana Residence Certificate.
Unfilled seats in this category shall be filled from Non-Haryana candidates on the basis of CEET-99 merit.
ALL SUCH ELIGIBLE CANDIDATE DESIROUS OF ADMISSION TO ENGINEERING COURSES IN THE ABOVE INSTITUTE MUST TAKE THE ENTRANCE TEST, CEET-99.
ADMISSION TO A PARTICULAR INSTITUTE WILL BE MADE FOR 1999 AS PER ELIGIBILITY CONDITIONS MENTIONED IN THIS BROCHURE (PART-C).
THE RESULT OF CEET-99 SHALL BE PROVISIONAL AND SHALL STAND CANCELLED IF THE CANDIDATE FAILS TO PRODUCE BY THE PRESCRIBED DAY OF COUNSELLING.
THE PROOF OF PASSING CLEARLY THE QUALIFYING EXAM.
SECURING THE REQUIRED PERCENTAGE OF MARKS AS MENTIONED IN THIS BROCHURE.
SUCH CANDIDATES SHALL NOT HAVE ANY CLAIM WHATSOEVER WITH REGARD TO COUNSELLING AND ADMISSION TO ANY OF THE ABOVE ENGINEERING INSTITUTIONS."
"(ii) Depending upon the merit and availability of seats in various Colleges/disciplines the students should come prepared to make up their mind at the time of counselling and no subsequent change in the college/discipline will be allowed.
The candidate, should, therefore, exercise his/her option with due care.
(iii) In case a candidate withdraws or declines his admission, or remains absent on the scheduled date of counselling, he/she will not be considered in the subsequent counselling.
(iv) Candidates who are selected will be required to deposit all original certificates at the time of counselling and these will subsequently be sent to the concerned Colleges.
These will be returned only on the cancellation of admission.
(v) The candidates, if selected, will be required to deposit fees, securities etc. on the spot in cash for non-payment seats and by Bank draft, drawn in favour of Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, payable at the State Bank of India, REC Kurukshetra (Code 6260) for payment seats.
Fee in any other form will not be accepted.
(vi) The duly admitted candidates will be governed by the rules and regulations of the College concerned and its affiliating University.
All matters relating to the admitted candidates will be dealt with by the respective institute/College only."
The relevant portion of these instructions would reveal that strictly the admission had to go by merit.
The discipline would not be allowed to be changed and original certificates have to be deposited at the time of counselling.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the said instructions required that the candidates should either get a no objection certificate or produce the original certificate.
The said instructions are invalid and arbitrary.
According to the learned counsel, new colleges were being opened and were being affiliated with the University.
In that event, the process of admission should have been strictly to be adhered on merits.
On these basis, he assailed the instructions by virtue of which no objection certificate was required.
9.
The instructions that have been issued that No Objection Certificate or original certificates have to be produced are based on the fact that one person may not take admission in many colleges at one time.
This is to avoid blocking of the seats.
If such instructions were not issued, a meritorious candidate may take admission in more than a dozen colleges and still attend one.
This would be patently unjust.
There is no arbitrariness or unreasonableness in the said instructions particularly when it is a highly competitive examination.
The petitioner admittedly did not produce the No Objection Certificate or the original certificates in the counselling.
Therefore, he was not considered for admission in the new colleges.
In that view of the matter merely because he had higher rank than respondents 3 and 4 will not permit him to claim a right to be admitted.
10.
Attention of the Court has been drawn towards the Division Bench decisions of this Court in the case of Rajiv Wadhwa v. State of Haryana, in Civil Writ Petition No. 18632 of 1997, decided on 2431999.
The facts in the case of Rajiv Wadhwa (supra) were that Regional Engineering College had conducted a Common Entrance Test.
As per the Brochure free seats, payment seats and also various disciplines were offered in the Entrance Test.
Rajiv Wadhwa appeared and his rank was 3142.
He was given admission as per his merit.
Subsequently admissions to certain other private Engineering Colleges were notified.
Keeping in view that last meritorious candidate had been admitted, this Court had directed to give one free seat to Rajiv Wadhwa according to his merit.
The position herein is different because presently in the present writ petition, the petitioner seeks quashing the condition only with respect to non-production of No Objection Certificate and original certificate.
This was not the controversy before the Division Bench in the case of Rajiv Wadhwa (supra).
Consequently, the petition must be taken to be without merit.
For these reasons, the writ petition being without merit must fail and is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.