Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of LPA Nos. 1549 of 1991, 55 and 883 of 1992 and Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1839 of 1992 and 97 of 1993.
The facts have been taken from L.P.A. No. 1549 of 1991.
2.
The petitioner/respondent (hereinafter called the petitioner) was appointed as a Lance Naik on September 1, 1963 and was promoted to the rank of Naik on August 1, 1965 and to that of Havildar on December 3, 1967.
Upto the year 1970, the petitioner remained in medical category `A' but while posted at Pachmari, he was admitted to the Military Hospital, Jabalpur on May 1, 1970 and he was thereafter referred to the Military Hospital, Jabalpur on May 2, 1970 for investigation of epilepsy as he had developed clonic convulsive seizures.
On the recommendations of the Release Medical Board, the petitioner was placed in medical category `EEE' on June 22, 1970 and on its recommendation was invalidated out of service on September 12, 1970.
The petitioner's case for disability pension was also rejected on the ground that the disease was not attributable to Military Service and this decision was conveyed to the petitioner vide Annexure P-1 dated October 12, 1970.
The petitioner's representations filed subsequently having yielded no result, he approached this Court by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 771 of 1998.
The learned Single Judge, who was seized of the matter, relying on para 423 of the Regulations for the Medical Services of Armed Forces, 1962, observed that the disease which leads to an individual's discharge from Military service was ordinarily deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it had been recorded at the time of the individual's acceptance and the only exception was in a case where it was held, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not be detected on medical examination at the time of the individual's acceptance in service.
The learned Single Judge concluded that as the petitioner had been assessed in category `A' at the time of his enrolment in service, it was reasonable to infer that he had been medically fit when he had entered military service and in this situation, the legal fiction as contemplated under Clause (c) would arise and the disease would be deemed to have arisen in service and, thus, attributable to military service.
The learned Single Judge accordingly quashed the order, Annexure P-1, and ordered the payment of disability pension to the petitioner.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Clause `c' of para 423 of the Regulations reads as under:  "(c) The cause of disability or death resulting from a disease as attributable to service when it is established that the disease arose during service on the conditions and circumstances of the disease.
Cases in which it is established that service conditions did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease will be regarded as aggravated by service.
A disease which led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.
However, if the medical opinion holds, for the reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
A bare reading of the aforesaid Clause clearly shows that the presumption drawn by the learned Single Judge is borne out therein.
Moreover, in Regulation 14(b) of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, a similar provision has been drawn with regard to the attributability factor of military service.
In Union of India and others v. Shyam Lal Malhotra, 1995(2) RSJ 493 a Division Bench of this Court while dealing with Regulation 14(b) of the Pension Regulations observed as under:  "A combined reading of the provisions reproduced above shows that the cause of disability which has led to the person concerned being discharged from service will be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at time of entry in the Armed forces or that he was suffering from such disability or unless a note is recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined the service."
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the reasons recorded by the learned Single Judge are fully borne out on record and it must be held that the petitioner had contracted the disease during military service.
The question that next arises is as to whether the disease epilepsy could be attributed to military service.
This Court in Om Parkash v. Union of India, 1998(3) RSJ 227 : 1998(3) SCT 662 (P&H), while dealing with a similar provision in the Central Civil Services Extra Ordinary Pension Rules, 1972 observed that the disease epilepsy was a disease which could be attributed to military service and could be contracted during military service.
4.
We, therefore, find no merit in the Letter Patent Appeals and the same are dismissed.
Consequently, the writ petitions are allowed.
Appeals dismissed.