VK Bali, J (Oral) - Suresh Kumar, who served the State of Haryana as Senior Athletic Coach through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash order dated 661997 (Annexure P-9) vide which Government of Haryana, has treated the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement as resignation.
2.
For the disposal of the present petition, it is not necessary to give detailed facts.
In brief it may, however, be mentioned that pursuant to the advertisement for the post of Senior Athletic Coach petitioner made an application through proper channel and was selected for the said post.
He joined as Senior Athletic Coach in Haryana Sports Department on 2931983 and on 8.12.1996 made a request to respondent No. 2 to count his previous service in N.S.N.I.S.
Patiala for granting service benefits in Haryana Sports Department.
This request was declined by respondent No. 2 vide letter Annexure P-3.
However, due to family circumstances, the petitioner made request to respondent No. 1 to permit him to resign along with all retiral benefits.
Vide Annexure P-5 he was informed that in case the request in the letter Annexure P-4 is accepted, he will not be entitled to any other benefit except the amount deposited in GPF and GIS Immediately thereafter, on 141997 petitioner explained by letter Annexure P-4 that he had made request for voluntary retirement with all retiral benefits and by another letter Annexure P-6 petitioner explained that his earlier letter was in reality only a request for voluntary retirement with all pensionary benefits .
Event after change of request made by him, respondents accepted his resignation vide office order Annexure P-9 dated 661997.
3.
It is too well settled that resignation tendered by employee can be withdrawn any time before the same is accepted.
If that be true, it shall equally be true that he can change his request of resignation to one for voluntary retirement.
It has not been disputed that petitioner made a request vide Annexure P-6 wherein he clearly stated that his earlier letter meant for resignation may be treated as notice for voluntarily retirement.
Respondents would have been well within their right to accept the request of the petitioner for voluntarily retirement but respondents treated his earlier request of the petitioner as only request made by him and accepted it.
As mentioned above, at that stage i.e. when letter Annexure P-6 had already been written, it is only the changed request of the petitioner that could be accepted.
There is no option for the Court but to set aside order Annexure P-9.
So ordered.
4.
It is apparent from the record of the case that petitioner had already rendered 14 years 2 months and 12 days of service on the post of Senior Athletic Coach.
The respondents are left with no other option but for to consider his changed request i.e. for voluntary retirement.
If his said request is accepted, the respondent would consider grant of pension to the petitioner as per rules.
The Court may only observe at this stage that the Counsel for the petitioner has canvassed before the Court that even in a case of voluntary retirement, one is entitled to pension, if he has worked for more than ten years.
Be that as it may, the respondents, as referred to above, shall now decide the change of request of the petitioner for his voluntary retirement and if the same is accepted, as mentioned above, pass orders with regard to post retiral benefits.
The respondents shall also consider, if petitioner is entitled to count his past service that he rendered in N.S.N.I.S.
Patiala and, if permissible under the rules, to count the said period for calculating the pensionary benefits.
Let this exercise be done within three months.
In the facts and circumstances of this the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Orders accordingly.