Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - Respondent No. 3, the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana, issued a prospectus in November, 1997 calling for applications for admission to the Post Graduate Degree/Diploma Courses for the session 1997-98, to start from January, 1998.
As per the prospectus, the last date for the submission of applications forms was December 12, 1997.
As the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualifications, he applied within time, took the entrance test on December 26, 1997 and on the declaration of the result obtained 116 out of 140 marks whereas respondent No. 4, Dr. Roy P Daniel, obtained 97 out of 140 marks.
It is the petitioner's case that when the final merit list was notified on the notice board on December 31, 1997, respondent No. 4 was shown as having obtained 121 marks and was granted admission to the Post Graduate Degree Course in the speciality of Orthopaedics whereas the petitioner was put on the waiting list at No. 1 in the said speciality.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner was nevertheless granted admission in the Post Graduate Degree Course in Anaesthesia.
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court claiming that Dr. Daniel, respondent No. 4 was entitled to only 117 marks on the basis of criteria laid down in the prospectus whereas the petitioner had in fact obtained 118 marks on the basis of that criteria.
Allegation of favouritism in favour of respondent No. 4 have also been made on the ground that he was a Christian by denomination.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by respondent No. 3.
It has been admitted that respondent No. 4 had obtained 97 marks in the written test but he had been awarded 5 additional marks for previous service, 7 marks for internal assessment and 7 marks for interview, making a total of 121 marks whereas the petitioner, who had obtained 116 marks in the entrance test, had been granted 2 additional marks for interview.
It has been submitted in the reply that 5 marks that had been awarded to respondent No. 4 for previous service rendered in the Christian Fellowship Hospital, Oddenchatram and Sewa Bhawan, Jagdishpur as both these Hospitals were situated in a Rural area.
The allegation of bias in favour of respondent No. 4 has also been denied.
3.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioner in which a plea has been taken that respondent No. 4 was not entitled to 5 marks that had been granted to him of previous service and if these 5 marks are deducted from 121 marks (making a total of 116), the petitioner who had 118 marks, was higher in merit.
4.
Two additional written statements have been filed by respondent No. 3 and two certificate Annexure R-3/3 and R-3/4 dated 15121997 and 31121997 respectively have been put on record to show that respondent No. 4 had served in the two hospitals i.e. in the Christian Fellowship Hospital, Oddenchatram from 171995 to 31121995 and Sewa Bhawan, Jagdishpur from 171997 to 31121997.
It has also been pleaded that though the certificate Annexures R-3/3 had been appended with the application form the clarificatory certificate Annexure R-3/4 had been produced by the said respondent No. 4 thereafter.
5.
Mr. ML Saggar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has raised only one argument before me.
He has urged that respondent No. 4 was not entitled to 5 marks for previous service (even if this service was accepted to be true) as the service was not continuous over 12 months as per the admission rules.
6.
Mr. PS Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3, has, however, argued that the word `continuous' in the context in which it had been used could mean six months in one Institution and six months in another with a short break intervening, and as respondent No. 4 had served for more than 12 months cumulatively in the two hospitals mentioned above, the weightage of 5 marks was justified.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the documents on record.
As already noted, the only issue between the parties is as to whether respondent No. 4 was entitled to claim 5 marks for previous service as admittedly if the 5 marks are deducted from his total, he would be lower in merit that the petitioner.
The relevant clause of the prospectus for the Post Graduate Training Programme for the Distribution of Marks/Points is reproduced hereunder :  "Distribution of Marks/Points Residency Written Test 140 CMC Ludhiana Graduate 5 CMC Ludhiana Satisfactory Internship 5 Previous Servide - Service Obligation for continuous service in peripheral Hospital/Army/Rural 5 marks/12 months (Max.
10) 10 Internal Assessment for working in CMCH in the Dept where the candidate is applying for PG (5 marks/6 months - Max.
10) 10 Internal assessment for satisfactory service in pre/para clinical/needy depths in CMC & Hosp., Ludhiana (5 marks/6 months - Max.
10) 10 Academic Medal/Certificate (Max.
5) 5 Sports/Extra-curricular merit certificate (College/University- I/Certificate (Max.
5) 5 Interview (Aptitude, Personality), (Max.
10) 10 Total 200 Mr. Saggar's argument that respondent No. 4 could claim 5 marks for previous service, only if the service had been continuous in a "peripheral Hospital/Army/Rural" must be examined in the light of the above provisions.
Admittedly, the word continuous in the context of its use has no technical connotations and is not a word of art.
It must, therefore, be given its dictionary meaning.
Webster's English Dictionary 3rd Edition defines the word `continuous' as "stretching on without break or interruption, characterized by uninterrupted extension in time or sequence; continuing without intermission."
It is also significant that in the prospectus for admission to Diploma Courses, which is also deemed to be a Post Graduate Course, the question relating to distribution of marks has also been dealt with and while prescribing marks for previous service the word `continuous' is conspicuously absent.
In other words, the prospectus itself makes a distinction with regard to the previous service for admission to the Degree/Diploma Courses although both are recorded as Post Graduate qualifications and whereas for the former the previous service must be `continuous' if it is to be accounted for it need not be so for the latter course.
Mr. Patwalia's argument that as respondent No. 3 college had always interpreted the instructions to mean that 12 months experience towards previous service could be obtained in one or more Institutions with a short break intervening cannot thus be accepted.
In this view of the matter, the mere fact that some students had got admission to the Post Graduate Courses in this very session in the light of previous service counted in the suggested manner cannot be of any avail to the respondents as the petitioner cannot be non-suited on the ground that the interpretation put by the College on the rules was an honest exercise and therefore justified.
It is the respondents case that respondent No. 4 had served from 171995 to 31121995 in the Christian Fellowship Hospital and from 171995 to 31121997 in the Sewa Bhawan Hospital.
As these two terms were not continuous, respondent No. 4 was not entitled to add 5 marks to his total.
In that eventuality, respondent No. 4 was entitled to 116 marks in all, against the petitioner's 118.
8.
Mr. Patwalia has finally argued that as per the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh and others v. Dr. Anupam Gupta etc., AIR 1992 SC 932 : 1992(2) SCT 292 (SC), it would be inappropriate to grant admission to the petitioner in the Post Graduate Degree Course in Orthopaedics mid-stream as he would not be in a position to complete his instruction as the classes had started way back in January, 1998.
He has accordingly argued that the petitioner, who was undergoing instructions in the discipline of Anaesthesia in the respondent-College should be allowed to continue in that speciality.
9.
I have considered this argument as well and find that it lacks merit.
The petitioner had approached this Court on 2111997, i.e. immediately after the admission process had been completed.
Moreover, Mr. Saggar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has stated at the Bar that the petitioner would be willing to go back to the 1st year of the Orthopaedics Courses starting this year by foregoing a year's term of study in Anaesthesia.
Mr. Patwalia has further argued that respondent No. 3 College, would be burdened with a substantial stipend (which is paid to all the students) for one additional year.
On this Mr. Saggar has once again stated at the Bar that the petitioner will not claim a stipend for the first year's course of study of the Orthopaedics Course.
10.
The allegations of mala fide that have been levelled by the petitioner, have to my mind, absolutely no merit.
It has been pointed out in the reply that a very large number of non-Christian students have been granted admission.
Respondent No. 4, who had thus been granted admission by the respondent No. 3-College on its perception of the Rules and not because of any bias in his favour has already undergone instruction for one year and cannot be made to suffer on account of a mis-interpretation of the rule by respondent No. 3.
His admission should, therefore, not be disturbed.
11.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued that the petitioner will be granted admission in the Post Graduate Degree Course in Orthopaedics in the ensuing academic year against an additional seat that will be created by the College and for that purpose necessary steps will be taken by the Medical Council of India as well.
It is also directed that the petitioner will not be entitled to claim stipend for the first year of his study in Orthopaedics.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.