Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research advertised a post of Library Attendant.
It prescribed the qualifications of Matric with Science and Diploma in Library Science.
The petitioner as also respondent Nos. 3 and 4 submitted their applications.
They were considered.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were selected.
The petitioner having failed has approached this court through the present writ petition with the prayer that the appointment of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 be quashed.
2.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Guglani, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the respondents were ineligible for appointment as Library Attendant as they had not completed the requisite period of training under the Apprentices Act, 1961.
Secondly, it has been pointed out by the counsel that the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 is vitiated as she is daughter of driver working with the Post Graduate Institute.
Thirdly, it has been pointed out that the petitioner is better qualified and should have, thus, been appointed.
No basis for selection having been disclosed the selection should be quashed.
Lastly, the counsel submits that the result of selection having not been published, the selection should be set aside.
4.
A copy of the advertisement has been produced on record as P-4.
It only requires that a candidate should have passed his Matriculation examination with Science as one of the subjects and should have a diploma in Library Science.
It does not require that the candidate should have completed any apprenticeship course or training under the Apprentices Act, 1961.
Thus, there is no requirement that a candidate should have undergone any training before becoming eligible for the post of Library Attendant.
Mr. Guglani submits that respondents were actually undergoing training.
It may be so.
However, the advertisement did not prescribe successful completion of apprenticeship/training as a condition precedent for eligibility.
Consequently, we cannot add this additional requirement to the qualifications laid down in the advertisement.
Resultantly, the contention that the respondents were not eligible as they had not completed the requisite training cannot be accepted.
5.
Equally lacking in merit is the contention that the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 is vitiated as her father is working as a driver.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the members of the Selection Committee had any reason to be biased against the petitioner or to be favourably inclined towards respondent No. 4 only on the ground that her father is one of the many drivers in the Post Graduate Institute.
Equally, it cannot be said that merely because the father of respondent No. 4 was employed with the P.G.I.
so she should be held to be ineligible.
6.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner was better qualified than the respondents.
This claim is based on the ground that the petitioner has passed MA examination.
As against this respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have secured first division in their Matriculation examination and have also passed the diploma examination in Library Science in first division.
Undeniably they are eligible.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was considered alongwith other candidates including respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
The selection was the job of the Selection Committee.
It has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents that a criteria had been laid down.
Marks were allocated according to that criteria.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were found to be more suitable than the petitioner.
We find nothing to doubt the correctness of the assertions made on behalf of the respondents.
The petitioner having been duly considered, she cannot complain of denial of equal opportunity.
The court cannot sit as a Super Selection Committee to interfere with the selection made by a duly constituted authority.
7.
Lastly, the petitioner complains that result of selection have not been notified so it should be set aside.
The contention is misconceived.
The very fact that the petitioner has challenged the selection shows that she was aware of the result.
She can have no legitimate cause for complaint.
No other point has been raised.
8.
No ground for interference is made out.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.