ML Singhal, J - Heera Singh was constable on the rolls of the police of Police District, Amritsar.
His constabulary number was 1908/ASR.
He was dismissed from service vide order dated 191995 by the Senior Superintendent of Police (hereinafter referred as SSP), Amritsar on the charge of absence from duty, although the period of his absence had been treated as non-duty period without pay.
He had joined the police service on 19111986.
The Line Officer who had put him off from duty on 531994 did not allow him to resume duty, though he attended the office daily.
On 21.3.1994 he requested through post to allot him duty but to no effect.
Heera Singh challenged his dismissal from service.
He filed suit for declaration challenging his dismissal from service brought about by the SSP, Amritsar vide order dated 191995 and also the order dismissing his appeal by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated 29111995.
It was alleged in the plaint that he could not have been dismissed from service when his period of absence had been treated as non-duty period without pay and further he was not wilfully absent.
He wanted to join duty but was not allowed to join duty.
He was never associated in the enquiry.
No summons were sent to him at his Amritsar address as he had left his village due to threat of terrorists.
2.
Defendant-State of Punjab contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that earlier he was censured in 1991 for remaining absent for 27 days.
He was habitual absentee as per entry made in his character roll.
On 531994, SI Lakhbir Singh, Line Officer checked the Guard and found him absent from duty.
His absence was recorded in the roznamcha vide DDR No. 43 dated 531994.
Since then, he remained absent from duty.
He was found absent by the DSP vide his findings dated 3151995.
3.
Civil Judge (Junior Division), Amritsar dismissed the plaintiff's suit vide order dated 921998, in view of his findings that absence from duty was the gravest act of misconduct calling for dismissal from service.
It was sound that the enquiry was quite in tune with the Punjab Police Rules and the principles of natural justice.
4.
Aggrieved from this judgment and decree dated 921998 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division), Amritsar, plaintiff went in appeal.
5.
His appeal was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar vide order dated 2171998.
Plaintiff has come up in appeal to his court.
6.
In the year, 1994 constable Heera Singh was posted in Police Lines.
He was deputed at gate No. 1 of the Police Lines, Amritsar.
During checking by SI Lakhbir Singh, Lines Officer, he was found absent.
DDR No. 41 was recorded in the roznamcha of Police Lines, Amritsar.
Since then, he remained continuously absent from duty without permission of the competent authority Sh. Swinder Singh DSP (Rural), Amritsar was appointed as enquiry officer for conducting enquiry into this misconduct, who after enquiry gave finding dated 3151995, holding him guilty of absence from duty.
7.
SSP, Amritsar accepted the enquiry report and after going through the finding of the Enquiry Officer became of the tentative view that he should be dismissed from service.
Show cause notice was accordingly sent to him alongwith findings of the Enquiry Officer at his residential address through constable Surjit Singh No. 1168/ASR on 871995 calling upon him to show cause why he be not dismissed from service.
He was not found available at his village address and it was reported by Sital Singh, Gian Singh and Jagir Singh residents of village Phoolke that he was not residing in the village.
One copy of the show cause notice was pasted at the outer gate of his house in the village.
In the show cause notice 10 days' time was set out within which, he could submit his reply.
One communication No. 451/Steno dated 381995 was sent at his residential address through constable Surjit Singh which was received by one Mandip Singh nephew of the delinquent on 1281995.
He was given 7 days time to submit his reply to the notice.
A written reply from the delinquent was received though post in which he had stated that he had reported to the Lines Officer for duty in the Police Lines, but he was not allowed to join duty.
If he had not been allowed duty by the Lines Officer, he could approach senior officers and request them to permit him to join duty but he did not do so.
He was thus absent from duty for a period of about 7 months.
8.
Question that arises in this appeal is "whether mere absence from duty can be said to be constituting an act of gravest misconduct entailing dismissal from service."
9.
It was submitted by the learned Counsel for the plaintiff that SSP, Amritsar while dismissing him from service has not recorded any categoric finding that his absence from duty was the gravest act of misconduct for which dismissal from service was the only punishment.
10.
It was submitted by the learned Counsel for the appellant that there has been non-application of mind to the requirement of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules which reads as follows :-  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for the police service and in making such an award, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
11.
It was held State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex-Constable, AIR 1992 SC 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that before awarding an order of dismissal it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct that too when it impinges the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service.
12.
In The State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SLR 174 : 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H), a Division Bench of this Court held that it is essential for the Punishing Authority to apply his mind and record a specific finding as to whether the act of the delinquent official which has been complained of is of such a grave nature that it must lead inflexibly to his dismissal.
13.
The charge against the delinquent was that he was found absent from duty when checked on 531994 at gate No. 1 of Police Lines, Amritsar by SI Lakhbir Singh, Line Officer and since then, he remained continuously absent for a number of months.
He belongs to a disciplined force charged with the duty of maintaining law and order.
A slight infraction in discipline by a member of disciplined force is likely to pollute the whole atmosphere and cause ripples in the discipline of the force.
Discipline is the foundation on which the edifice of efficiency of the police force can rest.
Police force is answerable to the public for maintaining law and order.
This answerability can be achieved more purposefully if there is complete discipline in the police force and the entire police force is stern with the thread of discipline.
Absence for about 7 months by a police constable who is put on guard duty is certainly an act of the gravest act of misconduct.
As to whether single act of absence from duty would constitute such serious misconduct as to entail dismissal from service is a matter that falls within the jurisdiction of the SSP to determine, who stands at the Apex of the District Police.
14.
In this case, it was not an act of stray absence from duty.
Earlier also, he had remained absent for 27 days in the year 1991, when he was censured.
Absence from duty shows that he was taking the job casually and not seriously.
Absence from duty impinges upon his sense of responsibility and effect efficiency.
SSP knows better whether this misconduct should cost him his job or he should impose some other punishment upon him short of dismissal from service.
A particular misconduct may be viewed very seriously in a particular service.
The same misconduct may not be viewed that seriously in some other service.
A single misconduct may be viewed so seriously by the Superintendent of Police that it may entail the delinquent's dismissal from service.
When the delinquent was not taking the job seriously but causally and was habitual absentee, his corrigibility/reliability became suspect.
Assuming that there is some secret information that there are certain terrorists hiding in a particular hide out planning to commit some terrorist offence and he is deputed to nab them and instead of proceeding on duty on which he is deputed, he goes elsewhere, he would thus be brining bad name to the police organisation and shaking the confidence of the public in the efficacy of the police organisation.
Such a constable with a casual approach towards doing duty was to my mind justifiably thrown out of job by the SSP.
15.
In this case the plaintiff had put in only 6/7 years of service and during that period he remained absent for 27 days and for that absence he had been censured.
It was thus not satisfactory service rendered by him.
6/7 years service did not qualify him for pension.
6/7 years service was thus rightly not taken into account while passing the impugned order by the SSP dismissing him from service.
16.
Enquiry has been quite in tune with the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules and the principles of natural justice.
17.
In view of what has been said above, this Regular Second Appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.