VK Bali, J - Petitioner herein claims admission in MBBS as a matter of right based upon her merit and in that context seeks to replace respondent No. 5 who even though lower in merit has been admitted in the MBBS.
2.
Brief facts on which admission of petitioner to MBBS course rests need a necessary mention.
3.
On 1851999, Government of Punjab vide notification of even date ordered the selection of students for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS course for the sessions 1999.
The last date prescribed for submission of application was June 10, 1999 as per prospectus for admission that came into being.
In clause 7 of of the prospectus, reservation in the State Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges was prescribed.
It is the case of the petitioner that she is daughter of late Sukhwinder Singh who was working as Assistant Sub Inspector and was killed at the hands of terrorists in action.
In this regard case F.I.R. No. 195 dated 9101990 under sections 302/307/353/34 of the Indian Penal Code read with sections 25/54/59 of the Arms Act and sections 3/4 of the TADA Act was registered at Police Station Jandiala, Police District Majitha.
As per clause 7(ix) of the prospectus, children/widows of Punjab Police, P.A.P.
and Punjab Home Guards Personnel killed on disabled to the extent of 50% in action were entitled to reservation to the extent of 1% of the total seats.
The petitioner who was entitled to admission under the reserved category as per clause 7(ix) and fulfilled all other requisite conditions and qualifications prescribed in the prospectus, applied for her selection for admission to MBBS/BDS/BAMS for the session 1999.
The result of PMET 1999 was declared and the petitioner secured 136 marks.
There were 430 seats in all in MBBS/BDS courses in the States Government Colleges for the sessions 1999.
As per 1% reservation prescribed for the children/widows of Punjab Police etc. four seats were kept reserved for these categories.
Out of four seats, 3 were kept under MBBS course and one under BDS course.
It is further the case of the petitioner that as per schedule given in the prospectus interview for admission in MBBS under reserved categories was to be held on 881999 at Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot.
The petitioner alongwith others appeared in interview before the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala.
Out of five persons claiming admission under clause 7(ix), the candidate who figured at Sr. No. 1 as per merit was Ms. Harpreet Kaur daughter of Sh. Babu Singh who also appeared for interview under the backward class category.
It is further the case of the petitioner that when interview was over, she was told that her name is figuring at No. 1 in the waiting list for admission to MBBS course in the reserved category in which she had applied.
She was then asked to talk to the concerned authorities after a a few days to see if there is any change made in the merit list.
Petitioner, thus, rushed back to her native place at Amritsar.
On 1081999, the mother of the petitionr visited office of respondent No. 3 to enquire merit position of her daughter and on enquiries made from the office, it revealed that the merit list was subsequently changed since the candidate figuring at Sr. No. 1 in the category of Wards of Punjab Police etc. had been given admission under the backward class category and therefore, the petitioner was selected for admission in the Government Medical College, Patiala.
It was further told to the mother of the petitioner that the list was displayed on 9th and since nobody turned up, the seat had now been given to next candidate Jatinder Singh who had only secured 51 marks.
It is further the case of the petitioner that she alongwith her mother continuously visited respondents No. 3 and 4 on 11th, 12th, 13th and 14th of August, 1999 and requested them to grant admission to the petitioner in MBBS course as per merit and allow her to deposit fee but when consistent efforts of the petitioner and her mother brought no tangible results, the present writ for the relief, as mentioned above, was filed.
4.
Before this Court might take into consideration the stand of the respondent opposing claim of the petitioner, it would be useful to reproduce clause 7(ix) of the Prospectus :-  "ix.
Children/widows of Punjab Police, P.A.P.
and Punjab Home Guard Personnel killed or disabled to the extent of 50% in action."
5.
Even though separate written statements on behalf of respondents No. 1 & 4, 3 and 5 have been filed but inasmuch as the defence projected in all written statements is the same, I would only refer to the averments made in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 4.
While admitting the basic facts leading upto the interview of the petitioner and others, the discordant view that is expressed on facts is with regard to change alleged to have been brought about in the merit list shifting petitioner from waiting list No. 1 to her finding admission in the said course i.e. MBBS in the very first instance.
It is also disputed that the petitioner ever endeavoured to contact anyone before 14.8.1999 or for that matter to deposit her fee for admission to the said course.
It is the case of respondents that the petitioner was selected under the reserved category of children/widow of Punjab Police, P.A.P.
& Punjab Home Guard Personnel killed or disabled to the extent of 50% in action in the Government Medical College, Patiala and her name figured in the selection notice dated 881999 which was displayed on the notice board of Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot.
In this notice it was clearly mentioned that the selected candidates are required to pay their fees after removing the deficiencies already pointed out to them at the time of interview and submission of original documents on 1081999 at the latest failing which the provisional selection would be considered cancelled and the seat will be filled from the waiting list.
It is also in the selection notice that the selected candidates are required to report for medical check up on 1081999 in the Anatomy Department at 800 AM.
The fee would be accepted on the same day.
In the wake of averments made, it is further the case of respondents that the petitioner was bound to see the selection list displayed on the notice board of Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot on 881999 and was required to report at Government Medical College, Patiala on 1081999 for medical check up and depositing the fee.
However, she did not report for medical check up and for depositing of fee in the Government Medical College, Patiala on 1081999.
The selected candidates who were interested for admission to MBBS course session 1999 reported for medical check up and depositing their fee on the same date.
The vacant seats were offered to next candidate on the waiting list vide office order dated 13.8.1999.
The seat of the petitioner also fell vacant and was offered to next candidate on the waiting list, namely, Jatinder Singh respondent No. 5.
The petitioner, thus, forfeited her right to seat for MBBS.
It is further the case of the respondents that in Prospectus for PMET it has been clearly stated that the interview for MBBS would be held at Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot on 781999 for open merit category and on 881999 for the reserved categories and the selected list will be displayed on the notice board at Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot for MBBS on 881999 and the following note has also been clearly given :  "It is further mentioned that the candidates selected for MBBS course will deposit the fees at the respective colleges on 10899.
As such the interview for the admission to MBBS course session 1999 was held at Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot on 7th and 8th August, 1999.
The selection list of the candidates selected in MBBS course session 1999 in State Medical Colleges Patiala/Amritsar/Faridkot & DMC Ludhiana was displayed on the notice board at Baba Farid University of Health Sciences on the evening of 8th August 1999 after the interview was over."
6.
From the pleadings of the parties culled out above, the crucial question that needs determination is as to whether in the selection list that came to be affixed on the notice board, the petitioner was originally in the waiting list at No. 1 for admission to MBBS course or that in the very first instance she found her merit for admission in the MBBS The original records were summoned and perused by the Court.
Perusal of the same would reveal that on 881999 itself a provisional select list came into being, paragraph 2 whereof, reads thus :-  "They are required to pay their fees after removing the deficiencies already pointed out to them at the time of interview and submission of original documents on 10th August 1999 at the latest, failing which the provisional selection will be treated as cancelled and seats shall be filled from the waiting list.
The selected candidates are required to report of Medical Check-up on 10th August, 1999 in the Anatomy Department at 800 A.M.
The fees will be accepted on the same date."
7.
Harpreet Kaur who had applied in two reserved categories, namely backward class and the category in which the petitioner had applied was provisionally selected in the category of backward class.
The name of the petitioner has been shown in the category meant for wards of Punjab Police, the category in which she applied.
The matter does not rest there.
The original record on the basis of which the provisional selection list has been made was perused by the Court.
In so far as Harpreet Kaur is concerned, she has been shown in the list of selected candidates specifically in the category of backward class (C).
Her name figures at Sr. No. 13 in the said category.
She has secured 495 marks in the PMET out of 800 and in merit list of the said category, as mentioned above, figured at Sr. No. 13.
Her name has also been shown in the category of Wards of Punjab Police, PAP/Home Guard (J) at Sr. No. 1, as in this category she was at the top of the list but in the remarks column it has been clearly mentioned that she has been selected in BC category.
In so far as the petitioner is concerned, she has been shown at Sr. No. 4 (merit No. 4).
It may be recalled at this stage that it has been pleaded by the petitioner herself that out of total 430 seats, as per one per cent reservation, reservation for children of Punjab Police/PAP etc. 4 seats were kept reserved.
Out of four 3 were kept reserved in MBBS and one in BDS.
It is further her case, that in all, five candidates had applied in this category.
If Harpreet Kaur who was at merit No. 1 in the category of wards of Punjab Police etc. was to be selected against backward class category, obviously, the petitioner Gurjinder Kaur, as mentioned above, who was at No. 4 would be straightaway admitted to MBBS and not in BDS.
If the matter is examined in context of the facts as have been mentioned above, it would straightaway appear that a story was coined by the petitioner that she came to know later in point of time that she has been shifted to MBBS from BDS and her entreaties to admit her in the MBBS fell on deaf ear is a figment of her imagination with a view to prop her case based on false averments made in the petition.
Quite to the contrary, it appears that she knew in advance that her merit would be at No. 4 in the category in which she had applied.
That being the situation, she also knew that she will get admission only in BDS and not in MBBS and it is her own case that after appearing for the interview on 881999, she went to her native place at Amritsar.
Even though, she qualifies her aforesaid statement by saying that she had gone to her native place after she was told that she is in waiting list at No. 1 for admission to the MBBS course but that part of her statement does not appear to be correct in view of the findings recorded above that she came to be admitted in the MBBS course by virtue of Harpret Kaur finding admission in the said course in the reserved category of backward class candidates.
It is interesting to note that confronted with this situation, the petitioner has filed replication wherein even though reiterating that she was intimated that her name was at Sr. No. 1 in the waiting list and she may contact authorities after 1081999 to see any change made therein, she further pleads that she met Principal as well as the Cashier on 11th, 12th, 13th and 14th August, 1999 but despite her several visits her admission fee was not being accepted.
It is relevant to mention here that as per the pleadings made in the written statement, the petitioner had contacted authorities on 14.8.1999 and not before that.
In the very nature of things it appears that the petitioner was not interested in getting admission in BDS at that stage.
However, when it came to her notice that she has been selected in MBBS course, she made an attempt to pay the fee etc. but the said attempt was made after the due date i.e on 14.8.1999, the last date being 1081999, this attempt proved abortive in view of the provisions contained in the prospectus and notice containing original select list.
There was no question for the petitioner to address a telegram only on 14.8.1999 when she was not allowed to deposit the fee on 10th, 11th 12th and 13th of August, 1999 nor even allowed to meet the concerned authorities and that further proves that, in fact and reality, she came to know that she had been admitted in MBBS course on 14.8.1999 and not before that, in any case, not till such time the last date to deposit the fee had already expired.
8.
In view of the discussion made above, I find no merit in the writ petition and dismiss the same despite the fact that the petitioner is far higher in merit having secured 136 marks in PMET as compared to one who has been admitted to the MBBS course i.e. Jatinder Singh who secured only 51 marks.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.