VK Bali, J - Claim of the petitioner, widow of Hvd./Clk.
Ajit Singh, for family pension, having been satisfied during the currency of present writ, the surviving dispute is only with regard to arrears of family pension from the day, pension already sanctioned way back in 1987 was stopped during the life time of Ajit Singh when a case under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code came to be registered against him.
There being no justification for withholding the pension payable to Ajit Singh during his life time, petitioner also pleads for interest on the arrears of said pension.
Brief facts, relevant for the limited remaining relief, as culled from the pleadings of the parties, need a necessary mention.
2.
After retirement from military service, Ajit Singh was brought under pension establishment and the same was being regularly paid to him.
It was, however, suspended due to non-identification of Ajit Singh in July, 1991.
Ajit Singh was accused of committing murder on June 26, 1990 and he was taken into custody w.e.f.
July 10, 1990 and remained under trial prisoner till his death, i.e., June 10, 1993.
It is the case of respondents that the matter regarding restoration of family pension to the widow of Ajit Singh, i.e. petitioner, was referred to the Area Headquarter, UP Area Bareilly vide office letter dated October 21, 1994 for obtaining sanction of the competent authority under intimation to the DPDO, Rohtak with a request to obtain LTA claim from the widow.
It is then pleaded that subsequently requests were made to the petitioner to submit her LTA claim to which she did not respond, as would be clear from letter dated March 13, 1996.
However, family pension of Rs. 56,381/- was paid to the petitioner on July 5, 1996.
It is then pleaded that the family pension has since been released to the petitioner along with arrears and that every step was taken by the competent authority to release the family pension on the name of the petitioner at the earliest.
The delay was caused in the matter because some formalities had to be completed.
The delay was also caused in the matter, as mentioned above, due to the fact that despite repeated letters dated May 31, 1994, November 16, 1994, May 9, 1995, February 16, 1996 and March 12, 1996 petitioner did not submit her L.T.A.
claim to the DPDO, Rohtak.
3.
From the pleadings made in the written statement, it is not clear as to whether the arrears were paid from the date pension was restored till its actual payment or from the date, it was suspended on account of involvement of Ajit Singh in murder case.
In the replication that has been filed on behalf of the petitioner, it has been specifically averred that pension of petitioner's husband was stopped w.e.f.
August, 1991 to May, 1993 and the same was released w.e.f.
July 5, 1996 and the arrears w.e.f.
August, 1991 to May, 1993 have not been paid till now.
It is further stated in the replication that arrears were paid only w.e.f.
June 11, 1993 to July 4, 1996 and that being so, she is entitled to arrears from August, 1991 to May, 1993 along with interest.
These pleadings have been made in para 5 of the replication, to which there is no reply.
4.
The pleadings of the parties as mentioned above, apart, the matter before this Court has also been argued on the basis as if arrears from August, 1991 to May, 1993 have not been paid.
Whereas, it is the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that there was no justification whatsoever for the respondents to suspend pension of husband of petitioner when he was alive, simply on account of his involvement in a murder case and in any case, so as not to release the same on his demise, as, in the facts and circumstances of this case, husband of the petitioner could not be convicted, the trial against him having abated, learned counsel for the Union of India has sought to justify the stand of respondent-Union of India in suspending and ultimately not paying the pension to Ajit Singh, during the period he remained involved in a murder case on the sole ground that an employee earns pension on account of good conduct and the very involvement of husband of petitioner in murder case, the Union of India was justified in its action in first suspending and ultimately not paying the arrears of pension to Ajit Singh and after his demise to his widow.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and examining the records of the case, we are of the view that an employee does not lose his right to earn pension simply on account of his involvement in a criminal case.
We may mention here that we are not going into the question as to whether conduct of Ajit Singh, after his retirement, when he was involved in a murder case, would reflect such a conduct that might disentitle him to earn pension, as in the present case Ajit Singh breathed his last before any verdict in regard to his being guilty of murder, could be returned.
Suffice it to say that mere involvement of an employee in a criminal case, can, at the most, raise a suspicion with regard to his conduct but the same cannot be conclusive till such time a finding of guilt is returned against him.
No rule or regulation that might justify suspension or non-payment of pension to an employee on account of his involvement in a criminal case, has been shown to us by the counsel representing Union of India.
This Court is of the firm view that there was no justification whatsoever for the respondents to have suspended pension of Ajit Singh on his mere arrest and involvement in a murder case.
If the trial was to culminate in his acquittal, the respondents would have had no option but for to pay the arrears of pension to Ajit Singh and after his demise to his widow, i.e. petitioner.
Same consequences had to follow when trial abated on account of demise of Ajit Singh.
6.
Consequently, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the Union of India to pay arrears of pension to the petitioner that might have been paid to Ajit Singh when he was alive, from August, 1991 to May, 1993.
Inasmuch as there is not even semblance of justification for suspending and ultimately not paying pension to Ajit Singh and after his death to his widow, petitioner is certainly entitled to interest on the arrears of pension from August, 1991 to May, 1993.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, the court thinks that ends of justice would be met if petitioner is granted interest @ 10% per annum.
So ordered.
Let arrears of pension that were payable to Ajit Singh for the period aforesaid along with interest @ 10% per annum be calculated and made over to the petitioner within four weeks from today.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.