Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This is a plaintiff's second appeal and arises out of the following facts.
2.
The appellant was appointed as Constable on 10th October, 1955 and was confirmed subsequently.
In April, 1967, while posted at Police Station, Ahmedgarh, he was chargesheeted on the facts that on 5th April, 1967, he had entered the house of one Amar Nath in a drunken condition at about 11 pm and had misbehaved with the inmates and when asked to leave, had demanded Rs. 10/-.
The appellant was dismissed from service after enquiry by the Superintendent of Police, Sangrur, vide order dated 22nd January 1968.
His appeal was, however, allowed by the D.I.G., Patiala Range, on 26th September, 1968 and a de novo enquiry was ordered which was held by one Balwinder Singh, D.S.P., Patiala, and on the basis of the fresh report, the appellant was dismissed yet again by the Superintendent of Police, Sangrur, vide order dated 4th July, 1970.
The appeal filed before the D.I.G.
too was dismissed on 28th September, 1970 and the Revision Petition before the I.G.P.
on 30th November, 1971.
The aforesaid orders have been challenged by the appellant in the present suit.
3.
On notice, the defendant-State of Punjab, filed its written statement and contested the suit and pleaded that the orders impugned had been properly made.
It was also pointed out that the appellant had never objected to the procedure adopted at the enquiry at any stage and could not now raise objections to the validity of its proceedings.
4.
The trial Court frames the following issues:-  1.
Whether the impugned orders dated 371970, 2391970 and 30111971, dismissing the services of the plaintiff are illegal, invalid etc. as alleged in the plaint in paras 1 and 2 ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is within limitation ?
OPD 3.
Relief.
5.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the appellant and it was held that the orders had been validly passed.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the defendant/respondent holding that the suit was not barred by time.
The suit was nevertheless dismissed in view of the findings recorded on issue No. 1.
The matter was taken in appeal before the Addl.
District Judge, Patiala, who confirmed the order of the trial Court holding that the argument that the non-compliance with the provision of Rule 16.38(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter called the Rules) was not fatal as this rule dealt with the question of sanction of the District Magistrate before the prosecution of a police official and as the appellant had not been prosecuted in a criminal Court, no sanction was required.
It was also noted that in any case, the sanction Ex.D1 had been given by the State of Punjab to the initiation of departmental proceedings against the appellant.
The argument of appellant's counsel that the provisions of Rule 162 had not been complied with, was rejected with the positive finding that the misconduct attributed to the appellant was of the gravest kind and his dismissal from service was the proper order in his case.
6.
I have heard the learned State Counsel and have gone through the record.
It will be seen that the primary issue that arises for consideration is as to whether the misconduct of the appellant was of the gravest kind which required his dismissal from service and also whether the authorities taking action against him were aware of the provisions of the rules on this score.
I have perused the order of the Superintendent of Police dated 371970 which clearly shows that he had given a positive finding on the appellant's misconduct and had observed that the fair name of the police department had been tarnished and as the allegations were of a very serious nature, he should not be allowed to continue in service.
This order was endorsed in the order of the D.I.G.
and also the I.G.P.
Even otherwise also, I am of the opinion that the appellant's misconduct was of the gravest nature which required that he be dismissed from service.
It stands proved that the appellant had entered the house of Amar Nath, Municipal Commissioner of Ahmedgarh late at night in a drunken condition and had misbehaved with his family and when asked to leave the house, had demanded Rs. 10/- to do so.
There is, thus, no merit in this appeal.
Dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.