Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in the Department of Social Work in the Guru Nanak Khalsa College, Yamuna Nagar, Haryana.
As per the letter of appointment, Annexure P-1 dated January 16, 1990, it was provided that he would have to acquire a PhD degree within a period of five years from the date of his appointment, failing which no further increment would be granted to him.
The petitioner applied to the respondents for doing his PhD and was duly registered on November 12, 1990 and in accordance with the letter Annexure P-2 of that date issued to him deposited the requisite fee etc. on November 28, 1990.
The petitioner also submitted an undertaking, Annexure P-4 dated May 11, 1992, from the Principal of the Guru Nanak Khalsa College, Yamuna Nagar so as to enable him to undertake the PhD degree.
The Supervisor/Research Grade Dr. SK Bhatt in the Department of Social Work made a note on this undertaking that the necessary facilities would be provided to the petitioner to pursue his research leading to his PhD, but Shri RK Upadhayaya, Head of the Department of Social Work recorded a dissent disagreeing with the said recommendation and pointing out that the department was not in a position to accept any Teachers Fellow.
The petitioner also applied for a Teacher Fellowship on May 11, 1992 for the PhD degree and this too was granted to him on May 11, 1993.
The petitioner nevertheless submitted his joining report as a Teacher Fellow to the Chairman, Department of Social Work, on May 11, 1993 (Annexure P-8).
As the petitioner was apprehensive about the negative attitude of Shri RK Upadhayaya, he also submitted a representation to the Vice Chancellor on July 6, 1993 (Annexure P-9) stating that he had already done some research work but on account of the hostile attitude of Shri RK Upadhayaya, it was appropriate that his registration be transferred within the faculty which was permissible under the rules and that the Chairman of the Department of Public Administration had agreed to look-after his interests and to be his Guide along with the Co-guide/Professor Dr. SK Bhatt.
Vide Annexure P-10 dated 16th July, 1993 the Chairman of the Department of Public Administration was informed by the University that the Vice Chancellor had ordered that the petitioner be shifted to the Department of Public Administration and that Dr. Hoshiar Singh, Chariman of the said Department would be his supervisor, whereas Dr. SK Bhatt would continue to work as the co-guide.
This recommendation was, however, kept in abeyance vide Annexure P- 11 dated February 5, 1994 on the recommendation of the Board of Studies in the Department of Social Work which also recommended the cancellation of the petitioners's registration and his transfer to the new department on account of unsatisfactory progress in research.
The petitioner was also informed that the Vice Chancellor would consider any defence that was to be put up by him.
The petitioner accordingly submitted a reply vide Annexure P-12 pointing out that the Board of Studies of the Department of Public Administration had, on 30th August, 1993, approved his transfer to that Department and, as such, the resolution of the Board of Studies of the Department of Social Work recommending the cancellation of his registration and transfer was wholly without authority and jurisdiction.
It appears that while a decision on this matter was yet pending the petitioner (vide Annexure P-13 dated 3181994) was informed that his PhD Viva-Voce had been fixed for 2 pm on 2nd September, 1994.
The petitioner appeared before the interview Board on the time and date along with six other candidates from the other disciplines, but the other six candidates were declared eligible for the award of their PhD Degrees vide orders of the Pro-Vice Chancellor dated 4th October, 1994, but his result was withheld for reasons unknown.
The petitioner thereafter submitted a representation dated 5th August, 1995 (Annexure P-16) to the Vice Chancellor but it was only on 22nd March, 1996 vide Annexure P-17 that he was declared successful and eligible for the award of a PhD Degree vide orders of the Pro-Vice Chancellor dated 2231996.
The petitioner thereafter submitted another representation on 13th February, 1997 (Annexure P-18) pointing out that he was entitled to claim that he had cleared the PhD Degree w.e.f.
4101994 instead of 2231996.
This representation was rejected vide Annexure P-19 dated 25.9.1997 on the ground that as the Vice Chancellor had under Section 11(5) of the Kurushetra University Act 1986 (hereinafter called "the Act") allowed the petitionr to shift his registration for the PhD from the Department of Social Work to the Department of Public Administration in March, 1996 the result would be declared only thereafter.
Annexure P-19 has been impugned in the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondent- University.
It has been pleaded that the writ petition was belated as the impugned order made in March, 1996 had been challenged in the present petition in the year 1998.
It has also been pleaded that the Vice Chancellor had taken action in approving the petitioner's transfer in March 1996 subject to the decision of the Academic Council as was evident from Annexure R-1.
It has, however, been admitted that the petitioner's case has been assessed by the Research Committee on 3101994 along with six other candidates pertaining to other disciplines, but the recommendation of the Research Committee in the petitioner's case had not been approved by the Pro-Vice Chancellor (he being incharge of the examination branch on behalf of the Academic Council) for the reason that his transfer from the Department of Social Work to the Department of Public Administration had not been approved by the Academic Council.
It has also been re-emphasised that vide letter Annexure R-1 dated 1831996 the Addl.
Controller of Examinations had been informed that the Vice Chancellor had taken action under Section 11(5) of the Act in anticipation of the approval of the Academic Council and had allowed the petitioner to move over from one department to the other.
3.
Mr. Sibal's preliminary objection with regard to the belated filing of the writ petition must be dealt with at the outset.
It has been argued that the order Annexure P-19 had been made on 25.9.1997 and the petitioner had waited for an inordinately long time before approaching this Court.
To my mind, this argument is absolutely untenable.
It will be seen that the petitioner had first been informed vide Annexure P-17 dated 22nd March, 1996 that he had been declared successful in the PhD The petitioner thereafter filed a representation to the Vice Chancellor vide Annexure P-18 dated 13th February, 1997 and thereafter another one on 18th September, 1997 and it was thereafter that the impugned order Annexure P-19 dated 25.9.1997 was made.
The writ petition came up for hearing before this Court on May 18, 1998 ie within about eight months from the date of the passing of the order impugned.
The positive stand of the respondents is that though the petitioner had submitted an application for transfer to the Department of Public Administration on 6.7.1993 (Annexure P-9), yet a final decision had been taken thereon by the Vice Chancellor on 22nd March, 1996, that is, after almost three years, it is, therefore, hardly appropriate for the respondents to contend that the petitioner was guilty of laches as he had approached this Court eight months after the passing of the impugned order.
4.
Mr. Sindhu, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has first argued that the Vice Chancellor had approved the petitioner's transfer from the Department of Social Work to the Department of Public Administration vide Annexure P-10 dated 16.7.1993 and, as such, there was no occasion whatsoever to make a fresh order of transfer in March, 1996.
Highlighting this argument, he has urged that the recommendation Annexure P-10 has been approved by the Board of Studies in the Department of Public Administration in its meeting held on 30th August, 1993 and, as such, the order Annexure P-11 dated 521994 cancelling the petitioner's registration in the latter Department on the recommendation of the Board of Studies to the Department of Social Work was wholly unjustified.
Mr. Sibal has, however, urged that as the Vice Chancellor had taken a decision to approve the petitioner's transfer to the Department of Public Administration in March, 1996 under Section 11(5) of the Act subject to the approval of the Academic Council of the University, the petitioner could not claim any benefit prior to that date.
5.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard at length.
It is the admitted position that vide Annexure P-10 dated 16.7.1993 the Vice Chancellor himself had approved the petitioner's transfer from the Department of Social Work to the Department of Public Administration on the basis of his representation Annexure P-9 dated 6.7.1993 which had been made primarily on the ground that the Chairman of the Department of Social Work was not allowing the petitioner to function in a proper manner.
It is also evident that this transfer was kept in abeyance by the Vice Chancellor on the recommendation of the Board of Studies in the Department of Social Work and a final decision was ultimately taken by the Vice Chancellor in March 1996.
It is also the conceded position that the petitioner had appeared before the Research Committee on 2nd October, 1994 along with six other candidates and they had been awarded the PhD Degrees w.e.f.
4th October, 1994 whereas the petitioner's case had been withheld up to March, 1996.
The respondents have taken a stand that the petitioner's result had not been declared as the Pro Vice Chancellor had raised some objection to his transfer.
To my mind, this argument is wholly unacceptable for the reason that once the Vice Chancellor had taken a decision to shift the petitioner from the Department to the other and that decision had not been cancelled, the Pro Vice Chancellor could not have withheld his transfer.
5.
The respondents have also emphasised that the Vice Chancellor had taken a decision in March 1996 in accordance with Section 11(5) of the Act and as this action was authorised the petitioner could not claim any benefit prior to this date.
Section 11(5) of the Act is reproduced below :  "11(5) The Vice Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act, except in the matters involving creation or abolition of a Faculty, Department, or post, the matters involving appointment or removal of an employee: Provided that the Vice Chancellor, before exercising powers under this section, shall record in writing the reasons, why the matter cannot wait till the meeting of the authority concerned : Provided further that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, the decision of the authority thereon shall be final : Provided further that person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under the sub-section shall have the right to represent to the Executive Council within one month from the date on which decision on such action is communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice Chancellor.
The employee shall be informed that the action has been taken under emergency powers."
It has been pleaded in the written statement and has also been so argued by Mr. Sibal that the Vice Chancellor had taken the decision (Annexure P-10) subject to the approval of the Academic Council.
A bare reading of Section 11(5) of the Act indicates that no such approval was required as the second proviso to this Section (on which Mr. Sibal has placed reliance) only postulates that if the authority concerned was of the opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, the decision of the authority thereon would be final.
Relying on Section 13 of the Act, Mr. Sibal has pointed out that the Academic Council was one such `authority'.
Assuming it to be so the fact remains that till today no opinion has been rendered by the Academic Council pointing out that the decision of the Vice-Chancellor permitting the petitioner's transfer from one department to the other was wrong.
This proviso is in fact in negative terms and unless an opinion to the contrary is taken, the decision of the Vice Chancellor has to be honoured.
The stand of the respondent, therefore, that the transfer (concurrence ?)
of the Academic Council was necessary before the transfer could be regularised is without any basis.
6.
I am also of the opinion that the functioning of the University in the present case, leaves much to be desired.
Mr. Sibal in this connection has strenuously urged that the Vice Chancellor, as a matter of fact, had attempted to help the petitioner and as Sh. RK Upadhayaya had not been impleaded as a party in this petition, a case of mala fides could also not be spelt out.
The fact that the petitioner's matter relating to transfer was kept in abeyance for almost three years itself indicates the sorry state of affairs independent of the fact of mala fides which need not be gone into in view of the fact that Sh. RK Upadhayaya is not a party to the proceedings.
It needs to be highlighted that the petitioner had, in fact, cleared the entire process at the time of the viva-voce.
The transfer of the petitioner from one Department to the other was, therefore, if at all, a ministerial act which could not have the effect of postponing his date of clearing the PhD In this situation, I am further of the opinion that the decision (Annexure R-1) taken by the Vice Chancellor on 22nd March, 1996 would relate back to 4th October, 1996 when the petitioner had appeared for the viva-voce and, as subsequent events have shown, was successful.
7.
In Annexure P-1, the letter of appointment issued to the petitioner, it had been stipulated that in case he did not acquire a PhD degree within the period of five years, he would not be awarded any increment.
The petitioner, therefore, has been denied his increment after the completion of five years from the date of his appointment.
The University must be held at fault and the petitioner must, therefore, be compensated.
8.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the order Annexure P-19 is quashed and it is directed that the petitioner will be deemed to have cleared his PhD w.e.f 4th October, 1994.
It is further directed that the petitioner will also have his costs which are quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.