RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner, Jarnail Singh, who was working as a Head Constable, was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector in his Own Rank and Pay (ORP) on April 6, 1994, after his name was approved for out of turn promotion by the DIG Police, Ludhiana Range.
Vide order dated September 28, 1994 the petitioner was placed under suspension w.e.f.
September 26, 1994, for his involvement in a case bearing FIR No. 91 dated September 26, 1994, under Sections 7/13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Vide order dated October 14, 1994, copy annexure P-1, he was reverted as a Head Constable with immediate effect and the reason given in the order is "on administrative grounds."
The petitioner was re-instated vide order dated January 23, 1995, without prejudice to the criminal case pending against him.
He along with Sukhchain Singh was tried in the aforesaid FIR but was acquitted by the trial Court vide judgment dated September 19, 1997, which has been appended as annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
Another order was passed on June 2, 1998 that in view of his acquittal by the trial Court, the petitioner was being reinstated w.e.f.
the date of his suspension, i.e., September 26, 1994, and it was further ordered that he would get full pay and allowances for the period of suspension and the period of suspension would be treated as duty for all intents and purposes.
The petitioner filed this writ petition claiming that he had been reverted from the rank of ASI (ORP) merely on the ground of pendency of a criminal case, in which he stood acquitted and, therefore, there was no impediment in his continuing in the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector (ORP).
2.
While issuing notice of motion we had directed the respondents to produce the file which led to the passing of the order dated October 14, 1994, copy annexure P-1 reverting the petitioner from the rank of ASI (ORP) to that of Head Constable.
File has been produced.
From the file we find that apart from the criminal case, there was one complaint against the petitioner and one Sukhchain Singh by S.P.O.
Gurnam Singh for their alleged misbehaviour towards him.
From the file, we further find that a departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner and Sukhchain Singh and the petitioner stands exonerated by the Enquiry Officer vide order of Senior Superintendent of Police, Jagraon dated November 13, 1995.
Since on both the counts, i.e., complaint by Gurnam Singh SPO, and the criminal case the petitioner stands exonerated/acquitted, we do not find any justification with the respondents not to allow him to continue as Assistant Sub Inspector (ORP).
Even after the acquittal of the petitioner by the trial Court, he was reinstated as a Head Constable w.e.f.
the date he was put under suspension.
This was done vide order dated June 2, 1998.
We find no justification in the order dated December 28, 1998, copy annexure P-7, rejecting the claim of the petitioner to continue in the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector (ORP) as we find from the record that there is nothing against him excepting the complaint and the FIR in which he stands exonerated/acquitted.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to allow the petitioner to continue as Assistant Sub Inspector (Own Rank and Pay).
Petition allowed.