AK Ganguly, J - Heard learned Counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner is aggrieved by an order dated 24111987 which is at Annexure-2 to the writ petition.
By the said order the petitioner was promoted to the post of Superintendent (Typist) in the pay scale of Rs. 880- 1510/-, on the condition that the promotion to the petitioner is given subject to the effect that the post shall be reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes community for three years and in case any member of the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribes community is made available within the period aforesaid, the petitioner will have to be reverted to the post of Senior Selection Grade Typist.
3.
The petitioner attacked this order initially on two grounds.
The petitioner has submitted that no promotion order can be passed with such kind of condition.
This condition is wholly de hors Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner further submitted that if a person is found eligible for promotion and has been promoted, such eligibility cannot be made subject to the aforesaid uncertain and vague condition.
4.
The next submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that the post of Superintendent (Typing) is only one post in the department of Mines and Geology where the petitioner is working and in respect of one post there cannot be any reservation.
5.
A counter-affidavit has also been filed in this case but in this counter- affidavit the facts stated in paragraph 11 have not been disputed.
It has been also stated in the counter-affidavit that there is only one post of Office Superintendent and according to the procedure laid down by the Personnel Department the roster clearance has been done.
6.
The fact that there is only one post of Superintendent (Typing) is not disputed in the counter-affidavit also.
In the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Faculty Association and others, reported in 1998(4) SCC 1 : 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC), the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has held that the view taken by the Supreme Court in the case of Chakradharpur Biri v. State of Bihar, reported in 1988(2) SCC : 1998(2) S.C.T.
448 page 214, is the correct view and the said view has been affirmed.
The view which has been taken in Chakradhar Paswan's case (supra) is to the effect that when there is only one post, the same cannot be treated to be reserved post as that would amount to 100% reservation.
In that view of the matter, the second point urged by the learned Counsel for the petitioner succeeds.
The offending conditions which are mentioned in Annexure-2 to the writ petition are hereby quashed.
The order of promotion of the petitioner to the post of Superintendent (Typing) is hereby confirmed.
7.
With the above direction, this writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.
No cost.
Petition allowed.