VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Rohit Kapoor has passed his 10+2 examination in the year 1996.
He appeared for MBBS/BDS entrance examination held in the year 1996.
He was granted admission in MBBS course in Pt. BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak.
He was at serial No. 51 in the open merit list though he belonged to the backward class.
The petitioner alleges that he started attending the classes but because of a severe head injury in September 1997, he could not attend the classes.
There was shortage of lectures.
He was detained for the first professional examination of MBBS in Anatomy and Physiology held in December, 1997.
The petitioner made a request for condonation of shortage of lectures pointing out that there were circumstances beyond his control.
His name was struck off from the college rolls in accordance with the Ordinance of Maharshi Dayanand University for MBBS examination.
As per the same, any candidate who was unable to qualify all he subjects of MBBS Ist Professional Examination in 4 consecutive chances cannot be allowed to continue further studies in the medical course, namely, in the IInd and IIIrd Professional Examinations.
Since the petitioner had already been granted four consecutive chances and he has not been able to clear the MBBS Ist Professional Examination, he had to discontinue further studies.
He was not granted further admission.
2.
The Government of Haryana advertised for the entrance examination for admission to the Medical/Dental Colleges in Haryana for the year 1999.
The petitioner by now has fully recovered from the head injury.
He again applied for fresh admission and took the entrance examination in the year 1999.
The candidature of the petitioner was not considered and rejected.
He was told that he cannot be permitted to appear in the entrance examination since he had not been able to pass the Ist Professional Examination in 4 consecutive chances.
By virtue of the present writ petition, the petitioner seeks quashing of the communication dated 961999 (Annexure P-3) being illegal and arbitrary.
There is no bar for appearing in fresh entrance examination and that he should be permitted to appear in the competitive entrance examination 1999 for admission to MBBS/BDS course.
3.
In the reply filed, the petition as such has been contested.
It has been alleged that the petitioner had earlier been admitted to MBBS course.
He failed to qualify the Ist Professional Examination in four consecutive chances.
He lost his legal right to continue his studies in the medical course.
If the petitioner was to be allowed re-admission through fresh admission test, according to respondents, that would amount to giving him many more chances and it would be violative of clause 3.5(b) of the University Calendar Vol. II, 1986.
By way of clarification, it has not been mentioned that the petitioner did not attend his classes regularly.
He fell short of lectures.
The petitioner filled up the examination form for the Ist Professional to be held in December, 1997 and was detained in the subjects of Anatomy and Physiology.
The version of the petitioner that he had suffered a head injury had not been accepted.
The petitioner was described to be an irregular student who was not serious in studies.
4.
On the strength of these facts, learned counsel for the petitioner urged that though on the earlier occasion the petitioner was admitted in the MBBS course at Rohtak and even if he failed to qualify the Ist Professional Examination in four consecutive attempts, it did not debar him from seeking fresh admission by fresh entrance test.
There is no bar as per the relevant rules.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents contended that this would tantamount to give more than four chances to the petitioner to clear the Ist Professional Examination.
5.
To appreciate the relevant contention, some of the admitted facts can be delineated.
The petitioner joined the MBBS course after taking the entrance test.
He could not qualify/pass the Ist Professional Examination despite four consecutive chances and, admittedly, his name was struck off from the rolls of the Institute.
A letter from the Dean of Pt. BD Sharma Postgraduate Institute of Medical Science, Rohtak, addressed to the petitioner reads as under :-  "Reference your application No. nil dated 1761999 on the subject noted above.
You could not pass the Ist Prof. MBBS examination in 4 consecutive chances and hence your name was struck off from the rolls of this institute.
In the light of the above, you cannot be permitted to appear in the entrance exam.
again."
To this extent, there is no dispute between the parties.
6.
The petitioner again wanted to take the entrance examination.
On 1861999, this Court had permitted the petitioner to take the entrance test.
It was directed that the result be not declared.
On 21.7.1999, this Court directed that the result of the petitioner be produced in the sealed cover.
An order of this Court dated 23.7.1999 indicates that the petitioner qualified the entrance examination.
He was given rank 97 in the general category and 4th position in Backward Class (A) reserved category.
The petitioner was allowed to participate in the counselling on the basis of the result.
It is abundantly clear from these facts that the petitioner has again qualified the fresh entrance test taken after three years.
7.
In the advertisement issued by the Government of Haryana for the entrance examination for admission to the Medical/Dental Colleges in Haryana for the year 1999, the eligibility criteria was as under :-  "A.
Only the candidates of the following categories will be eligible to appear in the MBBS/BDS Entrance Examination :- (i) The candidates who have studied 10th, 10+1 and 10+2 classes as regular candidates in the recognised institutions in Haryana.
(Such candidates will submit a certificate to this effect from the Principal/Head of the Institution last attended in the proforma given in Appendix `B') (ii) The children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependents of the employees, appointed on regular basis of Haryana State Govt./members of All India Services borne on Haryana cadre/Statutory bodies/Corporations established by or under an Act of the State of Haryana whether posted in Haryana or outside (such candidates will submit a certificate to this effect from the employer in the proforma given in Appendix `C').
(iii) The children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependents of employees of Indian Defence Services/Para-military Forces belonging to Haryana State at the time of entry into service as per their service records (such candidates will submit a certificate in the proforma given in Appendix `D' from the officer duly authorised by the Army/Navy/Air Force/concerned Para Military Forces Headquarters, as the case may be).
(iv) The children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependents of Ex-employees of Indian Defence Services/Para-military Forces belonging to Haryana State at the time of entry into service as per their service records, who retired from service on or after first April of the preceding year of admission (such candidates will submit a certificate in the proforma given in Appendix `M' from the officer duly authorised by the Army/Navy/Air Force/concerned Para Military Forces Headquarters, as the case may be).
(v) The children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependents of Ex-employees of Indian Defence Services/Para-military Forces belonging to Haryana State at the time of entry into service as per their service records, provided the candidate has studied 10+2 class are regular candidate in a recognised Institution in Haryana.
(Such candidates will submit a certificate in the proforma given in Appendix `M' from the Officer duly authorised by the Army/Navy/Air Force/concerned Para Military Forces Headquarters, as the case may be and also a certificate to the effect that he has studied 10+2 class as regular candidate in a recognised institution in Haryana from the Principal/Head of the Institution last attended in the proforma given in Appendix `B'.
B.
The candidates belonging to one of the categories mentioned above should also fulfil the following conditions to appear in the Entrance Examination :-  (i) He/She will attain the age of 17 years of more on December 31st, 1999.
Note : The age shall be determined as per entry in Matriculation/Higher Secondary or its Equivalent Certificate.
(ii) The candidate must have passed one of the following examinations :- (a) Senior Secondary Examination (12th Class) of the Board of School Education, Haryana, or an examination recognized as equivalent thereto by MD University with at least 33% marks in each subject i.e. English, Physics, Chemistry and Biology (Botany & Zoology) in the theory and practical separately and 50% marks in aggregate of these subjects.
(b) B.Sc.
Final Examination of MD University, Rohtak or any other University recognised by MD University, Rohtak or B.V.Sc.
or B.Sc.
(Nursing Final Examination of any University recognised by MD University with atleast 50% marks in aggregate.
(c) M.Sc.
Exam.
of the MD University, Rohtak or of any other University recognised by MD University, Rohtak with atleast 50% marks : Provided that students with the qualification in (b) or (c) above must have passed in Physics, Chemistry, Biology (Botany & Zoology) and English at the Senior Secondary Certificate (12th Class) or equivalent or higher level."
It is clear beyond any pale of controversy from the advertisement which is also a part of the prospectus that a person, who had once been admitted to MBBS course but could not pass the Ist Professional MBBS Examination, is not debarred from taking the entrance examination again.
8.
On behalf of the respondents, reliance is being placed on clause 3.5(b) of University Calendar Volume II, 1986.
It reads as under :-  "(b) A candidate who is unable to qualify in all the subjects viz. Anatomy, Physiology and Bio-Chemestry in four consecutive chances including the first chance to which is entitled, shall not be allowed to continue his studies for the Medical Course thereafter."
Stress was laid on the fact that a person who fails to pass the Ist Professional Examination in four consecutive chances cannot continue his studies for the medical course thereafter.
Obviously, the expression "to continue his studies for the Medical Course thereafter" is confined to continuation of the course after admission that he has obtained as a result of the entrance test.
He is not debarred from taking a fresh entrance examination.
One cannot equate a fresh entrant who is successful in fresh entrance examination.
After all, it is a fresh admission on merit.
The authorities had never thought of such an eventuality.
Clause 3.5(b), referred to above, does not envisage a situation.
If the petitioner has qualified again, then he has a right to get himself admitted.
Clause 3.5(b) of University Calendar Volume II, 1986, will not debar the petitioner because it is a fresh admission.
He has a fresh right to get admitted in the MBBS course.
9.
As regards the sickness or head injury of the petitioner, keeping in view the above findings, it becomes wholly unnecessary to go into that controversy.
10.
For these reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of the respondents is quashed the petitioner shall be allowed continue to attend the classes as a regular student.
Petition allowed.