VK Bali, J (Oral) - On September 26, 1999 Mr. Bedi, learned counsel for the petitioner made a request to take up this case.
It was stated by him that a widow has not been paid pension for over a period of eight years despite the fact that her husband had served for over 35 years and therefore this matter needs to be taken up immediately.
As court time was over when the request aforesaid was made, on consent, the matter was adjourned for today.
It is in these circumstances that even though I sit singly only on Thursday and Friday that this matter has been taken up today.
2.
This case pertains to a hapless and unfortunate widow who, till date, as per her case set up in the petition and so urged by learned counsel representing her, has not been given family pension and other post-retiral benefits, even though her husband late Balwant Singh served the irrigation department of the State of Punjab for over a period of 35 years and died way back in 1991 when he was still in service.
3.
Brief facts, as projected in the writ petition read with various documents attached with the petition, would reveal that the husband of petitioner was appointed on the post of Junior Engineer in the Canal Department way back in the year 1956 and after a prolonged illness expired on January 7, 1991.
He was transferred to join new station of posting on May 4, 1968.
However, due to his bad health he could not join his duties.
He, however, joined his duty on April 28, 1970.
He was then transferred to Ferozepur.
The Executive Engineer, Drainage Construction Division, Ferozepur, vide letter dated February 1, 1989 requested for completion of the service book of the husband of the petitioner and to regularise the period from March 17, 1968 to April 28, 1970.
This would be reflected from the letter, Annexure P-1 attached with the petition.
The husband of the petitioner also remained ill for the period from November 30, 1990 to January 7, 1991 and as mentioned above, he breathed his last on January 7, 1991.
After the demise of Balwant Singh, respondent No. 5 herein wrote a letter to respondent No. 4 for completion of his service book so that payment of family pension and other post-retiral benefits could be made to the petitioner.
When all entreaties of the petitioner brought no tangible result, present writ for the grant of family pension and other post-retiral benefits was filed.
4.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court, respondents have filed reply wherein it has, inter-alia, been pleaded that the service book of Balwant Singh Junior Engineer was got completed to a great extent by making strenuous efforts except for the following period :-  1.9.1977 to Related to Executive Engineer, 28.2.1978 Rajasthan Feeder Division, Ferozepur.
2651978 to Period related to Senior Executive 31.12.1978 and  Engineer, Anandpur Hydel Construction 1.4.1979 to  O&M Division, PSEB, Ganguwal.
31.8.1980 10.7.1985 to  Period related to Executive Engineer 3181986  Drainage Division, Faridkot.
5.
It has further been mentioned that service book entries were to be completed by other Divisions and the Executive Engineer Tunneling Division No. 1, Shahpur Kandi had been sending reminders to the concerned authorities.
No explanation at all has been given as to why, for the period, referred to above, the service book of the husband of petitioner could not be completed.
It has also not been mentioned as to why, even with regard to the service of husband of petitioner, for which there is a clear record, nothing has been paid to the petitioner so far.
This Court is of the firm view that the respondents have dealt with this case in a most casual and careless manner, thus, depriving a widow of her livelihood.
This is not the way a citizen has to be looked after by a welfare State, like ours.
6.
In view of what has been mentioned above, a direction is issued to the respondents to release the family pension to the petitioner and other post- retiral benefits based upon the completed service book of petitioner's husband, i.e., but for the period mentioned in para 10 of the written statement, reference whereof has been given above, and make over the post- retiral benefits to the petitioner within two weeks from today.
Let arrears on account of family pension as also other post-retiral benefits be calculated and made over to the petitioner within two weeks from today along with interest @18% per annum.
7.
Insofar as the period mentioned in para 10 of the written statement is concerned, the respondents must complete the service book within four weeks from today and in case this exercise is not done, the entire period referred to above, shall be deemed to have been regularised and would count towards computing the family pension and other post-retiral benefits.
In either case, i.e., if the service record of the petitioner's husband for the period mentioned in para 10 of the written statement is worked out or otherwise, the post-retiral benefits with regard to the said period shall also be made over to the petitioner within two weeks thereafter.
On the arrears that may be worked for this period, however, no interest shall be payable.
This petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 5,000/-.
Let costs be also paid to the petitioner along with arrears of post-retiral benefits within the first period of two weeks, as mentioned above.
Petition allowed.