VK Bali, J (Oral) - By virtue of affidavit dated July 30, 1999 filed by Ajmer Singh, District Education Officer, Ropar this petition has become infructuous.
It has been mentioned in the affidavit aforesaid that the petitioner has been paid all the retiral benefits, i.e., all the outstanding dues as mentioned by her in her replication under the head "Amounts claimed in the writ petition and still outstanding".
It has further been mentioned in the affidavit that nothing remains due except bonus for 1995-96 because the process has not been completed being time barred and the process is still on to withdraw the bonus and after receiving the required sanction from the concerned authorities, bonus would be paid to the petitioner.
2.
As mentioned above, this petition has become infructuous and is disposed of accordingly, however, with a direction that outstanding bonus be paid to the petitioner within two months from today.
3.
At this stage, Mr. Raina has brought to my notice another relief asked for in this petition.
The relief is with regard to period from 511962 to 2751966.
It is the case of the petitioner that she was appointed as Social Studies Mistress through Employment Exchange on ad hoc basis under respondent department on 511962 and served intermittently on the said post up to 2751966.
In para 15(vii) it has further been stated that the respondents should compute ad hoc service of two years, one month and two days towards pension which has not been done, although increments for the said period were granted and released to the petitioner long back during service.
This Court, after going through the pleadings and hearing learned counsel for the parties is quite convinced that the pleadings, for the relief, as referred to above, are not complete.
All that has been mentioned is that the petitioner worked intermittently for the period from 511962 to 2751966.
It has not been specified as to how much was the break, as to whether there were notional breaks or the gap was considerable.
It requires to be mentioned that the State counsel has informed this court that there was a break in service of the petitioner.
Be that as it may, inasmuch as pleadings are not complete on the aforesaid issue, it shall not be possible to determine the matter.
The petitioner is, however, given liberty to make a comprehensive representation for the relief aforesaid which shall be dealt with in accordance with law and disposed of as expeditiously as possible and preferably within two months from the date of its submission.
If the petitioner may still not be satisfied, it shall be permissible for her to file writ petition for the aforesaid relief.
4.
Mr. Raina, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that petitioner retired on 3181997 and the department has given no justification whatsoever for delaying various post-retiral benefits admissible to the petitioner.
There is considerable merit in the contention of the learned counsel.
There being no justification whatsoever, for delaying the post-retiral benefits of the petitioner, in view of this Court, grant of interest @ 12% per annum would serve the ends of justice.
So ordered.
Inasmuch as only interest is payable now, other dues having already been paid, let the arrears of interest be calculated at the rate aforesaid on various heads from the date the petitioner retired till such various amounts on various heads were paid to her.
Let this exercise be done and arrears made over to the petitioner within two months from today.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition disposed of