Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 17161 and 13322 of 1998.
2.
The petitioner, a divorcee, appeared for the entrance test to be conducted by the Director of State Council of Education Research and Training Haryana (Respondent No. 3) for admission to the OT (Punjabi) Course.
She was, however, held ineligible to do so on the ground that she was a little more than 41 years of age on the relevant date.
Frustrated thereby the petitioner has come to this Court pleading that the prescription of 41 years as the maximum age limit for the category of legally divorced women was wholly unjustified and arbitrary.
3.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondent and it has been pointed out that OT (Punjabi) Course was a professional Course and that the post of teacher could not be subsequently filled by a person who was more than 42 years of age.
It has been pointed out that the prescription of the maximum age was of fundamental importance and had a reasonable nexus with the object to be achieved i.e. to provide quality education to children and this could not be effectively provided by a person who at the very stage of appointment was well past her prime.
4.
Mr. Dinesh Kumar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has raised two arguments in the course of the hearing.
He has first pointed out that it appeared to be the conceded position that the maximum age for employment in the Haryana Government service was 35 years for the general category and 40 years for the reserved category and as no reservation in service had been made for divorcees, it is appropriate that avenues for employment be provided to legally divorced women by ignoring the maximum age limit.
It has also been pleaded that the Haryana Aided School (Security of Service) Rules, 1974 only postulated a minimum age for entry into service of an aided school and no maximum limit was prescribed and though the petitioner may or may not be eligible for a government service, the OT qualification would nevertheless entitle her to seek employment in a private institution which apparently had no age limit.
5.
Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned State Counsel appearing for the respondents, has controverted this stand and has pointed out that it was open to the State Government to lay down an upper age limit for admission to a course and the limit of 41 years provided for a divorcee was in any case a very substantial relaxation of the general rule which provided that the maximum age limit was 30 years for the general category, 35 years for the Scheduled Caste and Backward Class, 40 years for physically handicapped and 31+ for the released military personnel etc.
It has accordingly been pleaded that as a relaxation had already been made in the petitioner's case it would be improper to hold that there should be no maximum age limit qua the petitioner's category.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in these petition.
In the eligibility condition given in Clause (c) of the Prospectus it has been provided as under :  (C) There is no maximum age for admission to D Ed./DEd.
(Urdu), OT (Hindi/Skt./Punjabi) courses.
The upper age limit for admission is as under:  Sr. No. Category Max.
age limit for admission 1.
General 30 years 2.
Scheduled Caste/Tribes/Backward Class/Son/Daughter of a Service personnel killed or become disabled beyond 5%.
Disabled ex-servicemen.
35 years.
(disability from 20% to 50%), such ex-servicemen can at the same time avail of relaxation in age limit admissible to them normally, if that is more advantageous to them).
3.
Physically handicapped 40 years.
4.
Wives of serving military personnel, widow of military personnel killed in service/wives of those who become disabled in service/widow/legally divorced/legally deserted.
41 years.
5.
Released military personnel of ex-servicemen or disabled ex-servicmen (Disability from 20% to 50%) 31 years plus It will be seen that the petitioner's category has already been given a very substantial relaxation in age for the purpose of eligibility for admission to the course.
No rule or law has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner which could dis-entitle the respondents to provide for a maximum age limit.
To my mind, it is upon to the State Government to fix such an age keeping in view the benefit which would accrue to the State from the services rendered by a qualified teacher keeping in view the productive life span of such a teacher.
It is true that no maximum age limit has been laid down for employment in an added School as per the rules.
This analogy however would not apply in the case of admission to an OT Course.
The reliance of the learned counsel for the petitioner on Annexure P-3, a Division Bench judgment of this Court, is misplaced for the reason that in that fixation of two different maximum age limits for Backward Class and Scheduled Caste candidates was illogical and, therefore, arbitrary.
The issue before this Court is entirely different.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.