Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioners passed their 3-Years Diploma in various disciplines in Engineering from different duly approved and recognised State Boards of Technical Education outside the State of Haryana.
The Meharishi Markendeshwar Engineering College, Mullana (Ambala) and the Seth Jai Parkash Mukand Lal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Radaur (Yamuna Nagar) respondent Nos. 4 and 5 respectively, invited applications from Domiciles of Haryana for admission to the 2nd year of the B Tech.
Degree course under the Lateral Entry System, for candidates who had passed the Diploma Courses of 3-Years duration or more by securing at least 60% marks.
A copy of the advertisement dated 9th October, 1997, is appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition.
The petitioners who were domiciles of Haryana State obtained the prospectus and filed their applications for admission to the course.
The candidature of the petitioners were duly considered by the College in the presence of the University representatives and they were granted admission in the two Colleges afore-mentioned and the requisite fee amounting to Rs. 50,000/- each was also deposited.
The petitioners, who had been attending classes regularly, however, received notices (a copy appended as Annexure P-2 dated 23rd March, 1998 to the petition), calling upon them to show cause as to why their admissions should not be cancelled as they were not eligible for admission as they had not received their Diplomas from the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana, as required by the University rules.
The petitioners filed their reply to the show cause notices (a copy has been appended as Annexure P-3 dated 6th April, 1998) as it was pointed out that the admission had been granted after a scrutiny and examination of all the documents in the presence of the University representatives and they had been granted admission as they were found to be eligible.
It was, accordingly, requested that the admissions be regularised and the show cause notices be withdrawn.
Vide communication Annexure P-4 dated 8th May, 1998 to the petition, respondent No. 1 the Kurukshetra University, however, sought the comments of respondent No. 4 College on the admission granted to the petitioners and as an interim measure directed that the Roll No.
Slips of the petitioners be withheld.
Aggrieved by the directives of the University given in Annexure P-4, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
2.
The case first came up for hearing on 28th May, 1998 and notice of motion was issued to the respondents for 10th August, 1998 and in the meanwhile, the petitioners were allowed to appear in the impending examination subject to further orders of the Court.
While the matter was yet under consideration, the respondent-University cancelled the admissions granted to the petitioners vide Annexure P-5 dated 28.5.1998, on the ground that their admission had been made in contravention of the ordinance dealing with admission to the B Tech.
Course.
The petitioners, accordingly, amended the petition and have now impugned the order Annexure P-5.
3.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and 5 have filed their respective replies.
In the reply filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3, the positive stand taken is that the petitioners had been admitted to the course in question by respondent Nos. 4 and 5, the two Colleges, in contravention of the Ordinance for admission which had been approved by the Academic Council and that as a matter of fact even the advertisement was in violation of these provisions.
A copy of the Ordinance dated 18.6.1997 has been appended as Annexure R-1 to the reply.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 5, it has been pleaded that as the petitioners had not passed their Diplomas from the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana, hence they had been granted provisional admission subject to the approval of the University.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners in response to the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and a letter dated 16th September, 1997 from the Commissioner & Secretary to Government of Haryana, Technical Education Department to the Director, Technical Education, Haryana has been appended as Annexure P-7 in which, it has been intimated that the Government had approved the proposal for the admission in the Engineering Degree Courses for Diploma Holders in the Colleges i.e. respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and that the approval to their Draft Prospectus had also been accorded.
4.
The case camp up for hearing on 29th April, 1999 when after hearing arguments for some time, it was thought appropriate that State of Haryana should also be impleaded as a respondent.
The State of Haryana was then impleaded as respondent No. 6 and the notice issued to the State was accepted by its Counsel Mr. Ajay Jain, and a direction was made that the reply be filed within two weeks.
No reply has been forthcoming so far and Mr. Jain has stated at the bar that no representative of the department has come to Court.
In the light of these facts, I do not deem it proper to adjourn the case any further.
5.
Mr. Vinod Sharma, the learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the Draft Prospectus issued by respondent Nos. 4 and 5 Colleges had been issued by the State Government vide Annexure P-7 dated 16th September, 1997 and this prospectus provided for the basis of selection which was that "the admissions will be made strictly in order of merit on the basis of marks secured in the 3-years or more in Diploma Examination of the Haryana Board of Technical Education or its equivalent."
He has urged that though the petitioners had not undertaken their Diploma Courses from the Haryana Board of Technical Education, it appears to be the undisputed position that they had obtained diplomas of equivalent standard from other State boards and as such, they were duly qualified under the prospectus.
He has urged that as the prospectus had the force of law as laid down by a string of judgments of this Court starting with the Full Bench in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) S.L.R.
673 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H)(FB), the petitioners, the University as also the Colleges were bound to its terms, the more so, as the prospectus had been approved by the State Government.
6.
Mr. Satish Sibal, the learned senior counsel appearing for the University has, however, urged that the University Prospectus dated 16th September, 1997 governed the petitioners' case, and specifically provided that "a candidate could be admitted to the course in question if he had passed 3-years Diploma in the relevant discipline from the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana, with at least 60% marks" and as the petitioners did not fulfil the first part of the eligibility qualification, they were not eligible for admission to the course.
He has urged that as the Ordinance was law, it too bound the parties to its terms.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition must succeed.
It is the undisputed position that the petitioners would be fully qualified even as per the respondents but for the fact that they had not passed their Diploma Examination from the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana.
It is also undisputed that the prospectus issued by the College which had made the petitioners fully eligible as they had qualifications equivalent to the Diplomas passed from the Board of Technical Education, Haryana, had been approved by the State Government, as would be evident from Annexure P-7.
In the light of the fact that the prospectus has the force of law, the petitioners had a right to claim that their admissions had been rightly made.
It is true, as has been contended by Mr. Sibal, that the Ordinance too was law being statutory in character, but in the light of the fact that there appears to be two conflicting provisions on the question perhaps due to a lack of co-ordination between the State Government, the University and the College, the discretion must be exercised in favour of the petitioners and they cannot, therefore, be made to suffer on account of the confusion on the part of the respondents.
It is also the conceded position that the petitioners have already undergone half of the course in question and to dislodge them on the ground that they were not eligible in the given circumstances, would not be fair.
This petition is accordingly, allowed, the order Annexure P-5 dated 28th May, 1998 is quashed and a direction is issued that the petitioners' admission would be regularised to all intents and purpose.
A direction is also issued to the respondents that they must clear the anomaly that has been occasioned and to give clear cut instructions for admissions in the future.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.