NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner who is working as Technologist Grade-II in the Bio-Medical Division of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (for short the PGI) filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution making a number of prayers therein but only two of them were pressed at the time of hearing, the first prayer pressed is for a direction to the respondent to consider him for regular promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer/Technologist Grade-I (Bio-Medical Clinical) with effect from the date when it fell due and the second prayer is that he should be paid salary in the pay scale of Technologist Grade-I as he has been working on the higher post since July, 1991.
2.
Petitioner was appointed a Technologist Grade-II in the Bio-Medical Division on 30.11.1979 in the pay scale of Rs. 425-800 with a higher start of Rs. 560/-.
Consequent upon the retirement of one Shri Dalip Singh Technologist Grade-I, the post of Assistant Engineer/Technologist Grade-I (Bio-Medical Clinical) fell vacant and by an order dated 371991 the petitioner was directed to look after the work of Bio-Medical Clinical Sub Divisions as well making it clear that he would not be paid any extra remuneration for the same.
He has been working on this post since then.
He made several representation to the PGI to consider him for promotion to the higher post in Grade-I but there was no response from the PGI.
He then filed this petition in March, 1993.
3.
In response to the notice of motion the then Director of PGI filed the written statement dated 2481993 Para No. 15 of which reads as under :  "In reply of Para 15 of the petition, it is again submitted that the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Technologist Grade-I/Assistant Engineer is being taken up for consideration by the Departmental Promotional Committee and the appointment/promotion will be made strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Recruitment Rules."
4.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that in view of the averments made in Para 15 of the reply the respondent be directed to consider the petitioner for promotion against the higher post of Assistant Engineer/Technologist Grade-I with effect from the date when it fell vacant.
Shri Nehra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent after obtaining instructions from the PGI submitted that the claims of all candidates who are eligible as on date including the petitioner for the said post will be considered.
On this submission being made Shri Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner objected that persons who were eligible in July, 1991 when the post fell vacant could alone be considered for promotion and others who may have become eligible subsequently have no right to be considered along with the petitioner.
5.
Having given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions for the parties, I agree with the contention of Shri Jagia.
The higher post of Assistant Engineer/Technologist Grade-I fell vacant prior to 371991 on the retirement of one Dalip Singh.
The petitioner and may be some others were eligible for being promoted to that post but the PGI for reasons best known to it did not make any regular promotion and instead directed the petitioner to look after the work of the higher post.
The petitioner has been working on the higher post since 361991.
The writ petition was filed in March, 1993 and in the reply filed by the PGI in August, 1993 it was stated that the claim of the petitioner was being considered for promotion.
Unfortunately that has not happened so far and today the PGI want to consider the claims of all those who may have become eligible till today for the higher post.
To say the least it is most unfair and inequitable.
Since the post had fallen vacant in July, 1991 or prior thereto the PGI can consider the claims of only those employees who were then eligible for promotion to the post.
If an employer is allowed to consider even the claims of others who may have become eligible long after the post had fallen vacant then the action in a given case could invite the charge of nepotism and manipulation.
Take for instance a case where a post falls vacant in 1991 and only three persons A, B and C were then eligible for promotion.
The employer may be having one D in mind to promote but since he was then not eligible he could not be promoted.
The employer chooses not to fill up the post till D becomes eligible and then considers the claims of A, B and C along with D and promote the latter.
Such manipulations would be possible if the employer is permitted to fill up the posts as and when it wants notwithstanding the date when the post had fallen vacant.
I have, therefore, no hesitation in directing the PGI to consider the claims of only those employees who were eligible at the time when the higher post of Assistant Engineer/Technologist Grade-I had fallen vacant and make promotions is accordance with law.
The view that I have taken finds support from a Full Bench judgment of this court in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, 1989(4) S.L.R.
437.
6.
It was then contended by Shri Jagia that the petitioner is entitled to the pay of higher post as he has been working against that post since 371991.
There is merit in this contention as well.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the petitioner was made to work against the higher post since 371991 as is clear from the office order copy of which is Annexure P-9 with the writ petition.
It is also not in dispute that he is continuing on this post till date.
This being so, there is no reason why he should not be paid the salary of the higher post.
The view that I am taking is supported by a Division Bench judgment of this court in Sewa Singh v.
P.S.T.C., CWP 4733 of 1985 decided on 421987 and also from the judgment of the Apex Court in Smt. P Grover v. State of Haryana, 1983(2) S.L.R.
734.
7.
For the reasons recoded above, the writ petition is allowed and a direction issued to the PGI to make regular promotions in accordance with law to the higher post of Assistant Engineer/Technologist Grade-I within three months from today considering only those employees who were eligible on the date when the post fell vacant.
The PGI is also directed to pay to the petitioner salary of the higher post with effect from the date when he worked against that post after deducting the amount already paid to him.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.