Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, Simardeep Singh, who holds a graduate degree of B.Sc.
(Physical Education), applied for admission to the Diploma in Physical Education (DP Ed.) course in the Shaheed Kanshi Ram College of Physical Education, respondent No. 1 under a general category candidate as also against the solitary seat reserved for the children and grand-children of Freedom Fighters.
As the petitioner's result of the qualifying B.Sc.
examination had not been declared in time, he approached the Panjab University, Chandigarh and obtained his confidential result in a sealed cover and produced the same before the Interviewing Committee on 27/2871998.
The Committee found that the petitioner had obtained 1391 out of 2400 marks in the qualifying examination, which worked out to 579% marks in all.
On the declaration of the selection list of successful candidates on 3071998, respondent No. 5, who had obtained 5866% marks was granted admission against the seat reserved for the children/grand-children of Freedom Fighters.
The petitioner, however, found that there was a mistake in the tabulation of his marks inasmuch as the total marks for the B.Sc.
examination were 2200 and not 2400 as given in the confidential result.
He accordingly moved the University for rectification and on this representation, the University amended the confidential result showing that the petitioner had obtained 1391 out of 2000 marks, which corresponded to 6322% marks in all.
The amended confidential result was produced by the petitioner before the College Authorities on 381998 i.e. prior to the last date for admission, which was 481998.
The respondents nevertheless refused to grant admission to the petitioner on which he has come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed by the respondents.
The broad facts narrated above have not been denied and the only defence attempted is that respondent No. 5 had already been given admission by depositing his fees when the petitioner had appeared with the amended result and as such it had been decided not to interfere with the admission process at that stage.
3.
To my mind, the defence taken by the respondents is wholly misplaced.
Admittedly, the petitioner had conveyed to the respondent-College on 381998 that his marks were 6322% and not 579%.
As the last date for admission was 481998, the respondent-College was duty bound to grant admission to the petitioner, who was higher in merit vis-a-vis respondent No. 5.
4.
Vide an interim order dated 831999, the petitioner had been granted admission provisionally to the course subject to further orders of the Court.
Vide yet another interim order dated 2241999 in CM No. 8952 of 1999, this Court had also permitted the petitioner to take the examination in question.
During the course of hearing today, it has been pointed out by Mr. Gupta that the instruction for the course (which was of one year's duration) had started a year ago and the examinations after the completion of period of one year, had been held in April, 1999 and as such the petitioner having really not studied should not be permitted to take advantage of the interim orders.
This argument of the learned Counsel appears to be justified.
The course had started some time in August/September, 1998 and it has since been completed.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner has not undertaken a course of study, which would give him the necessary expertise and qualification in a technical course.
To my mind, therefore, it would be appropriate that the petitioner be granted admission to the course in the ensuing academic year against one of the seat reserved for the category of freedom fighters.
5.
This petition is according allowed and a direction is issued that the petitioner will be granted admission in the ensuing academic year whereas, the admission granted to respondent No. 5, though contrary to law, will also not be disturbed.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.