GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed for quashing the decision of the Director, Primary Education, Haryana rejecting the petitioners' request to be appointed as JBT Teachers in District Rewari.
2.
Perusal of the record shows that the petitioners and the respondents No. 4 to 7 were among the persons who applied for recruitment as JBT Teachers in pursuance of advertisement No. 4 of 1996 issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (renamed as Haryana Staff Selection Commission).
On the recommendations of the Selection Committee they were given appointments.
The petitioners have averred that the respondents No. 4 to 7, who belong to the category of dependents of Ex-Servicemen have been given preference over them in the matter of posting in District Rewari in clear violation of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular dated 21.5.1979 (Annexure P-2) and the decision of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 6888-90 of 1996, Dilwan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 25.3.1996 and therefore, the orders of their appointments be quashed and the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 be directed to adjust the petitioners in District Rewari.
3.
Shri Ravi Verma argued that in view of the instructions issued by government and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dilwan Singh's case (supra), dependents of the Ex-Servicemen can be appointed on the posts reserved for Ex-Servicemen only if sufficient number of suitable Ex-Servicemen are not available and as the petitioners were available for appointment as JBT Teachers in District Rewari against the posts reserved for Ex- Servicemen, the respondents No. 4 to 7, who are dependents of Ex-Servicemen could not have been given appointment in District Rewari.
Learned Counsel submitted that the preference in the matter of posting in a particular district should be read as a part of policy of reservation of posts for Ex- Servicemen as laid down in Annexure P-2.
4.
In our opinion there is no merit in the argument of Shri Verma that the petitioners are entitled to be appointed/posted in District Rewari in preference to the respondents No. 4 to 7 and, therefore, the decision of the respondent No. 2 to appoint non-official respondents in District Rewari should be declared illegal and quashed.
5.
In reply to the query of the Court learned Counsel candidly conceded that in the merit list prepared by the Selection Committee, the roll number of the petitioners figured at serial Nos. 1867, 1961 and 2758 and those of the respondents No. 4 to 7 figured at serial Nos. 1869, 1658 and 1805.
This shows that the merit of the petitioners as determined by the Selection Committee was lower than the respondents No. 4 to 7 and this would constitute the basis of their seniority vis-a-vis the respondents No. 4 to 7.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot claim that by giving appointment to the respondents No. 4 to 7 in District Rewari, the official respondents have violated their fundamental or legal rights.
6.
We are unable to agree with Shri Verma that policy of reservation framed by the government should be construed as conferring right upon the selected Ex-Servicemen to be preferred over the dependents of the Ex-Servicemen in the matter of appointments and postings ignoring their relative merit.
It is not a case in which sufficient number of Ex-Servicemen were available for appointment on the posts available and, therefore, dependents of Ex- Servicemen were not entitled to be appointed on the posts reserved for Ex- Servicemen.
In fact the petitioners have not even prayed for invalidation of the appointment of respondents No. 4 to 7.
Thus, we do not find any ground to interfere with the decision of the respondent No. 2 declining the request of petitioners to be appointed in District Rewari.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.