Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on 26.5.1969 and while undergoing training as a recruit suffered a Fracture of the Middle Phalange and was invalided out of military service.
In consequence thereof, he was also granted a disability pension w.e.f.
7.10.1969 to 11.9.1971.
He was, thereafter, called before a Re-Survey Medical Board first in the year 1971 and again in 1978 but the disability pension was not granted to him.
The petitioner was once again brought before the Re-Survey Medical Board in the year 1992 but his claim was yet again rejected.
His appeal before the Central Government was, however, allowed on the ground that the CCDA(P) had reduced his disability to less than 20% and that this action was uncalled for.
The petitioner's claim to the service element, however, continued to be rejected, which led the petitioner to filing Civil Writ Petition No. 12530 of 1995.
This Court disposed of the Civil Writ Petition by observing that the petitioner was entitled to the service element for a short term only and this amount was ultimately released.
The petitioner was thereafter brought before the Re-Survey Medical Board in the year 1997 for determining the extent of his disability and this was assessed at 20%.
The disability pension was, however, stopped from 14101997 on the ground that his claim had been rejected by the CCDA(P), Allahabad vide its letter dated 12.2.1998, Annexure P-6, on the ground that the Medical Advisor (Pensions) had opined that the petitioner's disability had been reduced to 11% to 14% i.e. less than 20% for a period of five years upto 2472002.
An appeal was also filed by the petitioner against this order but the same remains undecided so far.
The petitioner moved various representations for the release of his disability pension and ultimately, vide Annexure P-10 dated 391998, he was informed that the matter was under consideration with the Army Headquarter and in any case as the petitioner's claim to disability element of the pension had been rejected, the service element could also not be given to him.
2.
Mr. BS Sehgal, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued only one point before me.
He has urged that in the light of the Supreme Court decision in Ex. Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 decided on 1411993, the CCDA(P), Allahabad, could not sit in the judgment over the opinion of the Medical Board and to re-determine afresh the extent of disability of a claimant.
He has also pointed out that the judgment had been followed in a number of cases including a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Ujagar Singh v. Union of India and others 1997(4) RSJ, 587.
In paragraph 3 of this judgment, it has been observed as under :-  "From the above narrated facts and the stand taken by the parties before us, the controversy that falls for determination by us is a very narrow compass viz whether the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) has any jurisdiction to sit over the opinion of the experts (Medical Board) while dealing with the case of grant of disability pension, in regard to the percentage of the disability pension, or not.
In the present case, is no where stated that the petitioner was subjected to any higher medical board before the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) decided to decline the disability pension to the petitioner.
We are unable to see as to how the accounts branch dealing with the pension can sit over the judgment of the experts in the medical line and comment upon the extent of disability without making any reference to a detailed or higher medical board which can be constituted under the relevant instructions and rules by the Directory General of Army Medical Core."
3.
The above observations fully apply to the facts of the present case.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the order, Annexure P-6 in toto as also the order Annexure P-10 in so far it denies the petitioner's claim to the service element, are quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pay the disability pension (Keeping in view that his disability has been assessed at 20%) within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of the order is supplied to the respondents.
It is clarified that the petitioner's claim as of now would be for a period of five years ie upto 2472002 and after that date the petitioner would have to undergo a re-survey of his medical disability.
Petition allowed.