Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner joined the Indian Army on 29th October, 1956.
He was boarded out of Military service on 20th April, 1965 suffering from Tuberculosis.
He was also granted disability pension of 100% disability from 21st April, 1965 and he continued to draw the same till its discontinuance on 16th July, 1978 under the direction of CCDA (P) Allahabad issued vide Annexure P-13 dated 23rd June, 1979, whereby it was intimated that his disability had now been reduced to less than 20%.
He then filed an appeal against this order before the Central Government, but that too was rejected on 22nd May, 1984.
The petitioner has, accordingly, come to this Court impugning the order Annexure P-13.
2 On notice of motion, a reply has been put in on behalf of the respondent.
Union of India and a plea of laches has been raised.
It has also been submitted that the competent authority i.e. the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts had reviewed and determined the petitioner's disability at less than 20% with the result that the order Annexure P-13 had been made.
3.
Mr. BS Sehgal, the learned counsel or the petitioner has urgued that the Re-survey Medical Board had, on 17th July, 1978 Annexure P-8 to the petition, assessed the petitioner's disability at 20% and this opinion could not have been varied by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Allahabad).
He has placed reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ex. Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 decided on 14th January, 1993 and also a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Ujagar Singh v. Union of India and others, 1997(4) RSJ 587 and in paragraph 3, it was observed as under :-  "From the above narrated facts and the stand taken by the parties before us, the controversy that falls for determination by us is a very narrow compass viz whether the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) has any jurisdiction to sit over the opinion of the experts (Medical Board) while dealing with the case of grant of disability pension, in regard to the percentage of the disability pension or not.
In the present case, it is nowhere stated that the petitioner was subjected to any higher Medical Board before the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) decided to decline the disability pension to the petitioner.
We are unable to see as to how the accounts branch dealing with the pension can sit over the judgment of the experts in the medical line and comment upon the extent of disability without making any reference to a detailed or higher Medical Board which can be constituted under the relevant instructions and rules by the Director General of Army, Medical Corp".
To my mind, therefore, Annexure P-13 was wholly unjustified and is, accordingly, quashed.
It is, further directed that the petitioner will be paid arrears due on his pension on 16th July, 1978 up to the date within a period of four months from the date that a certified copy of this judgment is received by the respondents.
4.
Mr. Mohunta has finally pointed out that the petitioner had last appeared before the Re-survey Medical Board in July, 1978 and as more than 20 years have since elapsed, it was fit and proper that the petitioner should be re- examined by a Medical Board to determine the extent of his disability.
This argument of the learned counsel has force and is even accepted by Mr. Sehgal.
It is, accordingly, directed that the respondents shall arrange that the petitioner be examined by a Re-survey Medical Board within a period of six months from today at a place convenient to the petitioner, who is a resident of district Patiala.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.