GC Garg, J - Respondent served the Indian Army w.e.f.
26101954 to 961967.
After his discharge from the Army, the respondent joined the Transport Department, Haryana as Service Station Incharge on 27.10.1969.
He was promoted as Foreman w.e.f.
13.8.1979.
He was further promoted as Works Manager though in the pay scale of Foreman, w.e.f.
31.7.1989.
After giving the benefit on the Punjab National Emergency Rules, 1965 of service rendered by him in the Army, by order dated 821988, the respondent was given assumed date of appointment as 14.3.1965 as Service Station Incharge.
The assumed date of promotion as Foreman was given as 2471968.
2.
Another person Varinder Singh Joon who had served the Indian Navy, on his discharge, joined the Transport Department, Haryana as Service Station Incharge on 18.6.1971.
He was promoted as Foreman on 13.8.1979 and by giving the benefit of military service, his assumed date of appointment as Service Station Incharge and assumed date of promotion as Foreman were given as 1331967 and 24.10.1969 respectively.
After giving the benefit of military service and consequently the assumed dates of appointment and promotion as noticed above.
Varinder Singh Joon became senior to one Sultan Singh, Forman who had been promoted as Works Manager w.e.f.
21101969.
Varinder Singh Joon made a request to the authorities that he being senior to Sultan Singh, should be promoted as Works Manager from a date prior to Sultan Singh.
His request having not been granted, he filed a writ petition being CWP 5974 of 1985.
The writ petition filed by Varinder Singh Joon was allowed by the learned Single Judge of this Court by order dated 711988.
The respondents therein were directed to consider Varinder Singh Joon as eligible for promotion to the post of Works Manager qua the requisite qualification with effect from 21101969 i.e. the date when Sultan Singh, the person junior to Varinder Singh Joon was so promoted and to pass the necessary orders in accordance with law within two months from the date of the order.
It was also ordered that on his promotion as Works Manager w.e.f.
21101969, Varinder Singh Joon shall be entitled to the salary and all other benefits including further promotion etc. to which he would have been entitled had he been given the benefit of his military service in time and promoted as Works Manager with effect from the date the person junior to him i.e. Sultan Singh was promoted as Works Manager.
3.
Admittedly, the respondent herein is senior to Varinder Singh Joon and Sultan Singh Foremen aforesaid.
The respondent, therefore, laid a claim for promotion as Works Manager prior to the date of promotion of Varinder Singh Joon and in any case w.e.f.
the date he (Varinder Singh Joon) was promoted.
His claim having not found favour with the authorities, he filed a writ petition being CWP 11110 of 1989.
Writ petition filed by the respondent herein was allowed by a learned Single Judge of this Court by order dated 321993.
Hence this appeal at the instance of the State challenging the order of the learned Single Judge.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, we are of the opinion that this appeal deserves to be dismissed.
The facts in this case are not much in dispute.
Admittedly, the respondent was given 2471968 as the assumed date of promotion as Foreman whereas Varinder Singh Joon was given 24.10.1969 as the assumed date of promotion as Foreman.
It was not disputed at any stage and is not even disputed during the course of hearing in this appeal that the respondent is senior to Varinder Singh Joon.
5.
It deserves to be noticed here that the services of the respondent and Varinder Singh Joon aforesaid are governed by the Punjab Transport Department (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1963.
Pursuant to an amendment in the said Rules, brought about by notification dated 2311969 (Annexure R-1 to the writ petition), requisite qualification for promotion to the post of Works Manager were changed and qualification of Diploma in Automobile Engineering was made necessary for a person being considered for promotion as Works Manager.
It thus goes without saying that after the date of the above notification, an incumbent must possess the above qualification, while seeking promotion as a Works Manager.
Undisputedly, Varinder Singh Joon also did not possess this qualification.
He was promoted as Works Manager on ad hoc basis by granting relaxation in the above qualification.
It was on a later date that the authorities by a subsequent order conveyed that the Government was not in favour of giving relaxation in promotion cases.
Varinder Singh Joon challenged this action of the authorities by filing CWP 5974 of 1985.
This aspect of the matter was considered by the learned Single Judge and it was held that the order declining relaxation is arbitrary and illegal for the reason that while ordering his promotion on ad hoc basis relaxation had already been granted and there was no reason to decline the same while ordering regular promotion.
This apart, it was also pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioner in that petition that amendment in the 1963 Rules providing qualification of possessing Diploma in Automobile Engineering instead of Matriculation qualification was brought about vide notification dated 2861974.
In the wake of these submissions, it was further observed by the learned Single Judge as under :-  "So if the petitioner is promoted to the post of Works Manager with effect from 21101969 i.e. the date from which Shri Sultan Singh, the person junior to him was so promoted, he did not require to possess the qualification of diploma in Automobile Engineering."
It was only for the above two reasons the writ petition filed by Varinder Singh Joon was allowed by order dated 711988.
6.
In the writ petition out of which this appeal has arisen, the contention of learned counsel for the writ petitioner was the same as was raised in the case of Varinder Singh Joon.
The contention was that the requirement of possessing a Diploma in Automobile Engineering for the post of Works Manager prior to 2861974 was not required as the rule prescribing the qualification of a Diploma in Automobile Engineering was amended after the date the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Works Manager i.e. on 2110.
1969 and, therefore, the writ petitioner was entitled to promotion w.e.f.
that date even in the absence of possessing the qualification of Diploma in Automobile Engineering.
It was also submitted that in the case of Varinder Singh Joon also, it was held that he was to be promoted w.e.f.
21101969 (the date when his junior was promoted) and he also did not possess the qualification of Diploma in Automobile Engineering.
It was next contented that in any case the refusal to grant the relaxation was illegal.
The writ petitioner ought to have been promoted w.e.f.
the date his junior was promoted by granting relaxation as was done in the case of Varinder Singh Joon.
7.
Learned Single Judge relying upon the order in Varinder Singh Joon's case (supra) and after noticing that the counsel appearing on behalf of respondents in CWP 11110 of 1989 could not dispute that the qualification of Diploma in Automobile Engineering would not be applicable for promotion to the post of Works Manager prior to 2861974 when such qualifications were introduced by way of amendment, allowed the petition of the writ petitioner herein, as noticed above.
8.
During the course of hearing in this appeal, it was brought to our notice by reference to Annexure R-1 with the writ petition that the amendment in the 1963 Rules, whereby it was provided that an incumbent must possess the qualification of Diploma in Automobile Engineering for being considered for promotion as Works Manager, was brought about on 2311969.
Learned counsel also brought out that the Learned Single Judge failed to take note of this fact, though it was specifically pleaded in the written statement.
Nothing could be brought to our notice during the course of hearing by learned counsel for the writ petitioner or by the State Counsel as to how and under what circumstances, it was submitted before the Learned Single Judge that the amendment aforesaid was brought about vide Notification dated 2861974.
The only explanation offered was that in the case of Varinder Singh Joon the date of amending the rules was noticed as 2861974 and perhaps it was on that score the mistake occurred while preparing the judgment.
It is now the conceded stand of learned counsel for the parties that the date of Notification amending the rule is 2311969 and not 2861974.
Once that is so, the appeal deserves to be allowed.
However, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that this appeal still deserves to be dismissed.
The writ petitioner, respondent in this case is admittedly senior to Varinder Singh Joon.
He had been promoted as Works Manager w.e.f.
24.10.1969 and once that is so, the writ petitioner is also entitled to be considered for promotion w.e.f.
that date.
In the case of Varinder Singh Joon, it was held by this Court that refusal to grant relaxation in respect of qualification for promotion to the post of Works Manager was illegal keeping in view the fact that relaxation had been granted in his case while promoting him as Works Manager on ad hoc basis.
However, this aspect of the matter i.e. relaxation in qualification for promotion to the post of Works Manager was not considered by the learned Single Judge in the present case.
Once, it was held that Varinder Singh Joon was entitled to promotion, both on the grounds that the Notification prescribing qualification of possessing diploma in Automobile Engineering was not necessary, the rule having been amended from a later date, and that refusal to grant relaxation in the mater of qualification was illegal.
In other words, Varinder Singh Joon was ordered to be promoted by granting relaxation of qualification of possessing diploma in Automobile Engineering for promoting him to the post of Works Manager.
This is precisely the situation in this case, though, it was not considered and pressed in this context before the learned Single Judge.
Learned Single Judge only by reference to the amendment in the rule allowed the writ petition, the amendment having been brought about on a much later date than the one on which the writ petitioner was liable to be considered for promotion.
Once that is so, the writ petitioner, respondent herein also was entitled to be promoted as Works Manager by granting relaxation of qualification of diploma in Automobile Engineering.
Thus the appeal preferred by the State of Haryana deserves to be dismissed on a ground different than the one on which the writ petition was allowed especially when it is the conceded position that decision in Varinder Singh Joon's case has attained finality and the writ petitioner in this case is again concededly senior to Varinder Singh Joon.
Once Varinder Singh Joon was ordered to be promoted as Works Manager by granting him the relaxation of qualification, the writ petitioner in the present case is certainly entitled to that relief again by granting him relaxation in the matter of possessing the qualification of diploma in Automobile Engineering.
He in the circumstances and keeping in view the decision in Varinder Singh Joon's case cannot be denied the relief prayed for in the writ petition though, we grant him a relief on the ground other than the one on which it was granted by the Learned Single Judge.
9.
For the view taken by us, this appeal fails and is dismissed.
In the facts of this case, parties shall bear their own costs.
The case of the writ petitioner shall now be considered for promotion to the post of Works Manager w.e.f.
the date his junior, Varinder Singh Joon was promoted as such by granting relaxation of possessing the qualification of diploma in Automobile Engineering.
Appeal dismissed.