GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - The filing of this petition could have been avoided if the departmental authorities had taken a little trouble to inform the petitioner that one physically handicapped (blind) candidate has already been appointed as Lecturer in Hindi (School Cadre) against the quota of physical handicapped.
It is unfortunate that the failure of the respondent No. 2 to give a reply to the petitioner in response to the representation made by him for appointment on the post reserved for physically handicapped persons has led to the filing of this petition putting him to unnecessary cost and expenses.
However, this by itself cannot be a ground to issue a direction to the respondents to appoint him as Lecturer in Hindi (School Cadre).
2.
On September 20, 1983 the Government of Haryana circulated a policy decision to take all those posts out of the purview of Subordinate Services Selection Board which were earmarked for physical handicapped persons.
In November, 1997 the government issued instructions to all the departmental authorities to take steps for filling up the vacant posts meant for physically handicapped persons and in furtherance of that decision one blind candidate has been appointed as Lecturer in Hindi on October 10, 1997 on the recommendations made by the Departmental Selection Committee.
3.
The petitioner, who is Orthopaedically Handicapped, has sought the Court's intervention for directing the respondents to appoint him against the available vacant post of Lecturer in Hindi (Male).
His grievance is that the posts of General Category have been advertised, but no effort has been made to make recruitment against the posts reserved for physically handicapped persons.
4.
The respondents have averred that out of 41 posts of Lecturers in Hindi (School Cadre), one was reserved for physically handicapped person and has been filled on October 10, 1997 by appointing a blind candidate who was adjudged suitable by Departmental Selection Committee.
5.
In view of the averments made in the written statement, which have not been controverted by the petitioner by filing the replication, it is clear that the post reserved for physically handicapped candidates has been filled by appointing a blind candidate of that category.
Unfortunately, the petitioner is not that person.
But that is not sufficient to hold that the respondents have deprived him of his fundamental or legal rights.
6.
Hence, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, we hope that in future all the departmental authorities will ensure that the representation/notice of demand for justice sent by or on behalf of physically handicapped persons will be promptly attended to and reply sent to them so that they are not forced to enter into unnecessary litigation in the Court.
Petition dismissed.