RS Mongia, J (Oral) - While the petitioner was working as Executive Officer of Municipal Committee (Class I) in the pay scale of Rs. 2400-4000, he was appointed as an Executive Officer of Municipal Corporation, Amritsar, by the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Local Government Department, vide order dated August 10, 1987, which reads as under :-  "Shri Khushi Ram Garg, Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Faridkot, is hereby appointed as Corporation Executive Officer and is posted in Municipal Corporation, Amritsar on deputation in his own scale of pay with immediate effect.
2.
Shri Shubeg Singh, Executive Officer is hereby posted as Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Faridkot in place of Shri KR Garg."
2.
The above order was modified vide order dated December 16, 1987, copy Annexure P2.
The order modifying the initial order of appointment reads as under :-  "The words "on deputation" in the office order No. IDEG (MSC)-87/232 dated 10th August, 1987 vide which Shri KR Garg, Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Faridkot has been appointed as Corporation Executive Officer in Municipal Corporation, Amritsar, are hereby deleted."
3.
It may be observed here that the pay scale of the Executive Officer in Municipal Corporation at the relevant time was Rs. 3000-4500.
The petitioner continued to discharge the duties of Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, but was again appointed as Executive Officer, Municipal Committee (Class-I) on July 20, 1994.
This writ petition was filed on November 11, 1997, with a prayer that for the period, the petitioner worked as Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, he was entitled to the pay calculated on the basis of pay scale admissible to Executive Officer of Municipal Corporation.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner having discharged the duties of the Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, for the aforesaid period, he cannot be denied the pay of that post despite there being a stipulation in the initial order of appointment which said that the petitioner would discharge the duties of Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, in his own pay scale.
In support of his submission, learned counsel referred to the Apex Court judgment in Smt. P Grover v. State of Haryana, 1983(2) SLR 734, as also two other judgments of the Apex Court reported as Selvaraj v. Lt.
Governor of Island, Port Blair, 1998(4) RSJ 22 and Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer, Chandigarh v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(3) SCT 90 (SC);.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the writ petition is highly belated inasmuch as even civil suit for the relief claimed in the present writ petition would be time-barred.
On merits, he submitted that the petitioner was just asked to discharge the duties of Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, to which otherwise he had no right to be appointed and further it is not being disputed by either side that this was not a promotion.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the respondents cited Apex Court judgment in State of Haryana v. R.K. Aggarwal, 1997(4) SLR 734 : 1997(3) SCT 638 (SC);.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that it is not necessary to go into the merits of the case as the writ petition, for the relief claimed in it, is highly belated.
It is not a case of wrong fixation of pay where every month on the alleged wrong fixation of pay a cause of action arises.
In other words, it is not a case of a continuing wrong.
What the petitioner is claiming in the present case is a lump sum arrears of pay in the pay scale of the Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, for the period he rendered services as such i.e., from August 10, 1987 to July 20, 1994.
This writ petition was filed on November 11, 1997 (though the writ petition is dated October 4, 1997).
A civil suit for claiming the lump sum arrears of salary in the pay scale of the post of Executive Officer, Municipal Corporation, for the period August 10, 1987, to July 20, 1994, would be time barred on November 11, 1997.
5.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that he had been making representations to the respondent-authorities.
It is well settled now that mere making of representations would not extend limitation nor would it explain laches unless there is some acknowledgement to the person concerned that the matter is under consideration and he may not rush to any legal forum for the relief claimed.
From the pleadings of the parties, it is nowhere mentioned that the petitioner was ever informed that the matter regarding the relief which may have been claimed in the representation was under consideration.
For the foregoing reasons, we dismiss this writ petition on the ground of laches alone.
Petition dismissed.