Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who retired as a Lecturer from a private aided institution, has filed this petition with a prayer that the respondents be directed to grant him gratuity.
A few facts may be noticed :-  The petitioner joined service as Lecturer in Hindi and Sanskrit at the Doaba College, Jalandhar, on November 1, 1957.
After having served for a period of more than 33 years, the petitioner retired from service on September 30, 1991.
He represented for the release of gratuity.
Having failed to get the relief, he approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 4097 of 1995.
Vide order dated March 21, 1995 the petition was disposed of with a direction that the representation be decided.
On May 23, 1995 the petitioner was informed that the amount of Rs. 25,000/- has already been paid by the Managing Committee by way of Ex-Gratia Grant.
Thus, the petitioner was informed that it may be treated as "college management's share of gratuity."
On this basis his representation was not accepted.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petiton.
2.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
College Management has been impleaded as respondent No. 3.
No written statement has been filed on its behalf and no one has put in appearance at the time of hearing.
On behalf of the State of Punjab, a short written statement has been filed, wherein liability of the Government has been denied.
3.
Learned Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner it has been pointed out that the issue regarding the admissibility of gratuity to the teachers retiring from different institutions was considered by a learned Single Judge of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 10460 of 1988.
Vide judgment dated November 8, 1990 it was held that according to the University regulations "the respondent-College is under a legal duty to disburse the amount of gratuity calculating the same at the rate of half the pay last drawn for each completed year of service...." A Letters Patent Appeal against this judgment was dismissed by the Division Bench.
The Judgement is reported as Hindu College Governing Council and another v. Shri ND Malhotra and another, 1993(1) Recent Services Judgments 757 : 1993(1) SCT 183 (P&H); paragraph 9 of the petition it has been averred that even Special Leave Petition 757.
In paragraph 9 of the petition it has been averred that even Special Division Bench was dismissed on December 7, 1992.
4.
The decision in ND Malhotra's case (supra) is binding on this Court.
5.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to disburse the full amount of gratuity within three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
The amount of Rs. 25,000/-, already paid to the petitioner, shall be adjusted.
No costs.
Petition allowed.