VK Bali, J (Oral) - Darshan Singh Cheema, who is serving as AG III(D) in the office of Quality Inspector, Food Corporation of India, Barnala, District Sangrur through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of appropriate writ directing the respondents to grant him benefits of past military service of six years, two months and twenty days from May 16, 1962 to August 10, 1968 for the purposes of seniority, promotion, increments and pension etc.  2.
It has inter-alia been pleaded that petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army and joined its unit at Bengal Engineering Group of Engineers and he served the Indian Army uptil August 10, 1968 when after serving for a period of six years, two months and twenty eight days he was discharged from service.
He was re-employed in the Food Corporation of India and is at present serving as A.G.III(D) in the office of the Quality Inspector, FCI, Barnala, District Sangrur.
Head Office of the FCI issued Circular dated September 16, 1974 granting the benefits of military service for the purposes of computation of increments, seniority and pension.
A similar circular was also by respondent No. 2 on November 23, 1994 (1974 ?).
In 1975 when the petitioner came to know about the circulars referred to above, he moved a representation seeking benefit of military service.
He thereafter filed successive representations for the same relief followed by legal notice dated November 17, 1997, Annexure P-3.
When the representations and legal notice given by the petitioner brought no tangible results, he filed the present writ.
3.
The facts of the case, referred to above, reveal that the petitioner, to avail the benefits of the circulars, referred to above, is running from pillar to post and in his endeavour to seek justice, period of more than two decades has gone by.
The fact that the petitioner was discharged from military service is clear from Annexure P-1, certificate of discharge dated August 13, 1968 and that the petitioner is entitled to benefits for his having rendered military service is also clear from instructions dated May 28, 1985, Annexure P-4 issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana to all the Heads of Departments.
It is further made clear from Annexure P-2 dated March 20, 1975 that the District Manager had addressed a letter to the Senior Assistant Manager (Admn.
), FCI wherein it was mentioned that petitioner along with another had made representations for grant of benefits of services rendered by them in the Armed Forces and that Senior Assistant Manager was requested to take favourable action on the representation submitted by the said officials.
4.
Notice of motion in this case was issued on January 20, 1998.
The matter came up for hearing on March 17, 1998 when, enabling the respondents to file reply, case was adjourned to April 21, 1998.
It was directed that reply be filed three days before the date fixed with an advance copy to the counsel for the petitioner.
On the adjourned date, i.e., April 21, 1998, Mr. Walia, who appeared for the respondent, sought more time to file reply.
He was given four weeks to file reply with an advance copy to the counsel opposite.
The matter was then adjourned to July 14, 1998, on which date following order was passed :-  "Two dates have already been given to the respondents to file reply.
Petitioner through the present petition has sought benefit of military service for which he had applied in the year 1995.
One last opportunity is granted subject to payment of Rs. 1000/- as costs.
Adjourned to 11.8.98."
5.
It appears that the year 1995 has been wrongly mentioned as from the index and list of dates and events it is clear that such a representation was made in the year 1975.
On the adjourned date, it appears, that even though counsel for the respondent had sought time to file reply, it was wrongly mentioned in the order that reply was filed in the court and copy given to the counsel opposite.
The matter was, however, adjourned to October 28, 1998.
On October 28, 1998 counsel for respondents sought more time to file reply.
The same was granted and the case was adjourned to December 9, 1998.
It was clearly mentioned in the order dated December 9, 1998 that reply be filed three days prior to the date fixed with an advance copy to the counsel opposite.
No reply in the matter has been filed.
Learned counsel for the respondents seeks more time to file reply without giving any reason for having not filed the same by now.
This Court finds absolutely no justification for further adjourning the case.
6.
The pleadings of the petitioner, as referred to above, have not been controverted and on the ground of non-traverse, the same are accepted to be true.
In view of the averments made in the writ, the same is allowed.
The petitioners are directed to give the petitioner benefit of military service rendered by him for a period of six years, two months and twenty eight days in the matters of seniority, increments, pension, promotion etc. Let appropriate orders be passed within a month from today.
This petition is allowed with costs quantified as Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.