GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for quashing of the order dated 3101997 issued by the Chief Engineer (Public Works), Punjab Public Health Department retiring him from service 3171997.
He has also prayed for quashing of the memo Annexure P5, dated 1381998 issued by the Chief Engineer for completing pension papers in form PEN-15.
2.
The averments made in the writ petitions show that the recorded date of birth of the petitioner is 2331942, but by presuming his date of birth to be 1571939, respondent No. 2 retired him from service w.e.f.
3171997.
3.
On 6111998, the Court had, while issuing notice of motion, directed the respondents to file written statement and explain as to why the impugned order be not invalidated and quashed in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269.
4.
Today, the learned Deputy Advocate General produced the service book of the petitioner, a perusal of which fully supports the petitioner's assertion that the date of birth recorded in his service book is 2331942.
Learned Deputy Advocate General has been extremely fair and candid to concede that the recorded date of birth of the petitioner has not been changed by the competent authority after holding an enquiry in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
5.
In Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei's case (supra), their Lordships of the Supreme Court considered an issue similar to the one raised in this petition and held as under :-  "........
The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed is entitled to a hearing applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the set-up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
Duty to act judicially would, therefore, arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed; it need not be shown to be super-added.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essentials of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is a nullity.
That is a basic concept of the rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a decision in any particular case.
........................
It is true that some preliminary enquiry was made by Dr. S Mitra.
But the report of that Enquiry Officer was never disclosed to the first respondent.
Thereafter the first respondent was required to show cause why April 16, 1907, should not be accepted as the date of birth and without recording any evidence the order was passed.
We think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences, as already stated, must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
6.
Applying the ratio of the aforementioned decision to the facts of this case, we hold that the impugned order passed by respondent No. 2 retiring the petitioner from service w.e.f.
3171997 deserves to be quashed on the ground that it has been issued in violation of the rule of audi alteram partem.
7.
Hence, the writ petition is allowed.
The order Annexure P2 is quashed.
The direction given by the Chief Engineer vide memo dated 1381998 is also quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service and be given all consequential benefits.
However, it is made clear that this order shall not preclude the competent authority from passing an appropriate order for effecting a change in the recorded date of birth of the petitioner after making an enquiry in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Petition allowed.