VK Bali, J - Mrs Neeraja Puri Talwar through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash order, Annexure P-5 dated November 27, 1995.
In wake of setting aside order, Annexure P-5 she further seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allow her to continue in PCMS-1 w.e.f.
December, 1997, i.e. from the date she completed her post-graduation course in Anaesthesia.
2.
Brief facts, on which the relief aforesaid is sought to rest, reveal that petitioner completed her MBBS in December, 1991 and in 1995 she appeared in the Entrance Examination for Punjab Civil Medical Service-1.
On her successfully qualifying the said examination, she was given appointment letter on October 25, 1995.
She made representation to the respondents that she had joined MD in Anaesthesia course on November 8, 1995 and as such she should be given extension in joining time to the PCMS-1 service.
It is the case of the petitioner that earlier batches had been granted this benefit by the respondents.
On November 27, 1995, however, representation of the petitioner was rejected vide order, Annexure P-5.
It is also the case of the petitioner that batch of 1996 and all subsequent batches were granted extension in joining by one year to all students, who were doing post graduation.
Petitioner completed her MD in Anaesthesia from Medical College, Amritsar on November 27, 1997.
In September/October, 1997 the petitioner made representation to the Health Minister.
Punjab as also the Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare vide Annexures P-8 and P-9 but no reply was received.
In March, 1998 she made yet another representation to the Health Minister, vide Annexure P-10, who immediately ordered that the petitioner be allowed to join.
On March 31, 1998 the Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare was sent a letter by the Health Minister for allowing the petitioner extension in joining time.
However, petitioner was not allowed to join.
She made yet another representation, Annexure P-12 and she also approached the Director, Health Services, Punjab, who recommended her case but no response was received from the Principal Secretary, Health.
It is in wake of the facts, as have been fully detailed above, that the present writ for the relief, as indicated above has been filed.
3.
When the matter came up for motion hearing before the Division Bench consisting of GS Singhvi and Iqbal Singh, JJ, on December 9, 1998, following order was passed :-  "Heard Shri Mutneja and perused the record.
The petitioner has sought issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to give effect to the order passed by the Hon'ble Minister, Health, Punjab, granting her extension in the joining time and directing that the posting order be issued in favour of the petitioner.
We have our serious reservation whether the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India should be exercised only for the purpose of directing the government and its functionaries to implement an order passed by the Hon'ble Minister of the department concerned.
Nevertheless, in order to determine the important issue, as to whether the order passed by the Hon'ble Minister of the department can be ignored, violated or flouted by the Secretary concerned or his subordinates, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, is requested to appear on behalf of the respondents and assist the court.
Put up on 16121998."
4.
In response to the direction that were given by the Court, as noted above, appearance has been put in on behalf of the Advocate General, Punjab.
The stand taken by the petitioner that extension to join was granted by the concerned Minister has been denied.
We have sent for the original records which pertain to the application made by the petitioner for extension of time.
The last note dealing with the matter reads as follows :-  "The policy review covers cases of 1996 batch but not the old batch of 1994.
(File put up separately).
May be filed."
This note made on 2241998 has been signed by the concerned Minister on 7.5.1998.
There is no need at all to answer the question as posed by the Division Bench in its order dated December 9, 1998.
5.
Learned State counsel further states that the matter herein is covered against the petitioner by judgment of this Court rendered in CWP No. 15839 of 1996 (Dr. Maninder Kaur v. State of Punjab & ors.), decided on March 11, 1997.
The Division Bench judgment, referred to above, went in detail of all the issues involved in the said case and concluded as follows :-  "In the past a number of candidates were given extension in the joining time, which resulted in serious injury to the public interest because the people were deprived of the services of the Medical Officers.
The Government was forced to keep the posts vacant for those who were doing post graduation courses.
This resulted in complete frustration of the government's efforts to streamline the medical services in the rural areas.
The action of the government to do away with the evil practice of granting extension in the joining time will go a long way to redeem the grievances of the common man against the lack of medical facilities.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed."
6.
Hon'ble Division Bench has also taken notice of the contention, similar to the one as is raised in the present case with regard to arbitrariness.
We have gone through the judgment aforesaid and find no reason whatsoever to differ with the same.
No distinction has even been pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioner.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.