Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, who are class-III and IV employees working in the Bhiwani Circle of the Public Health Department, Haryana, have impugned the transfer order Annexure P-3 dated 751997, primarily on the ground that as they has been transferred outside the circle, they were likely to lose their seniority on account of that transfer.
It is the petitioners' case and it is so stated by Mr. JS Maanipur, their learned counsel that service rules governing the petitioners services had not so far been framed and they were, therefore, covered by the executive instructions issued from time to time.
2.
On notice of motion, the respondents have put in their reply and stated emphatically in para 5 that the seniority of the petitioners would be maintained in the new circle taking into account their past continuous service in the old circle and their chances for promotion would also not be affected.
The respondents have also relied on the instructions Annexure R-3 dated 181988 and in particular to paragraph 2 thereof which stipulated that if an employee was transferred from one unit to another in public interest on the change of jurisdiction of the circle, such an employee would take his position in the respective seniority list of the new unit taking into account his past continuous service.
The Division Bench in its order dated 2751997, however, noted that it was not very clear as to whether the seniority of the petitioners would be adversely affected on their transfer and, accordingly, stayed the impugned transfer order Annexure P-3.
The petition was finally admitted to a hearing on 1031998.
3.
This case first came up for hearing before me on 27.8.1998 and was adjourned to 23.9.1998 in order enable the State Government to find out as to whether the petitioners' transfer had been made in accordance with paragraph 1(a) or paragraph 2 of Annexure R-3.
On that date, the case was again adjourned for today and an affidavit has been filed today in Court, in which it has been clearly mentioned that the petitioner's transfer had been made in accordance with paragraph 2 of the Annexure R-3 on administrative ground in public interest.
4.
Mr. JS Maanipur, the learned counsel representing the petitioners has argued that as the seniority of the petitioners was to be maintained at circle level, the transfer outside the circle was generally not permissible and it was only in the case of a change in the jusridiction of a circle that an employee could be transferred from one circle to another.
In this connection, he too has placed reliance on Annexure R-3 dated 181988.
He has also argued that the petitioners apprehended that in case, their transfer were made, they would lose seniority and be put at the bottom in the new circle with their previous service having been washed out.
5.
Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned counsel for the respondent-State has, however, pointed out that it was the admitted position that the service to which the petitioners belonged, was not governed by any service rules and as such, transfers had to be made in accordance with administrative exigency.
He has also pointed out that it was evident from paragraph 2 of Annexure R-3 and paragraphs 5 and 6 of the written statement as also paragraph 2 of the additional affidavit dated 3111998 filed today in Court that the department had taken a conscious decision that the petitioners would not lose their seniority an account of their transfer vide order Annexure P-3 and as such their fears were without foundation.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in this petition.
7.
It is evident from what has been reported above that there are no rules governing the petitioners' service and in that eventuality, the petitioners would be governed by the general rules which provide that an employee of the State Government of Haryana, was bound to serve any where in the State in connection will the affairs of the State.
Moreover, in the absence of any rules to the contrary, it was open to the authorities concerned to issue orders of transfer for administrative exigencies.
8.
Mr. Maanipur's second argument with regard to the apprehension of the petitioners that they would lose seniority on transfer, must now be dealt with.
Annexure R-3 is reproduced here :-  "From :  The Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana,  P.W.D.
Public Health Branch,  Chandigarh.
To,  All Superintending Engineers,  P.W.D.
Public Health Circle in  Haryana State.
Memo No. 6865-74-PH/GA-I  dated 181988.
Subject : Regular field staff - Guidelines for transfer.
It is informed that now the seniority of regular field staff is being maintained at circle level by the respective Superintending Engineers.
Due to the declaration of the circle, as unit of Mech Establishment, the following guidelines may be followed in respect of transfers :-  1.
(a) Normally, no transfer of Mech Establishment will be made from one unit to another except in very special circumstances normally with the consent of both the Superintending Engineers.
Such an employee will not be given benefit of past service in the new unit for the purpose of seniority.
He will be placed at the bottom of the list of the employees in the category.
However, his past service will be counted for pensionary or terminal benefits.
(b) The order shall be issued from Head Office.
2.
Transfer of an employee from one unit to another in the public interest on the change of jurisdiction of the circle :-  Employees transferred in such cases shall take their position in the respective seniority list of the new unit after taking into account their past continuous service which counted for seniority in that category in the old unit.
It is, therefore, requested that the above guidelines/instructions of transfer be strictly followed and transfer of an employee from one unit to another be avoided as far as possible.
Sd/- Superintending Engineer (WB)  for Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana  PWD Public Health Branch, Chandigarh."
It will be clear from a reading of Annexure R-3 that the seniority of employees who were covered by paragraph 2(b) was to be protected.
It is the emphatic stand of the respondents that the petitioners would not lose seniority and their past service would be taken into account in determining their seniority as also their chances of promotion in the transferee circle as their case was covered by this paragraph.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioners' grievance on this score is also not made out.
9.
Mr. Maanipur has, at the fag end, argued that as the transfer order had been stayed by the Division Bench on 2751997, it would be appropriate that the petitioners be not transferred till the next general transfers.
To my mind, this is not a matter for the decision of this Court but it may be kept in mind by the respondents should they choose to do so when they take follow up action in this matter.
10.
For the reason recorded, there is no merit in this writ petition.
Dismissed.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition dismissed.