Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Punjab Police as Constable way back in 1965 and on the creation of the State of Haryana in 1966 was deputed to serve in the new State and ultimately transferred to the Government Railway Police (GRP).
He was promoted as Head Constable on 11111976 but his promotion as ASI was withheld on account of some adverse circumstances.
He was also given adverse confidential reports for some period in 1987, 1988 and 1989 but on a representation filed by him, the adverse remarks were expunged.
The petitioner thereafter submitted two representations before the authorities that as the adverse remarks have been washed off, he should be promoted from the date his juniors had been promoted to the higher ranks.
On 721995 (while the representations were still pending) some officials junior to the petitioner were further promoted as Sub Inspectors, which led the petitioner to filing Civil Writ Petition No 4991 of 1995 in this Court.
This petition was allowed vide order dated 24.5.1996 and as a consequence thereof the petitioner was promoted as Sub Inspector in January, 1997 skipping over the intermediate rank of ASI and was posted as SHO, GRP Police Station, Jind.
It is the petitioner's case that as he had filed the aforesaid writ petition, his superior officers were annoyed with him on that account and he had consequently been transferred frequently between the GRP Lines, Ambala City and the GRP Lines, Hisar and Jind.
While the petitioner was posted at Jind, one Inspector Satbir Singh, who was posted in the Commando Battalion, lodged a complaint with the Inspector GRP Vikas Dhankar against the petitioner on 17101997 and as a consequence thereof, the petitioner was suspended and was asked to report to the GRP Lines, Hisar.
Approval was also accorded to the petitioner's suspension by the D.I.G., Railway and Commando, Panchkula vide Annexure P-8 dated 19101997.
The petitioner was, however, reinstated vide order dated 9121997, Annexure P-9 pending the Departmental enquiry and D.S.P.
Raj Gopal of the GRP Hisar was appointed the Enquiry Officer.
It is the petitioner's case that on 311998 some altercation had taken place between him and Inspector Vikas Dhankar during the course of the enquiry proceedings and he was transferred from GRP to the Commando Battalion, Hisar vide orders Annexure P-11 dated 271998.
Annexure P-11 has been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
The petitioner's grievance is that he could not have been transferred from the GRP, which formed one cadre, to the Commando Battalion, which was a separate cadre, without the prior approval of the Director General of Police and as the approval had not been taken, his transfer could not be sustained.
It has also been pleaded that as he was more than 50 years of age on the date of transfer, the transfer was bad for the additional reason that a police official beyond 30 years of age could not be posted to a Commando Battalion.
In support of both these pleas, Mr. Balhara, the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on Ram Phal S.I.
v. The State of Haryana and others, 1996(5) SLR 481 : 1996(3) SCT 145 (P&H).
A plea of mala fide has also been raised, in particular, against respondent No. 5, Shri Pirthi Singh, the Commandant of the Commando Battalion at Hisar.
3.
Two replies have been filed by the respondents; one on behalf of the official respondents 1 to 4 and another by respondent No. 5.
In the first noted reply, most of the factual averments have not been denied, although some adverse comments have been made on the petitioner's record.
It has, however, been pleaded that the transfer order Annexure P-11 had been made by the DIG Railways and Commando Haryana, respondent No. 3, who administratively controlled both the Commando Wing and GRP and as such, the order was fully in accordance with law.
Reliance has also been placed on Annexure R-1 dated 2841995 to the effect that the Director General of Police had empowered the DIG Railways and Commando to transfer non-gazetted officers from the GRP to the Commando Force.
It has also been pleaded that the embargo of 30 years of age that had been averred by the petitioner was only for the purpose of direct recruitment to the Commando Battalions but no such embargo has been placed on the transfers of police officials from other wings of the police force to the Commando Force.
4.
Mr. Balhara, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has, during the course of arguments, reiterated the averments made by him in the petition.
5.
I am, however, of the opinion that the first two arguments raised by Mr. Balhara have in fact been subbstantially answered against him in Ram Phal's case (supra) wherein a Division Bench of this Court held that a Commando Force was not a separate cadre but was within a General Police force and as such a police official could be transferred from the GRP to the General Police, of which the Commando Force was a Unit, without consent.
6.
It has nevertheless been contended by Mr. Balhara that it had also been laid down in the judgment aforesaid that the prior approval of the Director General of Police was required to be taken before such a transfer was made.
This assertion is correct and to meet this situation Mr. Jain, the learned State counsel has referred to Rule 1226 of the Punjab Police Rules as also Annexure R-1, dated 2841995, a memo addressed by the Director General of Police to the D.I.G., Railways and Commandos, Haryana and it has been argued that on a cumulative reading of the instructions and the Rules, it would be evident that no prior permission was required to be taken before transferring a police official and in any case it was held that such a permission was required, the same had been impliedly given by the Director General of Police vide the memo, Annexure R-1.
To my mind, the first part of the argument is not open to the State counsel because in Ram Phal's case (supra), it has been held that the consent of the Director General of Police was required before a police official could be transfered from the GRP to the Commando Force.
It appears, however, that this lacuna was filled in by the issuance of Annexure R-1, in which the Director General of Police observed that the GRP and the Commando Force constituted a range and since a transfer from the Railways to Commandos was similar to a transfer from one district to another district within the same range, no concurrence of the Director General of Police was required to be taken.
To my mind, the implication of this memo, is that the Director General of Police could be said to have given his tacit and prior approval to all transfers from the GRP to the Commando Battalions.
7.
Mr. Balhara's argument of mala fides must now be examined.
It is true that the petitioner had been transferred repeatedly while his earlier writ petition was pending in this Court but in the absence of any allegation against a specific authority or official, a case of mala fide cannot be made out.
It is equally true that the petitioner had averred that he had been deliberately posted to the Commando Battalion, Hisar to serve under Sh. Pirthi Singh, respondent No. 5, against whom allegations of malafide have been made.
This grievance of the petitioner has, however, been redressed as he has, during the pendency of the present writ petition, been shifted from the Commando Battalion, Hisar to the Commando Battalion at Navel (Karnal).
8.
In the light of what has been discussed above, I find no merit in the writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.