Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is a non agrarian.
He started practice as an Advocate in the year 1923.
After the partition of the country in the year 1947, the petitioner shifted to Patiala and continued his law practice there.
In January 1948, he was appointed as a Govt. Advocate.
In August 1948, the petitioner was appointed as Advocate General in the State of Pepsu.
The post carried the pay scale of Rs. 1500-50-1700.
In the year 1953, the petitioner was appointed as a Sessions Judge in the State of Pepsu.
In the year 1954, he was appointed as Registrar of the High Court.
He retired from service on August 14, 1955.
At that time, the petitioner was drawing a basic pay of Rs. 1700/- in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-50-1700.
2.
In the erstwhile State of Pepsu, which was merged with the State of Punjab on November 1956, the conditions of service were governed by the regulations called the Pepsu Services Regulations.
These regulations were published initially in the year 1947.
On the formation of Pepsu, the regulations were made applicable to the "entire territories of the Union by Ordinance No. 1 of 2005 BK".
Regulation 91 of Chapter IX Volume I provided for the retirement of every Government servant on attaining the age of 55 years on such pension as may be admissible to him under the rules for the time being in force...." The provision for the grant of pensions was made in Chapter III of Volume II.
3.
According to the petitioner, under these regulations, a person on completion of 10 years of qualifying service was entitled to the grant of pension.
It is further averred that the Punjab, the conditions of service governing the members of the Judicial Service were laid down in the rules called the Punjab Superior Judicial Services Rules, 1963.
On the merger of the erstwhile States of Pepsu and Punjab, such persons who were in the service of the erstwhile State of Pepsu, were governed by the provisions of the Punjab Rules.
Rule 16 of these rules was amended vide notification dated February 22, 1990, to inter alia provide that in case of direct recruits "the actual period of practice at Bar, not exceeding 10 years, shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits."
However, by an order dated February 25, 1991, the government decided that the amendment of rule 16 shall apply to only such person as retired after February 22, 1990 and not to those who had retired prior to that date.
It is the claim of the petitioner that the action of the State Govt., in not extending the benefit of amendment to a person like him who had retired prior to the issue of the notification of February 22, 1990 is discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is on this premises that the petitioner has prayed for the issue of suitable writ or direction to the respondent for the grant of pension.
Initially, the petitioner had impleaded only the State of Punjab as a respondent.
In the written statement filed by the State of Punjab, a preliminary objection was raised that the pension is calculated by the Punjab and Haryana High Court (being head of the department) and sanctioned by the Accountant General, Punjab ...." It was claimed that these too were necessary parties to the case.
Accordingly, the petitioner had impleaded the High Court of Punjab and Haryana as also the Accountant General, Punjab, as respondents.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, it has been inter alia averred that the benefit of the notification dated February 22, 1990 can be given only to those officers who have been retired from service on or after the issue of the notification.
Since the conditions of service of the petitioner were never governed under the Punjab Superior Judicial Services Rules, 1963, he cannot claim the benefit extended under these rules.
On this premises, the claim of the petitioner has been contested.
5.
A separate written statement has been filed on behalf of the High Court.
It has been inter alia averred that since the petitioner had put in less than 10 years service, he was not granted any pension.
However, a sum of Rs. 14,000/- was allowed to him as death-cum-retirement gratuity.
It has been further averred that "the basic requirement of rule 39 of the Pepsu Services Regulations, Volume III at the time of retirement was minimum qualifying service of 10 years.
This service is the pre-condition which is to be taken into consideration to make an official entitled for the grant of pensionary benefits.
The benefit of 10 years standing at the Bar can only be given thereafter to add to the pensionary benefits.
The persons having rendered less than 10 years' service are not entitled to claim pension whereas they are only entitled to the grant of death-cum-retirement gratuity."
On this premises, the claim of the petitioner for the grant of pension has been contested.
6.
I have heard Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Arihant Jain, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, for the respondent.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that all retired persons, irrespective of their date of retirement, constitute one class and their right to pension must be determined on the basis of the exsting rules and not on the basis of the date of retirement.
As against this, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that the claim is highly belated.
It has been further contended that the benefit of the notification of February 22, 1990 is admissible only to such persons as have retired after a date and not to persons like the petitioner who had retired much earlier.
It is also claimed that no direction can be issued to the respondents as the petitioner had not raised any demand or made a representation for filing the present petition.
7.
As for the objection of delay, it deserves to be noticed that the decision to give benefit for the actual period of practice at the Bar not exceeding 10 years was notified only on February 22, 1990.
In the normal course of events, the claim for pension should have been determined in accordance therewith.
However, it was vide letter dated February 25, 1991 that the State Govt. informed the Accountant General, Punjab as also the High Court that the notification is only prospective.
The petition had been filed on September 16, 1991.
In this situation, I am not inclined to take the view that the petition suffers from the vice of laches.
Even otherwise, learned counsel for the petitioner stated that he was not claiming any arrears of pension for the period prior to February 22, 1990.
In this situation the objection raised by the learned counsel for the respondents is rejected.
8.
Equally benefit of merit is the objection that the petitioner having not made any representation, the present petition is not competent.
It is clear that the State Govt. had issued policy instructions vide letter dated February 25, 1991.
It had been decided that the notification dated February 22, 1990 was only prospective.
In such a situation no useful purpose would have been served if the petitioner had submitted a representation.
The Courts insist on "demand and denial" only to avoid unnecessary litigation.
This purpose would not have been served even if the petitioner had made a demand.
Consequently, the objection is rejected.
9.
Coming to the merits of the controversy, it is apt to remember that pension is no longer "a bounty" or "a matter of grace".
It is not "an ex gratia payment".
It is "a payment for the past service rendered".
It is a part of the "assistance" that the State is obliged to provide in "old age" under Article 41 of the Constitution of India.
It is "a measure of socio-economic justice which inheres economic security in the fall of life when physical and mental powerless is ebbing corresponding to aging process..." It has been described as an "allowance or stipend paid in consideration of past service..." The rules governing pension "should receive a liberal construction and the Courts may be interpret such statutes as to render them inane (American Jurisprudence 2-d 881)."
10.
It is in this background that the petitioner's claim has to be examined.
Do the statutory rules entitle the petitioner to claim pension ?
It is apt to notice the amendment introduced by the notification dated February 22, 1990.
It is as under :-  "16.
DEATH-CUM-RETIREMENT BENEFITS :-  In respect of death-cum-retirement benefits the members of the service shall be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II as amended from time to time.
Provided that in the case of a direct recruit to this service, the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits.
EXPLANATORY NOTE : For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a direct recruit to this Service, who immediately before joining the Service was a Law Officer or District Attorney shall also be entitled to the benefit of actual number of years not exceeding ten years, put in by way of practice at the Bar, being counted towards his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits."
The rule has a definite public policy to serve.
Members of the Bar are directly recruited to the Service after they have practised law for a considerable length of time.
They may not render service for a sufficient period so as to be able to earn pension.
In order to avoid such a situation, and to enable the retired judicial officers to fall back upon something, that provisions of rule 16 appear to have been amended to provide that "the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years, shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension..." The Explanatory note further shows that the benefit is also admissible to a person who has worked as Law Officer or District Attorney etc.
It appears that this provision has been made with the avowed objective of enabling the retired judicial officers to earn pension event if they have not served judicial officers for a sufficient length of time.
It can also be that the period of ten years standing at the Bar which is a pre-condition for eligibility is added to the actual service to determine the quantum of the pension admissible to them.
11.
The respondents contended that the benefit of this notification only admissible to persons who have retired after February 22, 1990.
I am unable to accept this contention.
In my view, after the decision of the Apex Court in DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983-SC-130, it is impossible to accept such a contention.
It has been authoritatively held that the pensioners from "a homogeneous class" and it cannot be divided by "arbitrarily fixing an eligibility criteria".
The contention as raised in the present case was clearly negatived by the Court.
Keeping in view the purpose behind the notification dated February 22, 1990, I am of the view that this application can not be confined to any such persons as have retired after the issue thereof.
There should be no rational basis for treating persons who have retired on February 21, 1990 differently from those who may have retired on or after February 22, 1990.
All of them have a right to be treated alike.
12.
Let us now examine the case of the petitioner.
The provisions relating to the grant of pension were laid down in Chapter III of Volume III.
Regulation 31 divides pensions into six Classes including superannuation pension and retiring pension.
Regulation 39 lays down the scales of pension.
Regulation 317 originally provided as under :  RETIRING PENSION  "317.
A Government Servant -  (a) Who is retired from service after completing 25 years of qualifying service as laid down in the proviso to clause (i) of Article 91, of Vol. 1 of these Regulations; or  (b) who seeks voluntary retirement after 30 years' qualifying service as laid down in clause (iv) of the aforesaid Article; shall be entitled to a pension at the rate of one half of the average emoluments".
Vide Notification dated February 2, 1960 issued under the proviso to Article 309, it was amended as under :-  "317.
A Government servant -  (a) who is retired from service after completing 25 years of qualifying service as laid down in the proviso to clause (1) of Article 91 of Volume 1 of these Regulations; or (b) who seeks voluntary retirement after 30 years qualifying service as laid down in clause (iv) of the aforesaid Article; or (c) who is retired after 10 years of qualifying service under second proviso to clause (i) of Article 91 of Volume 1 of these Regulations : shall be entitled to a pension at the rates prescribed in Article 39 of Volume III of these Regulations."
A perusal of the above regulations and particularly clause (c) shows that a Government servant who is retired "After 10 years of qualifying service" is entitled to the grant of pension the rates prescribed in rule 39.
Regulation 91 referred to above only prescribes the age of retirement and empowers the State to even retire a person on completion of 25 years of service.
There was an identical provision in Punjab at the relevant time.
Under Regulation 317 a Government servant who has completed 10 years of qualifying service is entitled to the grant of pension at the rates prescribed in Article 39 of the Regulations.
How is the qualifying service to be determined ?
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that this has to be done by taking into account the actual service rendered by the petitioner and adding thereto "the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years".
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to point out any provision to the contrary.
In view of my finding that the notification of February 22, 1990 applies to persons who have retired even prior to that date, it must be held that the benefit of the notification has to be given to the petitioner.
It is the undisputed position that the petitioner had started practice of law in the year 1923.
He was appointed as a Government Advocate in January, 1948 and as Advocate General, Pepsu in August 1948.
He had served as a District & Sessions Judge from the year 1953 to August 14, 1955.
Accordingly, the period of ten years as contemplated under the notification dated February 22, 1990 has to be added to his period of service as a judicial officer.
His pension has to be computed on that basis.
13.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the High Court it has been averred that completion of ten years qualifying service is a pre-condition for the grant of benefit under the Regulations.
I am unable to up-hold this plea.
The qualifying service under regulation 317 has to be determined by taking into consideration the period of standing-at the Bar.
For this purpose, an outer limit of ten years has been prescribed.
The fact that even an Advocate General is entitled to this benefit on his appointment as a member of the Superior Judicial Services is evident from the perusal of the Explanatory Note given in the notification.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner is entitled to claim pension from February 22, 1990.
14.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to compute the pension admissible to the petitioner by adding a period of 10 years to the actual service rendered by him as a District & Sessions Judge and as Registrar of the High Court.
The amount failing due as arrears shall be calculated and paid to the petitioner within a period of 3 months from today.
The pension shall hereafter be paid to him every month in accordance with the rules.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed