HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 6941, 7309 and 7312 all of 1998.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 6941 of 1998.
The petitioners were appointed as Canal Patwaris in the pay scale of Rs. 25-45 in the Irrigation Department of the erstwhile State of PEPSU prior to 1111956, the date on which the States Re-organisation Act, 1956 (hereinafter called `the Act') came into force.
The Raj Parmukh of the erstwhile State of PEPSU framed rules in pursuance to Article 309 of the Constitution known as PEPSU Services Regulations and the age of the retirement of the petitioners and others similarly situated was fixed at 60 years.
A copy of this Regulation has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the petition.
The Punjab Government issued a Notification dated 2111956, Annexure P-5 to the petition that Class IV servants would be those servants whose pay including all emoluments of the nature of pay did not exceed Rs. 200/- pm The petitioners who had entered their service in the pay scale of Rs. 25-45, were accordingly deemed to be class IV employees.
On the enforcement of the Act, w.e.f.
1111956 merging the State of PEPSU with Punjab State, a special protection was given to the employees of the erstwhile Pepsu State and it was stipulated that the conditions of service applicable to them would not be changed to their detriment by any subsequent amendment or change in the rules.
The petitioners, thereafter, served notices of demand Annexures P-8 and P-9 dated 12(sic).
1997 claiming that they were entitled to continue in service upto the age of 60 years, in the light of the provisions of the Act, 1956 as also the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Piara Lal v. State of Punjab & Anr, JT 1997(7) SC 346.
As the notices of demand proved fruitless, the petitioners have come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
This petition came up for hearing on May 18, 1998 and was admitted on that date and ordered to be listed for directions today.
3.
Mr. Anil Sharma, the learned D.A.G., Punjab, representing the State has, however, sought an adjournment so as to enable him to file a reply.
To my mind, this prayer is unjustified in the light of the fact that this petition was admitted almost five months age in the presence of the State Counsel.
Moreover, the matter appears to be concluded in favour of the petitioners by the judgment aforesaid, where in similar circumstances, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the erstwhile employees of the State of PEPSU were entitled to continue in service upto the age of 60 years.
It is evident from the table given in paragraph 2 of the petition that as of today, most of the petitioners have retired from service on attaining the age of 60 years.
Obviously, none of them can be taken back in service, but a direction is nevertheless issued that in case, the details given in paragraph 2 of the petition are found to be correct with respect to the petitioners' tenure of service, they would be deemed to have held or shall continue to hold their posts up to the age of 60 years and shall be entitled to receive their pay and allowances and all other benefits that might follow up to that date.
The claim for back wages will be confined to 38 months and no more from the date of the filing of the writ petition.
It is further directed that balance payment where due would be made to the petitioners in the light of this order within a period of six months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
No costs.
Dasti order.