HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a member of the Scheduled Castes, joined the service of the Punjab Government on February 22, 1969 as a Clerk.
He was thereafter promoted as Senior Assistant and vide order dated March 13, 1993, Annexure P-1, as Superintendent Grade-II in the Directorate of Technical Education against a reserved post.
The Punjab Government constituted a Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training and the services of the petitioner alongwith 15 other employees working under the Directorate were transferred to the Board vide order dated October 20, 1993, Annexure P-2/A These employees thereafter represented to the Board claiming that they be absorbed in the services of the Board or in the alternative be repatriated to the Directorate, their parent employer.
As no decision was taken on their representation, they filed Civil Writ Petition No. 12492 of 1994, which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on August 6, 1996 on the statement made by the learned State Counsel that the petitioner, Joginder Singh and two others would be sent back to the Directorate whereas the other writ petitioners would be absorbed in the services of the Board.
This statement was made by the learned State Counsel in view of the decision taken on May 27, 1996 Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The petitioner was accordingly relieved by the Board and was directed to report for duty in the Directorate.
He reported for duty on June 6, 1998 and on that very day the impugned order, Annexure P-5 was made directing his reversion to the post of Senior Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200, Annexure P-5 has been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
It is the petitioner's case that at the time of his promotion from the post of Senior Assistant to the Superintendent Grade-II on March 13, 1992 vide order, Annexure P-1, four posts of Superintendent Grade-II were available in the Directorate and once having been promoted to one such post, he could not be reverted to the post of Senior Assistant vide the impugned order, Annexure P-5.
3.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondent-State of Punjab and the Director Technical Education, Punjab and it has been pleaded that there was only one post of Superintendent Grade-II in the Directorate but two similar posts had been created by the Government vide decision taken on November 8, 1991, Annexure R-1 with the written statement for the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and that on the constitution of the Board of Technical Education, the petitioner alongwith the post had been transferred to the Board, with the result that only one post of Superintendent Grade-II remained in the Directorate.
The plea further is that as there was only one such post, the same could not be filled up on the basis of reservation and as such the Department had no option but to revert the petitioner, on his repatriation from the Board to the Directorate.
Reliance in this connection has been placed on AS Januja and others v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1996(2) 727 and Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh v. Faculty Association and others, 1998(8) RSJ 671 : 1998(2) SCT 794 (SC).
4.
Mr. Brar, the learned counsel for the petitioner, while relying upon Jagdish Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1997 Supreme Court 2366 : 1998(1) SCT 26 (SC) has argued that the time relevant to the petitioners' promotion was March 13, 1992 and as on that day, four posts of Superintendent Grade-II were available in the Directorate for promotion, the judgments above referred were not applicable in the facts of this case in hand.
5.
As against this, Mr. Sharma, DAG, Punjab, appearing for the respondents, has placed primary reliance on the two judgments referred to above.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
In the Post Graduate Institute's case (supra), it was held as under:  "In a single post cadre reservation at any point of time on account of rotation of roster is bound to bring about a situation where such single post in the cadre will be kept reserved exclusively of the members of the public and cent per cent reservation for the backward classes is not permissible within the constitutional framework.
The decisions of this Court to this effect over the decades have been consistent."
In para 36, it was finally concluded that "there cannot be any reservation in a single post cadre.............. either directly or by device of rotation of roster point."
It is evident from the reply filed by the respondents that the petitioner had been promoted as Superintendent Grade-II on a post that had been created for the State Board of Technical Education and as and when the Board was finally created, the petitioner was transferred to the Board alongwith the post.
It is, therefore, the firm case of the respondents that even on March 13, 1992, there was only one post of Superintendent Grade-II in the Directorate whereas the other posts of Superintendent Grade-II had been created exclusively for the State Board of Technical Education as per Annexure R-1.
In the light of this position, it is apparent that the petitioner could not have been promoted against the solitary post of Superintendent Grade-II.
7.
Mr. Brar's reliance on Jagdish Lal's case (supra) is to no avail as all that this judgment says is that a member of the Scheduled Caste, who had been promoted on the basis of reservation, could not be deprived of the benefit subsequently as that benefit would enure for all time to come.
This judgment does not help the petitioner as the question of reservation in a single cadre post was not in issue.
Moreover, as already held above, the petitioner had been promoted against a post created for the Board of Technical Education and not against the solitary post in the Directorate.
It is, therefore, clear from the judgments rendered in AS Januja's case (supra) and Post Graduate Institute's case (supra) that the petitioner's right to hold the post of Superintendent Grade-II is seriously in doubt.
8.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.