Harjeet Singh Bedi, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4045, 5567-A, 8289, 8456, 10131, 10420,10861, 12540, 15253, of 1989, 1072, 2724, 3029, 3703, 7402, 8014, 2215, 3006 and 8574 of 1990 as common questions of law and fact are involved in all these petitions.
The facts in this judgment have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 5568-A of 1989.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed on 1.6.1954 as a Carpenter in the Bhakra Dam Administration.
On 11th March, 1964, he was offered an alternative appointment in Beas Project, but due to reduction in strength, he was retrenched by the Beas Project on 30th March, 1984.
The petitioner, thereafter, joined on daily wage basis in the Store Division of the respondnent-Board with effect from 171984 and continued to be employed intermittently in various Sub Divisions/Divisions as Carpenter.
Full details regarding the service put in by the petitioner have been provided in paragraph 2A of the writ petition.
It has also been averred in the writ petition that the respondents framed a policy on 8th July, 1988, (Annexure P-1) for the employment of workers who are employed on daily wage basis, wherein it was provided that the seniority of daily rated workmen is required to be prepared and maintained at the Divisional, Sub Divisional and Sectional level, separately.
The challenge in the writ petition to Annexure P-1 has primarily been based on the plea that as per the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the 'Act') and Rule 77 of the Industrial Disputes Rules, 1957 (for short the 'Rules'), the seniority of petitioner ought to have been framed at the Project/Chief Engineer level so that the benefit of the entire service put in a particular project could be availed of by the petitioner.
It has also been prayed in the writ petition that a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner keeping in view his entire service put in a particular project.
3.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondents have stated that the policy Annexure P-1 (Annexure R-1 with the reply) has been framed by the respondents for safeguarding the interest of the daily wagers pursuant to the order passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in Civil Writ Petition No. 27 of 1988 (Ram Payari v. BBMB).
As a consequence of the maintenance of a seniority list, the Board also framed a policy vide Annexure R-2 dated 18111988 wherein instructions were laid down for the conversion of work charged and daily rated staff to regular staff.
4.
Mr. PS Thukral, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that a reading of section 25(G) of the Act and Rule 77 of the Rules would indicate that the seniority has to be determined keeping in view the entire service put in by the petitioner in particular project and is not to be confined to that particular Division alone where the petitioner is presently working.
He has also argued that Annexure P-1 in so far that it provides that the seniority be fixed at the Divisional level is violative of the provisions of section 25(G) of the Act and Rule 77 of the Rules.
Mr. Thukral has also urged that definition of employer as given in section 2(g) of the Act as also in the certified standing orders of the Board would reveal that the Chief Engineer and not the Executive Engineer of the Division, is the employer of the petitioner.
On this basis, it is urged that the seniority has to be maintained at the Chief Engineer or the Project level.
The argument raised is misplaced.
Section 25(G) of the Act and Rule 77 of the Rules do not indicate whatsoever as to the method of determining the seniority.
As a matter of fact, the only instruction giving the method and mode of fixing the seniority is Annexure P-1.
It is true that prior to 181988, the Chief Engineer was the employer as per the certified standing orders, but thereafter the Executive Engineer i.e. the Divisional Head has been made the officer incharge of his respective Division and, as such, the Executive Engineer is the employer of the petitioner.
As the present appointment of the petitioner was made after 181988, the Executive Engineer would be deemed to be the employer of the petitioner.
As various divisions of the Board are spread over the States of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan etc., we are also of the view that the maintenance of the seniority at the Project/Chief Engineer level would make the working of the respondent-Board extremely difficult.
To illustrate : A carpenter working in a Division in Rajasthan would have to be retrenched being junior although the post declared surplus pertained to a Division in Himachal Pradesh.
We are of the view that a Divisional level seniority list is essential to avoid unnecessary complications.
The judgment reported as Ravindra Kumar Srivastava v. Union of India, 1982 Lab.
I.C.
1739 also does not help the case of the petitioner.
As a matter of fact, in some what similar situations, the Allahabad High Court upheld the action of the Executive Engineer, in charge of the district, to terminate the services of the petitioners in that case, as he was held to be the employer.
Admittedly, after 181988, the definition of employer has been amended so as to make the Executive Engineer employer of the petitioner and, as a matter of fact, it is the Executive Engineer alone who has been making the appointments of the daily rated workers in their respective Divisions.
5.
As already indicated above, the policy for maintenance of seniority was framed by the respondents pursuant to the directions issued in Ram Payari's case (supra).
The policy of regularisation (Annexure R-2) was thereafter challenged in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in Kishnoo Ram and others v. Bhakra Beas Management Board and others, C.W.P.
No. 274 of 1990.
The said writ petition was dismissed by the Division Bench vide judgment dated 19th July, 1990.
The maintenance of the seniority list at the Divisional level was approved by the Division Bench and it was categorically held that the instruction for maintenance of seniority of daily rated workers at the Divisional level was good as the method of determining seniority had been adopted by the respondents on the basis of directions of the Himachal Pradesh High Court.
Against the judgment of the Division Bench, Civil Appeal No. 5635 of 1990 arising out of S.L.P.
(Civil) No. 11470 of 1990 was filed, but was disposed of with the following observations :-  "Leave granted.
We have heard counsel on both sides and perused the records.
The High Court by the impugned judgment stated as follows : "In this view of the matter, when the respondents have fully complied with the provisions of section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and have also undertaken to comply with the provisions of Section 25-H of the said Act, petitioners are not entitled to any relief in so far as their claims of regularisation and dispensing with their services as daily rated workmen are concerned.
Counsel appearing for the respondents here submits that the respondents undertake to comply with the aforesaid provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Counsel for the appellant, however, submits that there are vacancies in which appellants can be absorbed on regular basis and without recourse to retrenchment.
This submission, of course, is denied by the respondents, counsel.
In this proceeding it is not possible to determine whether or not the appellants' submission about vacancies is well founded.
Whatever it be, it is open to the appellants to approach the concerned authority in the event of violation of Section 25-F and H of the Industrial Disputes Act in terms of which the respondents undertake to deal with the employees, including the appellants.
In the circumstances, no further order is required in this appeal.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of without any order as to costs."
It is, therefore, evident from the above observations that the seal of approval has impliedly been put by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the maintenance of seniority at the Division level, and explicitly on the policy of regularisation Annexure R2.
6.
The last argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the service of the petitioner has to be regularised keeping in view his entire service rendered in the Project.
As we have already upheld the maintenance of the seniority at the Divisional level, this argument also does not have any force.
While dealing with the question of regularisation of service of the petitioner or similarly situated workers, the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Kishnoo Ram's case (supra) specifically upheld the policy dated 18th November, 1988, appended as Annexure R-2 with the reply.
A reading of para 4(a) of Annexure 'A' appended with Annexure R-2 with the reply would show that daily rate wagers are also entitled to have their services regularised on the fulfilment of certain requirements.
The relevant portion of para 4(a) of the aforesaid Annexure 'A' is reproduced below :  "Vacancies occurring in normal posts may be filled : (i) first from amongst regular employees manning special/other posts including by redeployment of individuals manning other posts of similar nature of equivalent rank and pay structure, (ii) then from amongst the workcharged employees working against special/other posts, and (iii) last of all from amongst the daily rated persons, seniority-cum-merit basis, provided qualification and experience of individuals suit the vacant posts."
As the Himachal Pradesh High Court judgment in Kishnoo ram's case was maintained by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, we are of the view that the services of the petitioner can be regularised only in terms of the policy, Annexure R2, out of the seniority list maintained at the Divisional level as indicated in Annexure P-1.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petitions are without merit and are dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.