RS Mongia, J - The petitioners, who were working as Clerk and Steno-typist in the office of Deputy Commissioner, Chandigarh were appointed as Taxation Inspectors in the Excise and Taxation Department of UT Chandigarh on March 9, 1984 (copy of the order at Annexure P-1).
On September 20, 1997, the Chandigarh Administration vide circular issued by the Finance Secretary, Chandigarh reorganised the Excise & Taxation Department.
All the Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers were designated as Excise and Taxation Officers (in short ETO); meaning thereby that thereafter there was no cadre of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers.
The posts of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers used to be filled under the statutory rules known as Punjab Excise and Taxation Department (State Service class III-A) Rules, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the class III-A Rules).
Rules 5 and 6 of class III-A Rules were in the following terms:-  "5 Method of Recruitment :  Members of the service shall be recruited in the following manner:-  (a) by promotion from the cadres of Excise Inspectors and Taxation Inspectors who have served as such for a period of atleast 3 years.
(b) by transfer of members of the ministerial establishment of the Excise and Taxation Department, Punjab and  (c) competitive examination, the syllabus for which is given in appendix `B' conducted by the commission either separately or jointly with that for recruitment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) and allied Services.
Note :- The candidates who wish to appear in the competitive examination shall have to pay the fees as prescribed in the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Brunch) Rules, 1930;  6.
Appointment to the Service:  When any vacancy occurs, or is about to occur, in the Service, Govt. shall determine in what manner it shall be filled :  Provided that 50 per cent of the vancanies shall be filled by promotion from the cadres of Excise Inspectors and Taxation Inspectors, 50 per cent by transfer of members of the ministerial establishment serving in the Excise and Taxation Department and the remainder, i.e. 25 per cent by direct appointment."
2.
As per the averments, the official respondents were filling the posts of E.T.Os.
by having the people on deputation but were not considering any person for promotion to the said post.
Only in the year 1983 and 1885, four vacancies were filled by promoting the members of the ministerial staff or Excise and Taxation Inspector.
The petitioners filed OA No. 560-CH-1993 before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh, inter alia with a prayer that the official respondents should be directed to fill the post of E.T.Os.
by promotion and not way of deputation.
By an interim order, the Tribunal gave the following directions on June 17, 1993:-  "Short reply on interim relief filed.
In the reply it has been stated that the sanctioned strength of the post of Excise & Taxation Officer, in the department is six and that out of the six posts, three are manned by the promotees of the Excise & Taxation Department, Chandigarh Administration.
Shri Som Parkash who has since been selected from IAS Cadre, was a deputationist.
In the short reply a reference has also been made to the relevant rules and it has been pleaded that the quota of the promotes has already been exhausted.
In the circumstances the interim order already made is modified to the extent that the vacant post will be filled up strictly in accordance with the rules/instructions and after considering the applicant in case he is entitled to be considered under the Rules/instructions and subject to eligibility and suitability."
3.
The OA was allowed vide order dated May 17, 1994, copy annexure P-6.
The Tribunal while deciding the case relied on class III-A Rules, which were applicable for recruitment to the post of A.ETO Perhaps considering that since cadre of A.ETO did not exist any more and all posts had been converted into ETO, the same very Rules, which were for recruitment for the post of A.ETO, would not be applicable to recruitment to the post of ETO Para 6 of the judgment of the Tribunal dated May, 17, 1994, reads as under:-  "Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, after reading the Recruitment Rules extracted above, we are very clear in our mind that appointment by deputation is not permissible method for filling up the vacancies of Excise & Taxation Officers.
The usual method is provided under Rule 5 & 6 extracted above."
4.
Later on two review applications were filed - one by E.T.Os.
from Punjab and other by the official respondents.
The E.T.Os.
from Punjab pleaded that in fact the deputationists be called by the UT Administration not only from the State of Haryana but also from the State of Punjab and the UT Administration submitted that in fact for filling up the post of ETO, the rules which govern the same are Punjab Excise and Taxation Department State Service (Class II) Rules, 1956 and not class III-A Rules.
The review petitions by the UT Administration were allowed whereas the other review petition was dismissed on June 30, 1997, vide order at Annexure P-8, the concluding portion of which reads as under :-  "10.
The observations above, leaves us with no option but to hold that the conclusions arrived at by this Bench in its earlier judgment, have to be withdrawn and set aside as the same are opposed to the law and the rules mentioned above.
We set aside our judgment dated 1751994 which is sought to be reviewed by the applicants, by holding that for appointment to the post of Excise & Taxation Officer it is Punjab Excise and Taxation Department (State Service Class-II) Rules, which are applicable.
The appointment to the post is covered under the said rules which includes appointment by deputation also and that the applicants cannot be appointed to the post of ETOs in view of existing Rules and thus, their prayer for consideration of their promotion to the post of ETO, has to be rejected."
5.
The petitioners have come up by way of the present writ petition challenging the order at Annexure P-8 passed on the review petition by the Tribunal.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners faintly argued that after the abolition of the cadre of A.ETO, class III-A Rules would still apply for recruitment to the post of E.T.Os.
as class III-A Rules have not been repealed and wherever the words `Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer' occur in class III-A Rules, it should be read as `Excise and Taxation Officer'.
Since these rules do not envisage any appointment to the post of ETO by deputation, the Union Territory Administration is not justified in filling up the post of ETO by deputation from the State of Haryana or the State of Punjab.
However, the learned counsel for the petitioner could not take this argument to a logical conclusion inasmuch there are specific rules for filling the post of E.T.Os., i.e., class II Rules and in the presence of class II Rules dealing with the recruitment to the post of E.T.Os, reference to class III-A Rules would be impermissible.
This is also so because of the observations made by the apex Court in Ram Saran and another v. State of Punjab and others, JT 1991(1) SC 469 : 1991(1) SCT 527 (P&H), that after the abolition of the cadre of the AETOs.
class III-A rules became redundant and inoperative.
7.
Faced with the above situation, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the UT administration is not even applying the class II Rules along with the amendment to class II Rules made by the State of Punjab.
Rules 5 and 6 of class-II Rules prior to the proposed amendment (relevant extract) read as under:  "5.
Members of Service shall be appointed in the following recruitment manner:- (a) xxx (b) xxx (c) In the case of Excise & Taxation Officer - (i) by promotion of Assistant Excise & Taxation Officer having an experience of working on that post for a minimum period of 3 years, or (ii) by competitive examination, the syllabus for which shall be the same as in the case of competitive examination conducted by the Commission for recruitment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) and allied Services; (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of Government of India or of a State Government."
xxx xxx 6.
Appointment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officers -  50% of the vacancies of Excise and Taxation Officers shall be filled by promotion from amongst the Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers and 50% by direct recruitment.
Note: Recruitment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officer by transfer or deputation will be counted towards vacancies reserved for direct recruitment.
The seniority will, however, be determined according to the provisions of rule 12 of the said rules."
8.
It would be seen from the aforesaid rule 5 that it does not talk of promotion from the post of Taxation Inspector or from any ministerial staff.
It may be observed that the Punjab Government had also done away with the cadre of AETOs.
on May 18, 1997, and AETOs.
were redesignated as E.T.Os.
The Punjab Government in order to provide avenues of promotion to subordinate staff including the Excise and Taxation Inspectors proposed the following amendment (relevant extract) to class II Rules:-  "Rules 5.
The members of the service shall be recruited in the following manner, namely:- a. xxx xxx xxx b In the case of an Excise and Taxation Officer.
i. by promotion from amongst the Taxation Inspectors and Excise Inspectors who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of five years; or ii.
by promotion from amongst the Superintendents, Assistant, Accountants and Senior Scale Stenographers working in the Excise and Taxation Commissioners Head Office and in the Divisional and District Offices of the Department of Excise and Taxation Punjab."
9.
The said rules further provided that there will be certain quota for each of the above categories for promotion to the rank of ETO, which is to the following effect:-  "Provided that 50% of the vacancies shall be filled by Direct appointment, 25% by promotion of Taxation Inspectors, 12-1/2% by promotion of Excise Inspectors and 12-1/2% by transfer of members of Ministerial Establishment of the Excise and Taxation Department."
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also referred to a Notification issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, exercising the powers conferred under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India to th effect that the service conditions of the employees of UT Chandigarh will mutatis mutandis be the same as of similar posts in the State of Punjab unless there are specific rules to the contrary.
The relevant extract of the said notification may be reproduced here:-  "2.
Conditions of Service of persons appointed to the Central Civil Services and posts under the administrative control of Administrator :- The conditions of service of persons appointed to the Central Civil Services and posts in Groups A, B, C and D under the administrative control of the Administrator of Union Territory of Chandigarh shall, subject to any other provision made by the President in this behalf, be the same as the conditions of service of persons appointed to corresponding posts in Punjab Civil Services and shall be governed by the same rules and others as are for the time being applicable to the latter category of persons."
11.
On the basis of the amendment to the class II rules by the State of Punjab, which were actually made applicable to the staff of the Excise and Taxation Department including Excise and Taxation Inspector in the State of Punjab read with Notification dated January 13, 1992 (supra), learned counsel for the petitioner argued that out of total six posts of the E.T.Os.
in the UT cadre, 50% have to be filled by way of promotion from amongst the eligible categories and the respondents cannot fill all the posts by transfer or deputation.
12.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for UT Chandigarh and the private respondents argued that the amendment by the State of Punjab in class II Rules was only at the draft rule stage and had not actually been brought about and the amendment to the rules had not been notified so far and the question of applying the same to the Taxation Inspector and other ministerial staff in the UT did not arise.
Therefore, under the unamended class II Rules as they exist, Taxation Inspectors is not one of the categories which can be considered for promotion to the post of ETO In reply to this argument, learned counsel for the petitioner cited Ram Saran Dass' case (supra) of the apex Court in which it was noticed that the State of Punjab had decided to adopt and apply the draft provisions of rule 5 in the matter of filling up the vacancies in the cadre of Excise and Taxation Officers before the rules could be formally promulgated.
The apex Court applied the proposed amendment to the Rules to the Taxation Inspectors and the ministerial staff in the Excise and Taxation Department of the State of Punjab on the aforesaid ground.
It is by now well settled that if a conscious decision is taken to apply even the draft rules, that would take the shape of executive instructions till the rules are formally promulgated and, therefore, can be made applicable.
In view of the judgment of Ram Saran Dass' case (supra), no doubt is left that the amendment to class II Rules brought about by the State of Punjab was made applicable to the Taxation Inspectors and ministerial staff in the State of Punjab for purpose of promotion to the post of ETO This was so because class III-A Rules had become redundant after the abolition of the cadre of AETOs.
Once we hold that the amendment to the class-II Rules in the State of Punjab is applicable to the employees like Taxation Inspector and other ministerial staff in the State of Punjab, then by virtue of the notification dated January 13, 1992, issued by the Government of India regarding the employees of UT Chandigarh, all the service conditions applicable to Taxation Inspectors in the State of Punjab would be ipso facto applicable to the Taxation Inspectors of UT Chandigarh.
The Tribunal while holding that class II Rules would be applicable for promotion to the rank of ETO did not refer to the aforesaid amendment as perhaps the same was not brought to its notice.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and hold that Punjab Excise and Taxation Department State Service (Class II) Rules, 1956, read along with the amendment as noticed above, which are applicable to the Taxation Inspectors and other Ministerial Staff in the State of Punjab, would be applicable for filling up the posts of E.T.Os.
in UT Chandigarh.
The post by promotion would be filled as per the percentage mentioned in the amendment amongst the different categories.
We are told that out of six posts of Excise and Taxation Officers, two are being held by the pormotees.
As per the rules, out of the six posts three posts can be held by the promotees in the ratio amongst the different categories mentioned in rules.
The writ petition is allowed to the extent that the order of the Tribunal dated June 30, 1997, copy annexure P-8 would stand modified to the above extent.
The official respondents are directed to fill in the post of E.T.Os.
by promotion as indicated above.
Petition allowed.