VK Bali, J - Whether correction of an apparent clerical mistake that may result only in showing the correct position as it always was, but may incidentally appear to be adversely affecting a citizen, needs hearing from such a person, is a question.
Before, however, we may delve upon the point posed above, it would be useful to extract brief facts of the case giving rise to the present petition which has been filed by Harbans Lal, a Junior Engineer, ME, Sub Station, P.S.E.B., Kartarpur, District Jalandhar.
2.
Petitioner pleads that he was appointed as Store Attendant on work-charge basis on May 5,1976.
He was given regular appointment as Peon in ME Sub Division, Batala on August 20, 1976 and on September 1, 1980 he was transferred to ME Sub Division, Hoshiarpur.
On December 24, 1985 he was promoted as Test Mechanic and posted at Kapurthala.
His name was shown at Sr. No. 222 in the seniority list of Test Mechanics from December 31, 1986 to March 31, 1993.
On December 24, 1997 petitioner was promoted as Junior Engineer.
It is further the case of petitioner that he was asked to hand over the charge of Junior Engineer without any order on February 12, 1998.
He requested to supply a copy of reversion order but the same was not supplied.
Aggrieved, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4652 of 1998 which came up for hearing before the Division Bench consisting of NK Sodhi and KS Kumaran, JJ.
and was disposed of with a direction to the respondents to supply copy of reversion order to the petitioner.
Pursuant to order aforesaid, Petitioner was supplied copy of order dated March 24, 1998, Annexure P-5 and it is this order that has been challenged in the present petition.
3.
In the order, Annexure P-5, dated March 24, 1998 it has been mentioned that the service particulars of the petitioner were called from the Superintending Engineer and as per particulars so sent, seniority of the petitioner was fixed at No. 222 vide office memo dated February 17, 1995.
On the basis of the aforesaid seniority number, petitioner was promoted from the post of Test Mechanic to that of Junior Engineer.
However, it has been brought to the notice of the office that the seniority of petitioner was wrong because he joined the Board on August 20, 1976 as a Peon and not as a Lab Attendant.
Therefore, his correct seniority comes at Sr. No. 250(B) and not at No. 222.
It has further been mentioned that the person at Seniority No. 250(B) of Test Mechanic is not due for further promotion to the post of Junior Engineer and, therefore, the petitioner, who was promoted as Junior Engineer, on the basis of his seniority No. 222, is reverted to the post of Test Mechanic and posted as Test Mechanic under the Superintending Engineer, PSEB, Jalandhar.
4.
Mr. Dadwal, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that order, Annexure P-5, which has adversely affected the service career of the petitioner, came to be passed without observing the principles of natural justice inasmuch as he was not heard in the matter before the impugned order was passed and for that reason alone, order needs to be quashed.
For his afore-stated contention, he has relied upon some judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as also this Court.
5.
While giving his service particulars, petitioner himself states that he was appointed as Store Attendant on May 5, 1976 on work charge basis and was given regular appointment on the post of Peon on August 20, 1976.
It could not be disputed during the course of arguments that if seniority list was prepared on the basis that petitioner came to be appointed as Store Attendant/peon on August 20, 1976, then his seniority would be at No. 250(B) and not at No. 222.
It could, thus, not be disputed that petitioner was shown in the seniority list at Sr. No. 222 on account of an apparent clerical mistake.
We invited learned counsel for the petitioner to say anything that he could if before passing order, Annexure P-5, he was to be heard that may even remotely suggest that the order, Annexure P-5 could not sustain.
But for repeatedly saying that it was too well settled principle of law that a citizen has to be heard in the matter before an order adversely affecting him is passed, the counsel could not take the matter any further.
No precedent has, however, been cited before us where it might have been held that before making a correction of an apparent mistake, that may in turn adversely affect a citizen, concerned person has to be heard in the matter.
6.
This Court has given its conscious thought to the question posed for an answer but is of the considered view that hearing is required only if by a conscious order rightly or wrongly, an order adversely affecting a citizen is passed.
Even a post-facto hearing in such an order may not cure the basic defect but when only a correction is made in the records that may incidentally affect a citizen, who on account of such mistake, had already taken undue or uncalled for advantage, prolonging the issue by hearing such a person, would be only perpetuating injustice.
After all, the petitioner was wrongly promoted at the cost of some one who would have been promoted if correct seniority was shown.
Further, in such matters, quashing the order and hearing the person and then repeating the same order would be an exercise in futility.
As a matter of fact, such orders do not in reality adversely affect a citizen.
Such orders do not recognise a stark reality which cannot be questioned on any grounds conceivable under the sun.
As mentioned above, learned counsel for the petitioner was unable to detract from the merits of order, Annexure P-5 on any grounds whatsoever.
Finding no merits in this petition, we dismiss the same at motion stage itself, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.