Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral)- The State of Punjab has filed this Letters Patent Appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge by which the claim of writ petitioner for the grant of leave encashment, restoration of cut in pension and the payment of retiral benefits had been up-held.
The petitioner himself having expired, his legal representatives are on record as respondents.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Baba Shiv Singh had retired from Government service as a District Inspector of Schools of July 9, 1954.
He had approached this Court with a prayer for the grant of following reliefs:  (i) He was entitled to be paid cash equivalent in respect of earned leave to the extent 240 days at the time of his retirement.
(ii) The restoration of the cut in pension imposed on account of the payment of gratuity with effect from September 30, 1997.
(iii) Grant of retiral benefits in accordance with the instructions contained in the letter dated July 9, 1985 wef.
March 31, 1985.
3.
The respondent's claim was contested by the State Government on the ground that the provision for leave encashment was only available to persons who had retired on January 31, 1978 or thereafter.
With regard to the restoration of full pension and the removal of the cut imposed on account of payment of gratuity, it was pleaded that the decision had been taken by the State Government on January 1, 1988 and the payment was released to the officer after that date.
In so far as the entitlement of the employee to the redetermination of pension with the grant of dearness pay is concerned, it was claimed that the benefits is admissible only to the persons who had retired on or after the prescribed date.
The learned Single Judge negatived the contentions raised on behalf of the department and accepted the claim of the writ petitioner.
Hence this appeal.
4.
On behalf of the appellants, it has been contended that in view of the later decisions of the Apex Court, the judgment of the learned Single Judge which is based on the decision in DS Nakara & ors. v Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130 cannot be sustained.
Consequently, the reliefs as claimed by the respondent were not admissible to him.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants has been controverted by the counsel for the respondent.
5.
Admittedly, the provision for leave encashment had been introduced in the year 1978 and was admissible in case of employees who had retired on or after September 30, 1977.
Similarly, the provision for restoration of full pension had been made in the year 1988.
Even the provision for treating a portion of the dearness allowance as pay in respect of government servants had been made only in respect of the employees who retired on or after March 31, 1985.
It has been shown on behalf of the respondent that the cut-off dates fixed by the department were arbitrary or unfair, still further, it is not disputed that the concept of leave encashment did not exist prior to its introduction in the year 1978.
Still further, the view taken by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in DS Nakara's case (supra) has been re-considered in the following decisions:-  (i)Krishan Kumar v Union of India and others, 1990(4) SCC 207.
(ii) Indian Ex-Services League & ors. v Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 468 (SC).
(iii)State of West Bengal etc. v. Ratan Bihari Dey and ors., 1994(1) SCT 96 (SC).
(iv) State of UP v. UP University Colleges Pensioners Association, 1994(3) SCT 659 (SC).
(v)Union of India v. PW Menon & ors., JT 1994(3) SC 26.
(vi)State of Rajasthan v. Sevanivatra Karamchari Hitkari Samit, JT 1995(2) SCT 682 (SC).
6.
In view of these decisions, it is permissible for the State to accord a differential treatment to the retired employees on the basis of the date of retirement.
That being so, the view taken by the learned Single Judge cannot be sustained.
7.
In view of the above, the appeal is allowed.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is reverted and the writ petition is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.