Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as Director Ayurveda in the State of Haryana.
Vide memorandum dated 2511995, a copy of which has been produced on record Annexure P-4 with the Writ Petition, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet.
It was inter alia alleged that he had gone to the "residence of Mr. Naresh Attray at Karnal and demanded a sum of Rs. 50,000/- as illegal gratification for renewal" of the licence granted to Attray Pharmaceutical, Karnal.
He has also threatened to cancel the licence.
An amount of Rs. 10,000/- was allegedly paid to the petitioner.
It has been further mentioned that there is an audio cassette which indicates that the petitioner had made a demand.
The petitioner did not file a reply.
On 181995, the Government appointed an Officer to hold an enquiry into the matter.
2.
During the pendency of the proceedings, the petitioner was prematurely retired from service vide order dated 6121995.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No. 7342 of 1997.
While the writ petition is still pending he has again approached the Court through this petition to challenge the validity of the charge-sheet issued to him.
He prays that the memorandum of charges and the order vide which the Enquiry Officer was appointed (copies of which documents have been produced as Annexures P-4 and P-3 respectively) be quashed.
3.
We have heard Mr. Jaspal Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has contended that in view of the fact that the petitioner has already retired from service, the enquiry proceedings cannot be continued against him.
4.
This contention cannot be accepted.
Admittedly, the petitioner was charge- sheeted while he was still in service.
Even an Enquiry Officer had been appointed during his continuance in service.
No order for dropping the proceedings had been passed by the Government even when it had decided to prematurely retire the petitioner.
There is nothing to show that the proceedings were not to be continued.
5.
Mr. Jaspal Singh submits that the action is wholly without jurisdiction.
Is it so ?
6.
It is admitted by the learned counsel that the petitioner's Provisional pension' has been sanctioned.
His gratuity has not yet been released.
It is thus clear that the Government has still to decide as to whether or not, the petitioner is entitled to the release of full retiral benefits.
To decide this issue, the Government, in our view, is entitled to complete the enquiry and to find out as to whether or not, the petitioner's conduct had been worthy of the office held by him.
If it is found that the petitioner's performance was not satisfactory, it would be open to the authority to proceed in accordance with the rules and to decide as to whether or not a cut should be imposed on the petitioner's pension.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the action is without jurisdiction.
7.
Mr. Jaspal Singh has referred to the decision of this Court in HS Kaushik v. State of Haryana, 1991(2) R.S.J.
499.
In this case it was inter alia observed that "after having taken the decision to order compulsory retirement, it was not fair for respondent No. 1 to proceed to issue charge-sheet to the Petitioner".
The charge-sheet was issued on 2311986.
The officer was prematurely retired on 2211985.
Thus, the proceedings had been initiated against the officer after he had been retired.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
It also deserves mention that a Ful Bench of this Court in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) Recent Services Judgments 543 : 1994(1) SCT 563 (P&H)., has while considering the provisions of Rule 2.2(b) of Punjab Civil Service Rules, inter alia upheld the Government's right to continue with the disciplinary proceedings "If initiated before superannuation as if the officer was in service".
Their Lordships were pleased to observe that from a plain reading of the rules, it would be reasonable to infer that power to impose reduction in retiral benefits "can only be exercised if in a departmental or judicial proceedings the retiree is found guilty of grave misconduct ........" Thus the enquiry proceedings can be legally continued against the officer even if he has been prematurely retired from service.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere with the impugned charge-sheet or the proceedings.
Resultantly the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.