Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Deputy Commandant in the Central Reserve Police Force, prays that the adverse remarks recorded against him be ordered to be expunged and that the respondents be directed to promote him to "the post of Second-in-Command..... with effect from 11121992 i.e. the date when juniors.... were promoted."
A few facts as relevant for the decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Deputy Commandant in the Central Reserve Police Force in the year 1974.
On February 14, 1989, the petitioner had carried out an operation against the terrorists in Ajnala Sub Division.
His performance was commended.
The Department conveyed appreciation of him vide letters dated September 21, 1990 and November 15, 1990.
At about the same time, the petitioner was communicated adverse remarks vide letters dated February 12, 1990 and February 13, 1991.
Copies of the two communications are at Annexures P.5 and P.6 with the writ petition.
On receipt of these communications, the petitioner represented.
These representations were considered.
Vide letter dated February 14, 1991, the petitioner was conveyed the decision regarding his representation of June 20, 1990.
The remarks recorded against him were partly expunged.
Vide letter dated June 15, 1991, he was informed that his representation against the remarks communicated vide letter dated February 13, 1991 had been rejected.
Undaunted, the petitioner persisted.
He submitted a representation on September 30, 1991.
He sent a reminder.
Vide letter dated July 1, 1992, the petitioner was informed that the remarks had been partly expunged.
On October 28, 1992, the Departmental Promotion Committee met to consider the claims of Deputy Commandants for promotion to the post of Second-in-Command.
The petitioner's claim was considered.
His name was, however, not brought on the panel.
3.
The petitioner complains that the adverse remarks had been recorded against him on account of extraneous considerations and that he has been arbitrarily superseded.
In particular, the petitioner has alleged that "Shri JR Soni (respondent No. 4) levelled baseless charges against" him.
In paragraph 5, the petitioner has reiterated that "the adverse remarks recorded by Shri JR Soni (respondent No. 4)" were "for the reasons other than the administrative or the working of ...." The petitioner further alleges that there was no material on the basis of which the remarks could be sustained.
In fact, he had been conveyed appreciation letters by the Inspector General as well as the Additional Director General.
According to him, the remarks had not been recorded "on the basis of the performance".
Since the remarks were not validly recorded, the petitioner maintains that the Departmental Promotion Committee had arbitrarily over-looked him for promotion.
On these premises, the petitioner prays that the remarks be ordered to be expunged and that the respondents should be directed to promote him with effect from the date the persons junior to him had been promoted.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by Mr. Swaran Singh, the Additional Deputy Inspector General of Police, Group Centre, CRPF Pinjore.
It has been inter alia averred that the remarks had been recorded on the basis of the material on the record and that the Departmental Promotion Committee had considered his claim and found him to be unfit for promotion.
It has been stated that the petitioner's record for the preceding five years was scrutinised and he was found unfit for promotion.
On these premises, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
5.
Mr. Hemant Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the remarks were based on wholly extraneous considerations and that the authorities had erred in partly rejecting his representation.
He further contends that since the remarks were not based on an objective assessment of his performance, even the consideration of his claim for promotion by the Departmental Promotion Committee is vitiated.
On these premises, the counsel maintains that the relief as prayed for in the writ petition deserves to be granted.
6.
Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta, Senior Standing Counsel appears for the respondents and controverts the claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Can the adverse remarks recorded against the petitioner be sustained ?
Normally, this court would be reluctant to interfere with the remarks recorded by the competent authority.
It is the prerogative of the employer to assess the performance of the employee and to record its opinion.
Still further, it may not be normally possible for the employer to support every remark by tangible evidence, as, in the very nature of things, concrete material may not be available with regard to everything.
A man's reputation may be extremely bad.
Yet, there may be no material on the file to support an adverse remark about the reputation.
In spite of this, whenever it is found that the remars have been recorded in a totally arbitrary manner or on account of extraneous considerations, the writ court shall not be precluded from interfering or reviewing the matter.
8.
What is the position in the present case ?
The petitioner had been communicated the following remarks vide communication dated February 12, 1990 :-  "(i) You possess wavering loyalty.
Your egoism, whims and fancies, obstinate nature and ill mannerism plays a key role in that; (ii) You display immaturity and insobriety while dealing with superiors and in performance of duties.
(iii) Your initiative, drive and determination require improvement as at times found to be lacking.
You have wavering and flinching determination.
(iv) Your work attitude is slow, casual and not result-oriented.
(v) Your ability to work in a team is not upto the desired level.
(vi) You have average intelligence.
At times failed to assess the situations well and did not suitably respond.
(vii) You are always critical of superiors, argumentative and obstinate and do not hesitate to use unparliamentary language.
(viii) Your relations with subordinates is loose and you try to win them over by adopting cheap and unofficer like methods.
(ix) You are just about an average officer.
Your performance is below the desired level.
Your behaviour too is below the norms of officership.
When advised to improve upon you try to create scandalous atmosphere in the unit.
You do not attend PT and avoid operational commitments.
You should try to avoid use of slang, abusive and unparliamentary language towards your superiors and show sufficient maturity and sobriety.
(x) You at times avoided your commitments as AC (Ops) against extremism.
Even when a section of the unit came under heavy fire by extremists you did not move and even disobeyed the orders of the Commandant to do so.
(xi) You are temperamental and need proper tackling."
Thereafter, vide letter dated February 13, 1991, the petitioner was conveyed the following adverse remarks :-  "Fitness for promotion  Not yet fit for promotion."
He had represented.
Vide order dated February 14, 1991, the petitioner was informed as under :-  "Having carefully examined the representation of the officer, comments of both the Reporting and Reviewing officers and the relevant records, I found the remarks against Srl.
No. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9 & 10 as mentioned in para 1 above, are motivated and not based on facts.
The Reporting Officer as well as the Reviewing Officer have not brought out any tangible facts to substantiate these remarks.
Therefore, I order expunction of these remarks.
They are further substituted/modified as under :-  Sl.
1 Loyal Sl.
2 Sober and mature Sl.
7 Satisfactory Sl.
8 Good Sl.
9 Nil Sl.
10 Nil Remarks against Srl.
No. 3, 4, 5, 6, & 11 as mentioned in para 1 of this order, are based on facts and I, therefore, order retention of these remarks in the ACR of Shri Gian Singh Asstt.
Commandant, for the period from 20.8.1988 to 3131989."
9.
Even though his representation against the remarks conveyed vide letter dated February 13, 1981 was rejected, the petitioner had submitted a representation dated September 30, 1991 to challenge the orders by which his claim for expunction of all the adverse remarks had been partly rejected.
The decision was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated July 1, 1992.
The remarks that "he is temperamental and needs proper tackling" and "not yet fit for promotion" were expunged.
10.
A perusal of the above facts shows that according to the Inspector General of Police himself, the remarks against the petitioner were "motivated and not based on facts."
It was further observed that "the Reporting officer as well as the Reviewing officer have not brought out any tangible facts to substantiate the remarks".
Thus, the authority was satisfied that the remarks against the petitioner were not based on an objective consideration and that there was no material at least in respect of some of the adverse comments.
Still further, the next higher authority viz. the Director General had considered it appropriate to again interfere and remove two out of the remaining six adverse comments.
When considered in totality, it is apparent that out of the 12 adverse comments that had been made on the petitioner's performance, the authorities had found it necessary to expunge eight.
11.
The petitioner alleges that the remarks were based on extraneous considerations.
In fact, in paragraph 3 of the writ petition, it has been averred that the "remarks in the second half of the annual confidential report were due to the vindictive attitude of Shri JR Soni."
It has been further averred that the remarks were conveyed after almost a year.
These averments have not been controverted.
The officer has not filed a reply in spite of the fact that he had been impleaded by name.
The allegations have not been denied by him.
Still further, it is established on the record that the petitioner's performance on December 14, 1989 had been commended.
It was observed that his "brave action and leadership was responsible for the spectacular success".
By another letter of November 15, 1990, the petitioner was informed that the party under his command had "reached the place of encounter and displayed courage and operational skill... During this encounter, four dreaded terrorists were killed and four AK 47-rifles, one rocket launcher with 2 shells, one 7.62mm Chinese made pistol were recovered with large quantity of ammunitions."
These letters of appreciation relate to the petitioner's performance during the period for which the adverse remarks had been recorded.
If the petitioner had shown bravery and displayed courage as well as operational skill, it cannot be understood as to how he can be described as wavering in his loyalty or lacking in initiative, drive and determination.
Still further, if the authorities themselves were satisfied that the adverse comments were motivated and were not based on facts, it would not be safe to sustain the adverse remarks recorded against the petitioner.
12.
On a cumulative consideration of the matter, it appears that the adverse remarks against the petitioner were recorded arbitrarily and, thus, deserve to be quashed.
13.
It was then contended that since the petitioner was superseded on account of the adverse comments, the respondents should be directed to reconsider his claim for promotion w.e.f.
November 1992 when persons junior to him had been promoted.
Mr. Mohunta contests this claim on the ground that the Departmental Promotion Committee had considered the petitioner's record for the preceding five years and declared him unfit for promotion.
14.
It is undoubtedly correct that in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been specifically averred that the Committee had considered the petitioner's record of service for the preceding five years.
However, nothing has been pointed out to show that there were any adverse comments on the petitioner's record of service except the remarks which have been mentioned above.
Still further, even from the record, nothing has been pointed out to show that the petitioner had been communicated any adverse remarks on an earlier occasion.
Irrespective of that, the fact remains that the remarks recorded for a part of the year 1988-89 were adverse.
These adverse comments could have weighed with the Departmental Promotion Committee in declaring him to be unsuitable.
15.
In view of the finding that the adverse comments cannot be sustained, it would only be fair that the Committee reconsiders the petitioner's case in the light of the changed record.
It is, accordingly, directed that the petitioner's case for promotion w.e.f.
November 1992 when persons junior to him were promoted, shall be considered afresh in the light of the changed situation.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
The impugned orders, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P.5 and P.6, are quashed.
In the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.