VK Bali, J (Oral) - Challenge herein is to selection and appointment of respondents 4 to 19.
2.
The facts of the case, as projected in the petition, reveal that the National Fertilizers Limited - respondent No. 1 herein requisitioned candidates with BCom.
qualification from Employment Exchange, Nangal in first half of 1995.
In the second half of 1995 the candidates were sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
Respondent No. 1 then required the candidates to fill bio-data forms for scrutiny and in November/December, 1996, it engaged a Madras based agency for conducting competitive written test in commerce and general aptitude.
On February 23, 1997 competitive written test was conducted by the Agency with fictitious roll numbers and on February 24, 1997 the merit list based on the said test was given by the Agency to respondent no. 1 which displayed the merit list of 54 candidates on notice board on March 23, 1997.
It is then pleaded that the Personnel Department proposed the constitution of Selection Committee for approval by the Executive Director, vide Annexure P-1 dated April 2, 1997.
The Executive Director, who was about to retire, did not approve and passed unprecedented orders after eight days that Committee Members would be decided one day before the interview and verbally informed the name of the Chairman to the Deputy GM (P&A) on April 10, 1997.
No formal decision regarding members of the Selection Committee was taken and a sham interview was held and selection to fill nine posts was arbitrarily made by ignoring merit list drawn on the basis of the Competitive Written Test.
On April 29, 1997 selection of respondents 4 to 19 was approved.
The Executive Director superannuated on April 30, 1997 and after that on May 5, 1997 petitioners through their counsel, issued registered notice to respondent No. 1 to fill the posts strictly in accordance with the merit list prepared on the basis of Competitive Written Test.
No response was received by the petitioners to this legal notice and selected candidates were required to join on June 2, 1997.
The petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 7995 of 1997 seeking quashing of selection of respondents 4 to 19 on May 30, 1997 wherein notice of motion was issued for July 4, 1997.
During the pendency of the writ petition aforesaid, it is further the case of petitioners, name of respondent no. 7 was added by tampering with the select list and appointment letters were issued to respondents 7 and 12, who joined on September 1, 1997.
The writ came up for hearing on November 26, 1997 and the same was dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to file fresh on the same cause of action after arraying the selected candidates as party-respondents.
3.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court, respondents have entered defence.
Separate written statements on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 and 19 have been filed.
Petitioners have filed rejoinder to the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3.
4.
This matter came up for hearing on July 28, 1998 and after hearing arguments at some length, the Court directed the official respondents to produce the records to find out as to when the selection criteria, as mentioned in para 6 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondent no. 2, was laid down.
It may be mentioned here that it was and continues to be the contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that no criteria for interview was at all laid down and that the selection committee was not properly constituted.
Pursuant to our directions given on July 28, 1998, the entire records of selection have been produced.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through their pleadings with accompanying documents as also records as summoned by the Court.
6.
Before, however, the points canvassed by learned counsel for the petitioners are noted, it would be appropriate to notice the defence projected in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pleaded in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 3 that selection was made strictly on merit and without any extraneous considerations.
The written test was not the sole criteria for selection for the post as due weightage for qualification i.e., marks obtained in BCom.
and performance in the vica-voce/interview was also (to) be taken into consideration.
The petitioners are local candidates and their parents have also been serving under the respondent No. 1.
They put undue influence for their selection.
It, however, did not work.
Despite that, the petitioners were able to manage certain documents including office notings which are confidentialin nature, from which it could be ascertained that since the petitioners were able to obtain confidential documents, they could influence the agency conducting the written test as well.
The candidates, who were having good marks in BCom.
and also those candidates who performed very good/excellently in the interview scored higher marks from each member of the selection committee and thereby they surpassed those candidates who scored a little higher marks in the test.
The variation in the test performance was not significant as it ranged from 62% (lowest) and 73% (highest) in respect of general candidates.
It has been denied that respondent No. 7 was not in the original selection list as his name was already in the selection list at Sr. No. 4.
Insofar as constitution of the selection committee is concerned, it is the case of the respondents that the said Committee is to be constituted by the Competent Authority and it has to include at least five members, out of which at least two members had to be drawn from the discipline in which recruitment is to be made.
In addition, one officer from Personnel Department has to be invariably associated with the Selection Committee as Member Secretary.
Where selection is to be made for reserved category, an officer of appropriate status belonging to SC/ST communities is also to be included as a member.
For a selection to the post carrying pay scale of 1060-1870 a representative of appropriate status from other units is to be coopted as a member in addition to representative of the Head office.
While making recruitment of apprentices/trainees, a representative from Head Office has to be associated with the Selection Committee.
Further, in respect of recruitment to Class-III (Group C) and Class IV (Group D) posts (including recruitment of Apprentices/Trainees) a representative of the State Government has invariably to be associated in the Selection Committee.
The Selection Committee would then recommend the names of the candidates in order of merit, who, in their opinion, were suitable for the post in terms of the prescribed specifications and merit adjudged on the basis of interview/or test conducted for the purpose.
It is the case of the respondents that Selection Committee was constituted in accordance with the rules governing the field.
It has further been pleaded that the main object of written test is to shortlist the deserving candidates for the limited posts when the applicants are in large number.
After the initial screening, the successful candidates appeared before the Selection Committee for interview/viva-voce for adjudging their suitability.
The allegations of extraneous and mala fide considerations have been denied.
It has further been pleaded that the question paper of written test was an objective type without any negative marking and after short listing the candidates an oral test in the shape of interview was held by the duly constituted selection committee to adjudge the suitability after evaluating professional knowledge, general aptitude etc. For that specific selection, 20% weightage was given to the candidates for qualification on the marks obtained in BCom.
examination, 40% for performance in the written test and remaining 40% were further split up in different heads, i.e., 20% for knowledge relating to accounts, 10% for general knowledge and 10% for general aptitude/personality test.
Based upon the aforesaid criteria, the final merit was prepared and accordingly the candidates were selected in order of merit by adjudging their over-all performance.
Insofar as conducting the test by a public agency is concerned, it is the case of the respondents that ten different parties who were enlisted with respondent No. 1 were contacted for conducting the written test of various categories for the Technical and non- technical posts.
In the present case, M/s Management Information Services, Madras which offered the lowest rates, was assigned the task.
After the written test by the independent and impartial outside authority, the interview was held which was not a sham formality.
A fair opportunity was given to each candidate called for interview in a logical and methodological manner to adjudge the general knowledge, adaptability, aptitude etc.
The selection was made strictly on merit and without any extraneous considerations.
7.
Respondents 2 and 19 have filed separate written statements.
There is no need to mention the averments made in the written statements filed by the said respondents as a detailed written statement has been filed by respondents 1 and 3, contents whereof have been detailed above.
8.
In the context of the written statement that has been filed by respondents 1 and 3, we do not find any merit in any of the contentions raised by learned counsel for the petitioners.
The respondents have made a chart of the candidates, who have been selected.
If the written test was of 80% and 10% marks were allocated for higher qualifications and 10% marks were allocated for interview, as per the chart, mention whereof has been made above, and the authenticity of which could not be disputed, by and large, same candidates would have been selected, who have been selected now.
That in itself sufficiently knocks out the allegation of the petitioner with regard to bias in interview.
Further, from the records that have been shown to us, we are of the view that selections were made on merits and not on account of any extraneous considerations as is the allegation made by the petitioners.
Insofar as constitution of Selection Committee is concerned, it is not fair for the petitioners at this stage to challenge the same having participated in the selection process and having failed to secure a position that may be commensurate to the vacancies available.
That apart, nothing at all has been pointed out from where it could be made that the Committee was not properly constituted.
Insofar as Selection Committee having been appointed a day in advance to the interview is concerned, we rather find that it was commendable.
By that process, the scope of canvassing was minimized.
It may be recalled at this stage that quite a few petitioners are close relatives of employees of respondent No. 1 and it has been specifically pleaded by respondent No. 1 that they were trying to exert influence for selection of their wards.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same in limine, leaving however, the parties to bear their own costs.