Gitesh Ranjan Bhattacharjee, J - The petitioner's grievance in this case is against the letter dated 6.12.1996 Annexure 'B' at page 15 of the writ petition issued by the Secretary, Hijli Junior Technical School where the petitioner is an assistant teacher serving since 1966.
In the said letter the Secretary of the said school, the Managing Committee of which is respondent No. 4 in this writ petition says that the petitioner had taken excess leave for 196 days approximately and proposes to make pay-cut for the same.
The petitioner then wanted to know from the school authorities as to how it was calculated that he was absent unauthorisedly for 196 days in excess of the leave admissible to him, by his letter dated 12121996 part of Annexure 'B' at page 16.
As the petitioner was not informed anything and the respondents proceeded to enforce pay-cut for the alleged period of absence in excess of admissible leave, the petitioner moved this Court.
An affidavit-in-opposition was affirmed on behalf of the respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
In the affidavit-in- opposition also the respondents state that the petitioner was absent for 196 days unauthorisedly and therefore the salary given to him for that period is liable to be deducted.
Unfortunately it has not been disclosed to the petitioner in any notice or even before the Court in the affidavit-in- opposition as to what are the materials on the basis of which the calculation for unauthorised absence of 196 days was made by the authorities concerned.
If really the petitioner enjoyed unauthorised absence for 196 days and if for that, the authorities concerned want to make deduction from the salary of the petitioner, in that case it is the preliminary requirement of the norms of justice that the petitioner must be told as to on what days or on what specific and particular period he was absent without leave.
Nothing has been stated either to the petitioner as to how that calculation was made and nothing has also been disclosed before this Court in the affidavit-in- opposition how the calculation of 196 days absence authority was made.
2.
It is submitted on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner himself could make the calculation by going through the attendance registers of the school.
Well, in the opinion, this cannot be the correct approach.
If the respondents want to make any recovery by deduction of salary of the petitioner for any unauthorised absence, the respondents will have to specifically spell out to the petitioner that he was absent without leave or proper authority on such and such dates or for such and such periods with sufficient particulars identifying such periods, so that the petitioner may know as to how it is stated by the authority that he was unauthorisedly absent for 196 days and in that case if the petitioner is not satisfied with the same he may make a representation before the authority concerned which the authority concerned may consider.
But without doing anything of the sort the respondents cannot be allowed to take action against the petitioner on the mere ipse dixit of the authority concerned without any specific mentioning of the dates or periods that he was absent for 196 days.
The notice issued to the petitioner cannot be sustained and therefore cannot be given effect to, as it is vague and lacks sufficient particulars.
3.
In the circumstances, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned notice dated 6.12.1996 is hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to refund to the petitioner whatever deduction from his salary has been made pursuant to the impugned notice dated 6.12.1996.
Such refund shall be made within two months from the date of communication of this order.
It is however made clear that the respondents will have the liberty to take appropriate action against the petitioner in accordance with law for any unauthorised absence, whatever may be the period of 196 days or otherwise, by giving sufficient particulars about the period of his absence and the calculation of leave granted to him already thereby justifying the charge of unauthorised absence, so that the petitioner may know how the calculation has been arrived at and he may also make representation in the matter to the authorities thereafter if he does not agree with the calculation that may be supplied to him by the respondents for taking action against him in accordance with law.
Thereafter the matter will be dealt with in accordance with law and the respondents will be at liberty to take all appropriate actions against him in accordance with law.
4.
The writ petition stands disposed of.
5.
All parties to act on signed xerox copy of this dictated order on usual undertaking.
Petition allowed.