ML Singhal, J - Petitioner-Nanak Chand, who is working as Safai Mazdur in Municipal Council, Palwal has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to promote him w.e.f.
the date his junior has been promoted.
He was initially appointed as Safai Mazdur in Municipal Council, Palwal on daily wage basis vide annexure P1 w.e.f.
28.11.1978.
Later on, he was appointed on regular basis w.e.f.
26.4.1979.
Annexure P2 is the letter appointing him on regular basis.
In the year 1986, he made an application for promotion as Safai Daroga.
His request was turned down by Deputy Commissioner, Faridabad (respondent No. 3) on the ground that no post was available and as and when any post became available, he would be considered.
Letter Annexure P3 is communication to this effect.
On 3061996, one regular post of Safai Daroga fell vacant due to retirement of an employee of Municipal Council, Palwal.
Respondent No. 5 i.e. Om Parkash was promoted to the post of Safai Daroga vide order Annexure P6 dated 2721997 by respondent No. 4.
Petitioner was not considered for the post of Safai Daroga.
Respondent No. 5 i.e. Om Parkash was much junior to the petitioner.
Petitioner had been working since 1978 and even on regular basis since 1979 on the post of Safai Mazdur, while respondent No. 5 was initially appointed on 3151989 as Safai Mazdur.
He made representation Annexure P7 to Municipal Council, Palwal claiming right to be promoted against the vacancy against which Om Parkash had been promoted but to no effect.
Petitioner through this petition, filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, has prayed for the issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to promote him/consider him for promotion w.e.f.
the date his junior was promoted.
2.
Respondents 1 to 4 contested this petition pleading that only provisional promotion has been made.
S/Shri Atam Parkash, Ram Lal, Ram Chand, Kalu Ram, Kiran, Om Parkash, Manohar Lal, Puran and Karan Singh are senior to the petitioner among the Safai Mazdurs as such the petitioner could make no grievance if Om Parkash respondent No. 5 had been promoted, without impleading Atam Parkash, Ram Lal and others, no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
This petition is premature as without making any representation to the Executive Officer, Secretary or the Administrator of the Municipal Council, he has come to this court for a writ of mandamus.
Petitioner was appointed on probation on 251979.
His services were regularised on 2841980.
3.
Respondent No. 5 contested this petition urging that the petitioner was suspended on account of misconduct on his part and he remained suspended between 191980 to 591980.
In November, 1996, he was also suspended on account of negligence in the performance of his duty and was issued a charge- sheet on 1121996.
It was denied that petitioner was senior-most.
Instead, Atam Parkash, Ram Lal etc. are senior to him.
Safai Mazdurs went on strike in December 1996.
Strike continued upto March 3, 1997.
During this period, the Safai Daroga including the petitioner did not work.
Respondent No. 5 performed duty on almost all those days when petitioner and others were on strike.
Vide order annexure R1, he was asked to perform the duties of Safai Daroga in his pay scale.
4.
Promotion of respondent No. 5 was made by Municipal Council vide Order dated 2721996 Annexure P6 during the period of strike in extraordinary and emergent circumstances.
The situation was so grave that in case immediate steps had not been taken, an epidemic could have spread.
He is workman and the Municipal Council is "industry" within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He has worked for 240 plus days and is governed by the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act.
Similar writ petition has been dismissed on 25111997 by a Division of this court vide order Annexure R5/2.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
6.
In our opinion, the petitioner could not have been denied promotion when he was admittedly senior to respondent No. 5 as Safai Mazdur.
Para 5 of the petition where the relative seniority of the petitioner and respondent No. 5 has been given, has not been denied by the respondents.
Petitioner was senior to respondent No. 5 by almost 10 years.
While promoting respondent No. 5 through order Annexure P6, no reason has been given why the petitioner is not being promoted.
Order Annexure P6 does not indicate that the petitioner's case for promotion was at all considered.
It was submitted by the learned counsel representing respondent No. 5 that the promotion of respondent No. 5 was only provisional.
Be that as it may, respondent No. 5 is working as Safai Daroga appointed w.e.f.
131997 while the petitioner is working as Safai Mazdur which is a lower post.
After petitioner had joined the strikers and remained on strike and respondent No. 5 did not go on strike and working at the risk of his life, that does not mean the petitioner should have been ignored for promotion and respondent No. 5 promoted.
Respondent No. 5 could have been given extra increments for having stood by the Municipal Council in times of strike.
7.
Promotion is a very valuable right.
Every body has a desire to occupy the superior position.
For occupying superior position one toils.
8.
Order Annexure R5/2 dated 25111997 passed by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 12227 of 1997 has no relevance so far as this case is concerned as there the facts were that without advertisement or notice to the public, some persons had been appointed as Safai Sewaks and their appointments were challenged by one Shiv Charan on the ground that no requisition was sent to the Employment Exchange and no advertisement was issued and no notice to the public, was issued.
Eligible candidates were deprived of the chance to apply and be considered.
Those persons had been appointed because they offered their services during the period of strike.
They offered their services to the Municipal Committee at grave risk to their life.
In view of compromise, original incumbents of the post were reinstated.
Those respondents were shown consideration by the State Government as they had stood by it in the hour of need.
As such it was held that there was no cause of grievance to Shiv Charan-petitioner.
In CWP 12227 of 1997 (supra), the facts were quite peculiar not attracting Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In the case in hand, Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India are quite well attracted.
Here is a case of promotion.
Petitioner is far senior to respondent No. 5 who has been promoted without considering the claim of the petitioner for promotion.
So, the promotion of respondent No. 5 is in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
As such the same is quashed.
9.
For the reasons given above, this petition succeeds and the respondents 1 to 4 are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for being promoted to the post of Safai Daroga in place of respondent No. 5.
In case, on such consideration, the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, his promotion will relate back to 131997 in that event.
Petition allowed.