Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Sub Post Master in the Pay Scale of Rs. 1400-2300.
On May 31, 1993, the petitioner was drawing the Basic pay of Rs. 1800/-.
He had to cross the efficiency bar so as to entitle him to the release of the next increment of Rs. 50/-.
His case for being permitted to cross the efficiency bar w.e.f.
June, 1993 was considered and in view of the record of service, it was held that he was not suitable.
The petitioner's case was again considered in the year 1994.
He was again not allowed to cross the efficiency bar w.e.f.
June 1, 1995, and his Basic pay was raised from Rs. 1800/- to Rs. 1850/-.
A copy of the order passed in this behalf has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the present writ petition.
2.
Aggrieved by this order the petitioner approached the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh.
He prayed that the action of the respondent in stopping him at the stage of efficiency bar w.e.f.
June, 1993 and June 1, 1994 be set aside and further that this pay has been wrongly fixed w.e.f.
June 1, 1995 inasmuch as instead of releasing three increments of Rs. 50/- each only one increment was granted to him.
3.
The Tribunal considered the matter and found that during the year 1990 and 1991 `there were as many as 10 disciplinary inquiries initiated against him in which punishment was imposed upon him'.
Thus it was held that the "applicant's contention that he had satisfactory and unblemished service cannot be accepted".
Still further, the Tribunal found that the petitioner's case "for crossing of efficiency bar was considered but rejected by the Departmental Promotion Committees held from time to time and it was only when the Departmental Promotion Committee held on 2891995 found him fit to cross the efficiency bar and that too w.e.f.
1.6.1995 that the impugned order dated 7101995 (A-1) was issued by respondent No. 2".
On this basis it was held that the applicant cannot claim that he had a right to get the Basic Pay of Rs. 1950/- instead of Rs. 1850/-.
Thus the petitioner's claim was rejected.
Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
4.
Mr. Kasturi Lal, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner had a satisfactory service record and that the action of the respondents in stopping the petitioner at the efficiency bar was wholly arbitrary.
Still further learned counsel has submitted that the petitioner was entitled to the release of 3 increments on the passing of the order dated October 7, 1995.
He contends that the action of the Tribunal in rejecting his claim is, thus, vitiated.
Is it so ?
5.
The petitioner has given the list of punishment awarded to him during the year 1990 and 1991 in paragraph No. 4 of the writ petition.
Admittedly, he was awarded the punishment of warning vide letter dated August 6, 1990, the petitioner's one increment was stopped without cumulative effect.
In appeal this order was partially modified and the stoppage of increments was to be operative for 6 months instead of a year.
The petitioner was also awarded certain other penalties vide some other orders.
In appeal the punishment of stoppage of increments was reduced to censure in four cases.
In one case, the appeal was accepted.
Keeping in view the petitioner's record and the totality of the situation it cannot be said that the action of the respondents in stopping the petitioner at the efficiency bar in the year 1993 and 1994 was arbitrary and unfair.
The authority had taken a view which was possible.
6.
Mr. Kasturi Lal, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contended that in the year 1995, when the petitioner was permitted to cross the efficiency bar he should have been given three increments.
7.
The contention is misconceived.
Normally a person working in a particular scale of pay gets an increment at the end of the year on satisfactory performance of duties during the relevant period.
However, in case of increment which falls due at the stage of efficiency bar the authority is entitled to consider and decide as to whether or not an officer/official is fit to cross the bar and get the increment.
In a case where it is found that the record does not warrant the crossing of the bar the increment is not released.
Ultimately, when the official is allowed to cross efficiency bar i.e. the date on which he crosses the bar, he gets the next increment.
In the very nature of things, only one increment and not all have to be granted.
8.
Mr. Kasturi Lal has placed reliance on a decision of a Single Bench of this Court in Dr. RN Arora v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) Recent Services Judgments 358.
In paragraph No. 5, it was observed that on being allowed to cross the efficiency bar the officer "was entitled to have his pay fixed at the stage in the time scale on the basis of his length of service, meaning thereby that all the increments in the time scale were to be released to him and the effect of stoppage at the efficiency bar was only to deprive him of the increments only for the period during which those increments were not released."
Support for this view was drawn from the provisions of Rule 4.8 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume 1 Part-I.
9.
Rule 4.8 inter alia lays down that "the increment next above the bar shall not be given to a Government employee without the specific sanction of the authority empowered to withhold increments under rule 47 or the relevant disciplinary rules applicable to the Government employee.....".
This rule does not provide that on an order for the crossing of efficiency bar being passed even the increments for the period during which the employee was held up at the efficiency bar have also to be released.
The employee does not earn an increment till he crosses the bar.
On passing over the hurdle, he gets the increment.
However, neither on principle nor on the language of the Rule, the employee can claim increment for the period during which he had remained held up at the efficiency bar.
We are unable to sustain the view taken by the learned Judge.
We over-rule the decision.
10.
Mr. Kasturi Lal, counsel for the petitioner also contended that the petitioner's case for crossing the efficiency bar in the year 1993 was not considered in conformity with the instructions and, thus, he should be deemed to have crossed the efficiency bar.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra and others v. Uttamrao Rayala Nikam, 1994 Administrative Tribunal Cases 905.
This was a case where no order had been passed for three years.
The Tribunal took the view that the action was arbitrary.
It was sustained by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
11.
No other point has been raised.
12.
In view of above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.