Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - On June 18, 1995, the appellant-college advertised a post of Lecturer in Commerce.
The respondent was one of the applicants.
Vide letter dated July 12, 1995, he was called for interview.
The Selection Committee met on July 20, 1995.
It recommended the name of the respondent for appointment on purely temporary basis upto 31396 or till fresh selection after the post is readvertised.....The post had actually become available on November 16, 1995.
The offer of appointment was issued to him vide letter dated November 16, 1995.
It was categorically mentioned that the appointment "will be on purely ad hoc basis upto 3131996 and your services can be terminated at any time with 24 hours' notice."
The respondent joined the post.
However, on February 29, 1996, he filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution with a prayer that the appointment "may be treated as regular......and the stipulation fixing the appointment upto 3131996 or to terminate the services on 24 hours' notice at any time be treated as non est and quashed....." The learned Single judge having accepted the prayer, the college and its Principal have filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
2.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
3.
Mr. JR Mittal, counsel for the appellants has vehemently contended that the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge are beyond the pleas raised by the respondent in the writ petition.
Thus, the order passed by the learned Single Judge cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants was controverted by Mr. BS Walia who appeared for the respondent.
4.
The respondent had approached this Court with the plea that he had applied "for the regular post of Lecturer in Commerce."
He was "selected against that post."
However, since "respondent No. 5, daughter of respondent No. 6 could not appear in the interview....it was observed that none of the candidates was found suitable for regular appointment......therefore, ad hoc appointment was given......" Thus, it was the petitioner's case that appointment had been given to him on ad hoc basis as respondent No. 5 who was the daughter of the Principal, had not been able to appear in the interview.
However, the learned Single Judge, on examination of the matter has held as under :-  "After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the considered view that the petitioner was appointed on regular basis and later on in order to harm his interest and in order to accommodate the daughter of the Principal the original record has been tampered with.
In column No. 4, the word `regular was written which suggests that the post was regular.
The word `regular' has been written with different ink.
Later on this word regular has been scored and `full time on as hoc basis' has been written.
Similarly, against column No. 11, the entry has been made subsequently which is totally out of context.
Similarly in the margin, the entry has again been written in order to show to the court as if the appointment of the petitioner was purely on ad hoc basis."
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Can the above conclusion be sustained ?
6.
Firstly, it is not even the petitioner's case that he had been appointed on regular basis.
In fact, as noticed above, in paragraph 22 of the petition, he had admitted that "ad hoc appointment was given" to him.
The finding is, thus, apparently contrary to the case as pleaded by the petitioner himself.
Secondly, it is the admitted position that the offer of appointment was given to the petitioner vide letter dated November 16, 1995, a copy of which is at Annexure P.18 with the writ petition.
In this letter, it has been clearly observed that the appointment will be "on purely ad hoc basis upto 3131996."
Thus, there is nothing to suggest that the petitioner had been appointed on regular basis at any stage.
Still further, a copy of the proceedings of the Selection Committee was produced by respondent No. 1 as Annexure R-4/1.
Since learned counsel for the first respondent had insisted that the court should see the original document we had asked the counsel for the appellants to produce it.
It was shown to us and a photo copy has been retained on the record.
It is at Mark `A'.
A perusal of the proceedings clearly shows that "no candidate was found suitable."
However in the interest of the student, "it was recommended that Shri Bhim Chand may be appointed on purely ad hoc basis upto 31396 (temporary) and the post be readvertised."
Still further, while giving the particulars of the selected candidate, it was recorded as under :-  "Shri Bhim Chand recommended for appointment purely temporary basis upto 3131996 or till fresh selection after the post is readvertised, whichever is earlier."
The proceedings are signed by various members of the Selection Committee.
A perusal of these proceedings clearly belies the suggestion that the appointment had been made on regular basis.
7.
Mr. Walia submitted that the proceedings had been tampered with.
In fact, the post was regular.
However, the description of the post was later on altered.
8.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
It is true that the post was regular.
It appears that the Selection Committee was considering the candidates with the object of making a recommendation for appointment on regular basis.
However, after interview, it did not find any of the candidates to be suitable for appointment on regular basis.
Therefore, it recommended that the respondent be appointed on purely ad hoc basis so that the students did not suffer.
This is perfectly legal and valid.
In the circumstances, the action was totally fair.
The mere fact that the word `regular' was crossed out and the post was treated as ad hoc, does not indicate that the record was tampered with.
It only corroborated the decision of the Selection Committee.
In this behalf, it also deserves notice that besides the Principal of the College and the nominees of the management, the representative of the Vice Chancellor and the Director of Public Instructions who had nothing to do with the Institution or its Principal, were also the members to tamper with the record.
Equally, there were two subject experts from the University.
It was not even suggested that they had any interest in the Principal or his daughter.
9.
Still further, it was stated by the counsel for the appellants that the post had been actually readvertised and that the selected candidate had been appointed.
It was further stated that the Principal's daughter had not appeared in the interview.
Thus, the suggestion that the record was tampered with so as to accommodate the daughter of the Principal, was wholly unfounded.
10.
In view of the above, we are unable to sustain the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge.
11.
The respondent had been selected and appointed on purely ad hoc basis.
He had served for the requisite period.
The condition imposed in the letter of appointment was in conformity with the decision of the Selection Committee.
There was no basis for the claim made by the respondent.
The writ petition was wholly misconceived.
12.
Mr. Walia contended that the appellants did not have the power of making appointment on ad hoc basis.
He placed reliance on the decision in Rishal Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) RSJ 403 : 1994(2) SCT 556.
13.
The contention raised by the counsel is wholly baseless.
No rule or provision has been pointed out to show that the college could have made appointment only on regular basis.
Equally, there is nothing which may suggest that the college was debarred from making appointments on ad hoc basis.
In the absence of a rule to the contrary, the employer has the right to make an appointment on such terms as it considers just and reasonable.
The appointment can be made even on daily wages.
Equally, it can be made on ad hoc, temporary or regular basis.
In the present case, the respondent had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis till the post was readvertised and fresh selection was made.
This was in complete conformity with law.
The factual position in Rishal Singh's case was totally different.
The observations of their Lordships were in the context of the statutory provisions in the Punjab Police Rules.
14.
No other point was raised.
15.
In view of the above, we are unable to sustain the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
Consequently, we set aside the judgment and allow the appeal.
The writ petition is dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.