TS Doabia, J - The petitioner was working as Stock Assistant in the Sheep Husbandry Department of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
He was promoted as Block Supervisor.
The order to this effect came to be passed on 1391978.
Along with petitioner, some other officials also came to be promoted.
Later on, on 23121980, the petitioner was informed that his case was placed before Departmental Promotion Committee for giving appointment.
Further, on account of adverse confidential reports, his case could not be considered for regular promotion.
The relevant observations made for the petitioner are as under :-  "The case of Sh. Krishan Kumar Stock Assistant was placed before the DPC but due to adverse ACR's he was not considered for the post of Block Supervisor in the scale of 220-430.
He will therefore report to the Sheep Dev.
Officer Banihal for further adjustment in his org.
against the available post of Stock Asstt.
after being relieved from Project Officer ISD, Kathua."
It is this order which is being challenged by the petitioner by way of this petition.
It be seen that during the pendency of the petition, the petitioner filed an application with a view to amend the petition.
The amended petition has since been filed in this Court.
In this petition a specific stand has been taken that adverse confidential reports which are referred to above in the order were never communicated to the petitioner.
It is accordingly submitted that these adverse confidential reports cannot be taken into consideration with a view to debar the petitioner and he was entitled to promotion with effect from the date other persons similarly situated were promoted.
The requisite averments that adverse confidential reports were never communicated are mentioned in para-13(i) of the amended petition.
For facility of reference, this paragraph is reproduced below :-  "The so-called adverse ACRs have not been communicated to the petitioner and the petitioner could not be denied promotion on account of the same."
The respondents have filed counter to the above.
There is a vague denial.
It is stated that annual confidential reports were communicated to the petitioner.
As to when this was communicated to the petitioner is not mentioned.
The further fact is that the petitioner was given promotion in the year 1990.
The petitioner submits that he is entitled to retrospective promotion with effect from the date, his juniors were given promotion.
Relying upon the Government Circular issued vide order No. 8549-56 dated 23121980, the petitioner submits that adverse confidential reports are required to be communicated within a period of six weeks and if, this is not done, then this cannot be taken into consideration.
The fact that adverse confidential reports are required to be communicated is borne-out from the case reported as Brij Mohan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1987 SC 948.
In the aforementioned decision following observations were made :-  "There is no doubt that whenever an adverse entry is awarded to a Government servant it must be communicated to him.
The object and purpose underlying the communication is to afford an opportunity to the employee to improve his work and conduct and to make representation to the authority concerned against those entries.
If such a representation is made it is imperative that the authority should consider the representation with a view to determine as to whether the contents of the adverse entries are justified or not.
Making of a representation is a valuable right to a Govt. employee and if the representation is not considered, it is bound to affect him in his service career, as in Govt. service grant of increment, promotion and ultimately premature retirement all depend on the scrutiny of the service records.
In Gurdial Singh Fiji v. State of Punjab, 1979(3) SCR 518 : AIR 1979 SC 1622 the appellant therein was denied promotion on account of certain adverse entries against which he had made representation to the Govt. but for some reason or the other those representations could not be considered or disposed of.
In view of those adverse entries he was not selected for promotion.
This Court while considering the effect of non-consideration of the representation observed (at p. 1626 of AIR): "The principle is well settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for some reason or another, not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant, though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified."
The State-authorities would indicate to the petitioner, the date on which the adverse confidential reports were communicated to him.
Let this be done within three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date a copy of this order passed by the Court along with writ petition and annexures are made available to respondent-authorities by the petitioner.
In case this is not done by the respondents, it would be presumed that adverse confidential reports were not conveyed/communicated to the petitioner.
In this eventuality, petitioner would be entitle to promotion with effect from the date, he was ignored i.e. 23rd December, 1990.
This petition is disposed of in the manner indicated above.