RS Mongia, J - On March 3, 1980, vide Annexure R-1, State Government issued instructions regarding the grant of selection grade to its employees w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
As to in which category of posts selection grade was to be admissible and to what number of posts in the cadre and when it will become admissible, the instructions laid down as follows :  "(i) Selection grades will be provided in cases where the number of higher posts (all levels taken together) to which employees in a particular case can seek promotion is less than half the strength of that cadre or where there is no promotion posts at all available to a cadre or service.
(ii) The number of selection grade posts at each level should not exceed 20% of the strength of the basic scale for which the selection grade posts are to be sanctioned.
For the purpose of calculating the number of selection grade posts, all posts including temporary posts, which have been in existence for three years should be taken into account; and (iii) selection grade will not be admissible to an officer unless he has completed 15 years service.
The service should either be in the basic scale where appointment to the basic scale is from the point of fresh entry into service or as the sum total of the employee's service in the basic scale and in the one scale next below."
2.
Vide instructions dated May 18, 1987 (Annexure P-3), which were in the form of clarification of the earlier instructions dated March 3, 1980, it was clarified that if by application of the instructions dated March 3, 1980, a promotee officer by getting his service counted in the lower rank as well as in the rank, where the selection grade is to be awarded, completes fifteen years of service but happens to be lower in seniority than any other person like a direct recruit, then in that eventuality, a post for the senior would be kept reserved in the selection grade and such a senior person would be granted the selection grade when it becomes admissible to him on completion of 15 years of service.
3.
Let us notice the facts of the present case.
The petitioners joined the Public Works Department (Buildings and Road Branch) as Sub Divisional Engineers by way of direct recruitment in November, 1970.
Thereafter they were granted ad hoc promotions as Executive Engineers in July, 1975.
They were reverted on December 29, 1977, but were again promoted on the same day as ad hoc Executive Engineers.
The order has been attached as Annexure P-1.
One Shri AS Mann had joined the service in the Public Works Department (Buildings & Road Branch) as Junior Engineer on April 28, 1956.
He was promoted as Sub Divisional Engineer on December 22, 1971.
The petitioners are senior to Shri AS Mann in the rank of Sub Divisional Engineer.
In the gradation list, the petitioners were shown at Sr. No. 4 and 9 in the rank of Sub Divisional Engineer whereas Shri AS Mann was at Sr. No. 64.
One Shri Davender Singh Sekhon is senior to Shri AS Mann but junior to the petitioners as Sub Divisional Engineer.
Shri AS Mann had filed a civil suit claiming that he was entitled to the grant of selection grade w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
The civil suit was decreed in his favour on September 24, 1985.
He had claimed that his seniority is at Sr. No. 64 whereas persons who were at Sr. No. 74 to 77 had been granted selection grade.
The appeal of the State of Punjab was also dismissed.
The Regular Second Appeal No. 2316 of 1986 filed by the State was also dismissed in limine on September 22, 1986.
Shri AS Mann was released the selection grade w.e.f.
January 1, 1978, vide order dated April 21, 1989, copy Annexure P-4.
Shri Davender Singh Sekhon filed a writ petition - C.W.P.
No. 14777 of 1995 that Shri AS Mann, who was junior to him, had been granted the selection grade and the same had to be granted to the seniors.
This writ petition was allowed on September 12, 1996.
The petitioners claim that since it was decided in the writ petition of Davender Singh Sekhon that if selection grade has been granted to a junior person, the same should be granted to the seniors as well; they are also entitled to the grant of selection grade w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
4.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioners that as per the instructions above at no given time, the number of persons getting selection grade can increase 20% of the posts in the cadre where the selection grade is to be awarded and further normally no person should be awarded selection grade unless he has completed 15 years of service which may be counted as per para 3(i) of the instructions dated March 3, 1980 subject to one exception which may be illustrated as follows :  5.
Suppose there is direct recruit Sub Divisional Engineer who has put in six years of service and there is a promotee who may be promoted, say after two years of the appointment of the aforesaid direct recruit as a Sub Divisional Engineer and after putting in 11 years of service as Junior Engineer (in short JE).
He would be junior as a Sub Divisional Engineer to the direct recruit Sub Divisional Engineer.
After completion of four years of service (when he is holding the post of Sub Divisional Engineer substantively), he may become entitled to the selection grade having put in 15 years of service as JE depending upon whether there is any post vacant within the outer limit of 20% posts in the selection grade, then the question would arise that if he is within 20% posts in the selection grade, what is to happen to that person who is a direct recruit and senior to such a promotee.
He has not completed 15 years of service and, therefore, cannot get the selection grade.
Learned counsel submits that if by giving the selection grade to that senior (who may not have completed 15 years of service) and to that Junior who has completed 15 years of service, the limit of 20% of posts in the selection grade is not crossed both of them would get the selection grade.
Even if there are more than seniors (who do not have 15 years of service), all the senior persons would also be granted selection grade though they may not have completed 15 years of service subject to the rider that all of them are within the limit of 20%.
In case as many posts for the seniors are not available within the 20% limit, then none would get the selection grade despite the fact that the promotee may have completed 15 years of service.
This is because a junior person cannot get more pay in normal circumstances than his seniors.
6.
Further, it has been submitted that a person would be entitled to grant of selection grade in the cadre where he holds the post substantively, i.e., holds a lien though he might be officiating or temporarily promoted to a higher post.
To illustrate this, if a person is holding substantively the post of Sub Divisional Engineer and has been promoted as Executive Engineer where he is not confirmed, his entitlement to the grant of selection grade would be seen amongst the cadre of Sub Divisional Engineers.
7.
In support of his contention learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in Chief Engineer-cum-Secretary v. Jagdish Mitter and others, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 2000 : 1992(1) SCT 581.
In that case, Jagdish Mitter had claimed that for purpose of grant of selection grade, his services rendered in CPWD prior of joining UT Administration Chandigarh be also counted.
This was negatived by the office.
However, it was observed by the Apex Court in para 5 as under :-  "We may, however, observe that if any junior of the respondent is given selection grade on the basis of the aforesaid guidelines it is proper that the respondent is also placed on the same scale since the denial of such benefits to senior would be discriminatory.
No junior in the same grade could be given a higher pay scale than his senior unless the pay of the junior is personal to him".
Similar view was taken by a learned Single Judge in Balbir Singh Rathee v. State of Haryana, 1994(2) SLR 189 : 1994(3) SCT 777.
A learned Single Judge in Smt. Satya Bhalla v. State of Haryana, 1994(8) SLR 726 : 1994(3) SCT 490 went to the extent of observing that if the instructions were to lay down that a particular individual would be entitled to a selection grade on completion of particular number of years of service, which may entail a junior getting more salary than his senior (because the service in the lower rank would also be counted) would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
However, in this case the instructions are not under challenge.
Moreover, we are reading down the instructions to construe harmoniously that no junior person would get selection grade unless his senior has also got it.
8.
Applying the aforesaid observations to the facts of the present case, the petitioners were substantively holding the post of Sub Divisional Engineer and they were promoted as Executive Engineers on officiating basis on December 29, 1977, and were regularly promoted as such on April 5, 1980 and were confirmed as Executive Engineer vide order dated March 31, 1980 with effect from June 2, 1980, meaning thereby that prior to June 2, 1980, the petitioners were holding lien against the post of Sub Divisional Engineers.
Admittedly, some of the juniors to the petitioners, i.e. Avtar Singh Man and DS Sekhon have been granted selection grade from January 1, 1973 (order dated April 21, 1989 granting selection Grade to Avtar Singh Mann has been appended as Annexure P- 4).
If a junior person has been granted selection grade from January 1, 1978 and the petitioners being senior to Avtar Singh Mann and if they are within the 20% posts of the cadre of the Sub Divisional Engineer, then there is no reason why they should be not granted selection grade.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents that if the petitioners fulfil the aforesaid conditions as mentioned in the judgment, i.e. that when selection grade was given to their junior and by grant of selection grade to them, the outer limit of 20% posts in the selection grade did not exceed, they be also released the selection grade w.e.f.
the date their juniors were so given.
The payment of arrears would be in the same terms as the Government has released in case of Shri Davender Singh Sekhon.
Petition allowed.