GS Singhvi, J - The State of Punjab etc. have filed this appeal against the order dated January 18, 1989, passed by the learned Single Judge accepting the writ petition filed by the respondents to quash the order dated April 6, 1987, passed by the Labour Commissioner, Punjab terminating their services.
2.
The respondents were appointed as temporary/ad hoc Clerks in the service of the Labour Department Punjab some time in the year 1983, vide order dated March 29, 1985 issued by the President of India, it was decided that the services of all ad hoc/temporarily appointed employees appointed to Class-III services or posts under the Punjab Government shall be regularised on fulfilment of the conditions enumerated that order.
Completion of two years' service as on 141985 was one of the conditions which was required to be satisfied by the temporary/ad hoc appointees to claim the benefit of the policy of regularisation.
These instructions were modified vide order dated 881986 and the requirement of two years of service as on 141985 was substituted by one year's service as on 141985.
Though the respondents became entitled to be considered for regularisation of their services  in accordance with the aforementioned instructions, no action was taken by the department in accordance with the Government instructions.
Instead, the service of the petitioners were terminated on the ground of abolition of 12 posts of Labour Inspectors and supporting staff like Clerks and Peons.
The principal ground on which the petitioners (respondent herein) challenged the order dated 641987 was that the authorities concerned have acted arbitrarily inasmuch as they did not consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of services in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government.
The appellants defended the impugned order by asserting that the temporary employees like the petitioners did not have the right to hold the posts and their services were terminated with a view to implement the policy decision taken by the Government to abolish 12 posts of Clerks.
3.
After considering, the rival cases, the learned Single Judge held as under :  "It is an admitted case of the respondents that per Government letter dated 29.8.1985 service of all the ad hoc/temporary employees appointed to Class III service or post under the Punjab Government in various departments/offices would be regularised.
Per that letter an employee becomes eligible for regularisation of his services if he had completed a minimum period of two years on 141985.
In the case before me, it is an admitted case of the respondents that the petitioners had completed 3-1/2 years' service without any break.
The petitioners fulfilled all the requisite qualifications for regularisation.
The petitioners have been removed from their respective jobs simply on the ground of reduction of cadre strength.
This matter is otherwise also covered by Division Bench decision in Piara Singh, Government Senior Secondary School, Sirsa and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1988 SLR 439, in which it has been held that ad hoc employees having rendered more than one year's service in different departments of the States of Punjab and Haryana and Government Undertakings/Corporations are to be treated as regular employees.
It was further held that regularisation of services of employees other than sponsored through Employment Exchange creates individious discrimination having no object to be achieved rather run contrary to the object to be achieved.
In view of what has been stated above, the petitioners who have completed more than 3-1/2 years' service are entitled for regularisation of their services.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 641987 (Annexure P-8) is quashed."
4.
Along with CM No. 1227 of 1997, the respondents have filed an affidavit of Shri Mohan Lal, who is one of the respondents, and copies of the orders dated 851989, 471991 and 2481994.
In his affidavit, Shri Mohan Lal has stated that at the time of termination of the services of the respondents, four posts of clerks were available and against these posts, Mewa Singh, Krishan Pal, Meena Kumari and Gulab Singh have been appointed in August, 1991.
By Stating so, the deponent has sought to convey that the reason given in the order dated April 6, 1987 for terminating the services of the respondents was patently erroneous.
However, we are unable to agree with the learned counsel for the respondents that on the basis of the statement made in the additional affidavit, the legality of the order dated 641987 can be decided because these facts are not brought on record at an appropriate stage and no opportunity has been given to the appellants to place all the facts leading to the passing of the order dated 2441991.
Therefore, we have refrained from placing reliance on the averments made in the additional affidavit of Shri Mohan Lal.
5.
Shri Khosla argued that the impugned Order passed by the learned Single Judge should be set aside solely on the ground that the Division Bench judgment in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(4) SLR 439 on the basis of which the learned single Judge has given relief to the respondents has been substantially reversed by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(4) SCC 118 : 1992(3) S.C.T.
201.
He further, argued that the respondents did not acquire the right to hold the post because no order was passed by the Competent Authority regularising their services in terms of the instructions issued by the circulars dated 2831985 and 881996 and, therefore, the termination of the services of the respondents could not have been invalidated.
On the other hand, Shri Namit Kumar argued that the executive instructions vide circulars dated 2831985 and 881986 created a valuable right in favour of the petitioners to be considered for regularisation of service and as the appellants have failed to show any cause for their failure to do so, the direction given by the learned Single Judge should not be nullified.
Shri Namit Kumar pointed out that the order dated 16101986 vide which 12 posts of Labour Inspectors Grade-I were abolished along with supporting staff of Clerks and Peons itself envisaged, absorption of surplus staff against the vacancies which were available, within the department or to surrender them to the pool of the Chief Secretary for absorption in other departments and as such even if the petitioners were declared surplus due to abolition of the posts, they should have been absorbed against the other available vacancies within their department or in some other department.
For the purpose of properly appreciating the contentions urged by the learned counsel, it will be useful to reproduce the relevant extracts of circulars dated 2831985 and 881986.
The same are :  Extract of the circular dated 2831985.
"xx xx xx The President of India is pleased to decide that the services of all ad hoc/temporarily appointed employees appointed to Class-III Services or posts under the Punjab Government in various Departments/offices shall be regularized subject to the following conditions :- 1) That the ad hoc/temporarily appointed employees should have completed minimum of two years service on 1st April, 1985.
While calculating the period of service any break of notional nature, falling between ad hoc/temporary appointments in the same category of posts and in the same department is to be ignored.
However, the break in ad hoc/temporary service would not be ignored in cases where :-................. xx xx xx" Extract of the circular dated 881986.
"xx xx xx The matter has been reconsidered and Government has now decided that the services of all ad hoc/temporary employees appointed to Class-III service/posts, who have one year service to their credit on 1st April, 1985 may also be regularised.
The conditions for such regularisation as contained in this Department's earlier communication, dated 29th March, 1985 as referred to above, however, remain the same and should be meticulously observed.
xx xx xx."
Paragraph 4 of the Order dated October 16, 1986 by which the posts of Labour Inspectors Grade-I were abolished is also reproduced below :  "xx xx xx The Department of finance observes that according to the guidelines for the committed non-plan expenditure issued by the Planning Commission Government of India, vide No. W/12011/2/84-CEN dated 301184, the scheme involving phased coverage, the expenditure on the fields staff of the block already covered are to be treated as committed expenditure, except in the case of schemes specified from time to time.
The Labour Commissioner, Punjab had got the staff scheme consisting of 12 Labour Inspectors Gr.
I, 12 Clerks and 12 Peons converted from Plan to Non-Plan without giving specific reasons and these posts were lying vacant at the time of conversion and never filled up after creation on the plan side which could not be termed as committed liability and provided for on the Non-Plan side.
The Department of Finance therefore regret its inability to provide for these posts on Non-Plan side particularly since these posts are still lying vacant.
Therefore, 12 posts of Labour Inspectors Grade-I lying vacant along with their supporting staff are abolished w.e.f.
1186 for which no provision is being made during 1987-88.
The Administrative Department is therefore advised to adjust the personel posted against 12 posts of Clerks and Peons each, against other vacancies within the department of Labour or surrender to the pool of the Chief Secretary for absorption in other department.
xx xx xx" 6.
A combined reading of the circulars dated 2831985 and 881986 shows that the Competent authorities were required to undertake an exercise for considering the cases of ad hoc and temporary employees for regularisation of service subject to their fulfilling the prescribed conditions.
These instructions were applicable to all the departments.
Therefore, it was the duty of the appellants to have undertaken exercise for regularisation of services of the respondents because they had completed more than one year's service as on 141985 because, as on 141985, the posts of Clerks against which they were appointed on ad hoc basis had not been abolished.
Admittedly, that was not done by the appellants.
Therefore, the direction given by the learned Single Judge to consider the cases of the respondents for regularisation of their services cannot be termed as wholly without substance.
7.
Although it is true that the judgment of the Division Bench in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana (supra) has been substantially reversed by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh (supra) their Lordships have also held that the departmental authorities are bound to give effect to the instructions issued by tile Government for regularising the service of ad hoc and temporary employees.
In fact, their Lordships have suggested that the Government should formulate the policy for regularisation of services of those who have completed long tenure of employment.
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the argument of the learned Deputy Advocate General that the direction given by the learned Single Judge is erroneous.
8.
We also find considerable force in the submission of Shri Namit Kumar that if the services of the petitioners had been regularised in service w.e.f.
141985, then they would have become entitled to be absorbed on other available vacancies within the department or in any other department in accordance with Para 4 of the letter dated October 16, 1986.
Thus, it can be said that the failure of the appellants to take steps in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government has not only resulted in discrimination qua the respondents but has also occasioned substantial failure of justice.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that even though the judgment relied upon by the learned single Judge stands reversed by the Supreme Court, there is no legal jurisdiction to upset the direction given by the learned Single Judge.
10.
Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.
The appellants are directed to consider the cases of the respondents for regularisation of their services in accordance with the instructions contained in the circulars dated 2831985 and 881986.
The respondents should judge the suitability of the petitioners on the basis of their service records which were available upto April, 1985 and if they are found entitled to be regularised in service then appropriate order should be passed for regularisation of their services w.e.f.
141985.
We also direct that if the petitioners are to be treated as surplus due to abolition of posts, then appropriate steps shall be taken by the department in accordance with Para 4 of the Order dated October 16, 1986.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed by the appellants within a period of six months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
In case the writ petitioners are adjudged suitable and are absorbed in the Labour Department or in any other department, then their seniority shall be determined from the date of regularisation of their services.
They shall also be entitled to be confirmed in service by counting their service from the date of regularisation.
Appeal dismissed.