HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Engineer in Punjab PWD (B&R) Branch on November 12, 1970 through the Punjab Public Service Commission and was promoted as Executive Engineer on July 5, 1975.
The respondent-State of Punjab issued a provisional seniority list of the P.S.E.
I Class Officers of PWD (B&R) Branch on September 17, 1985 in which the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 65 whereas one Gurbhajan Singh Mann was at Sr. No. 67.
The services of the petitioner are governed by Punjab Service of Engineers Class I, PWD (Buildings & Roads Branch).
As per Rule 9 of the Rules, promotion from the post of Executive Engineer to the post of Superintendent Engineer is to be made by selection on the basis of merit and suitability.
The petitioner while working as Executive Engineer at SAS Nagar, Mohali with effect from February 1, 1995 detected certain irregularities in the office under his charge.
He accordingly reported the matter to the higher authorities which resulted in the suspension of the Sub Divisional Engineer and one Junior Engineer vide orders dated August 3, 1995 and August 8, 1995.
The Chief Engineer to whom this information was also conveyed and directed the petitioner to further enquire into the matter and on this the petitioner affirmed that there was a shortage of material worth Rs. 951 lacs.
An anonymous complaint was, however, made against the petitioner and the matter was, therefore, entrusted to the Vigilance Department.
It is the petitioner's case that Gurbhajan Singh Mann mentioned above who was junior to the petitioner and was also eligible for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer along with the petitioner was the head of the Technical Wing of the Vigilance Department and he was able to direct an investigation into the said complaint.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Bureau, Fatehgarh Sahib vide his letter date 14-11-96 sought certain informations from the petitioner and the same were duly supplied to him.
The Departmental Promotion Committee met on June 6, 1996 to consider various eligible Officers including the petitioner for regular promotions to the post of Superintendent Engineer.
On the recommendations made by the Departmental Promotion Committee, the State Govt. promoted various officers as Superintendent Engineers vide order dated September 25, 1996 including Gurbhajan Singh Mann but the name of the petitioner was put in a sealed cover on the basis of instructions dated 20194 Annexure P-6 which provided inter-alia that when a Govt. employee was under suspension or where a charge-sheet had been issued or a criminal prosecution was pending, promotion could not be made and the assessment made by the Departmental Promotion Committee qua such officers was to be put in a sealed cover.
The petitioner thereafter filed a representation Annexure P-7 to the petition in which it was pointed out that the allegations made against the petitioner were wrong and the proceedings of the Departmental Selection Committee which had put his assessment in a sealed cover were contrary to the government instructions.
It appears that the representation filed by the petitioner met with partial successes as vide order dated 23.10.96 Annexure P-8 to the petition, he was ordered to the promoted on an ad hoc basis and GS Mann was ordered to be reverted vide order dated 23.10.96 Annexure P-9.
The petitioner, accordingly, joined as Superintendent Engineer at Ferozepur on October 30, 1996.
Gurbhajan Singh Mann aforesaid aggrieved by order Annexures P-8 and P-9 filed CWP No. 16964 of 1996.
The petition was allowed vide judgment date May 19, 1997 and the orders Annexures P-8 and P-9 were quashed.
The Division Bench observed that a regular promotee such as GS Mann could not be reverted to make way for an ad hoc promotee such as the petitioner even if the petitioner was senior in rank.
The Division Bench also observed that as the aforesaid writ petition had been filed by GS Mann, the present petitioner being a respondent could not get any relief in it and could file an independent petition if so desired.
The present petition has, accordingly, been filed by the petitioner challenging the action of Departmental Promotion Committee in putting the result of his assessment in a sealed cover.
It is the admitted position that a charge- sheet has now been served on the petitioner on 17.10.96 but no disciplinary proceeding had been initiated against the petitioner thereon.
2.
Notice of motion was issued and a reply has been filed by the respondent-State.
3.
It has been admitted that the petitioner was senior to GS Mann.
It has been averred that the petitioner's averment had been put in a sealed cover on the basis of Government instructions dated 20194 and in particular para 6 thereof which reads as under :-  "Government servant against whom an investigation or serious allegation of corruption, bribery or similar grave misconduct is in progress either by the CBI or any other agency departmental or otherwise."
4.
It has also been pleaded that as very serious charges had been levelled against the petitioner, he could not be regularly promoted on the due date.
A rejoinder has been filed by the petitioner to the written statement filed by the State and it has been set out that the allegations made against the petitioner were incorrect, without basis and it had been so found in some inquiry made earlier.
5.
Shri Ashwani Kumar Chopra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has urged that in the writ petition filed by GS Mann, the respondent had taken a stand that action had been taken against the petitioner in terms of instruction Annexure P-6 date 20-1-94 although a different stand was now sought to be taken placing reliance on the instructions dated 23.11.90.
It has been, accordingly, urged that Annexure P-6 visualised three eventualities as under for putting the result in a sealed cover:-  1) Government employee under suspension;  2) Government employee in respect of whom a charge-sheet had been issued and the  3) Government employee in respect of whom prosecution for criminal charge is pending.
and that on June 6, 1996 when the Departmental Promotion Committee met, no charge-memo had been issued to the petitioner and no disciplinary proceeding was pending in terms of para 2 which could be made applicble to the petitioner's case and merely because an investigation was pending before the Vigilance Department, the action of the Departmental Promotion Committee was not warranted.
Even independently of this matter, Shri Chopra has placed reliance on two judgments of this court Union of India v. RV Swamy @ Vellaichamy, 1991(5) SLR 602 : 1997(3) S.C.T.
202 in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that Departmental disciplinary proceedings could be said to commence only at the stage that a charge memo had been issued to a delinquent and not at any earlier stage and as such the sealed cover procedure could be adopted only after a charge memo had been issued.
A division Bench of this Court in Des Raj v. Food Corporation of India and others, 1996(2) RSJ 543 : 1996(3) SCT 45 following the aforesaid judgment observed that the sealed cover procedure could not be justified in a case where the charge-sheet had been issued subsequent to the date on which the Departmental Promotion Committee had met.
The Division Bench observed that "when disciplinary proceedings had not started against the employee on the date when the written test and the interview for promotion were carried out and the promotional process was going on, any subsequent charge-sheet does not give any right to the management to put the result regarding the promotion of the employee in the sealed cover."
6.
Shri Gill, the learned counsel for the respondent stated that he could not controvert the submission made by Shri Chopra but he has argued that action of the respondent was justified in terms of the instructions dated 23.11.90 and in particular para 11.1(iv).
I, however, find no merit in this submission.
In CWP No. 16964 of 1996 the State had relied on the instructions Annexure P-6 in its defence.
A different stance is, therefore, not permissible.
The instructions Annexure P-6 visualise the sealed cover procedure only after a charge memo has been issued and in view of this position and the judgments aforequoted, I am of the view that Departmental Promotion Committee was not justified in putting the result in a sealed cover.
7.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the writ petition must succeed.
The writ petition is, therefore, allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondent to open the sealed over and if the petitioner has been found suitable to make his promotion as per rules from the date that his juniors had been promoted.
The entire exercise be completed within a span of one month from the date a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
Petition allowed.