Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a driver with the Haryana Roadways.
On September 3, 1994 there was an accident in which one Kharaiti Lal was killed.
A criminal case was registered.
The petitioner was acquitted by the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Karnal.
Simultaneously there was a claim for compensation on account of the death of Kharaiti Lal.
The Motor Accidents Claims Tribhunal found that the death had occurred because of the rash and negligent driving of the bus in question by respondent No. 3.
The petitioner was the third respondent before the Tribunal.
Thereafter departmental proceedings were initiated against the petitioner.
The charge of negligent driving was proved.
Vide order dated January 13, 1997 the petitioner was ordered to be removed from service.
He filed an appeal.
The Appellate Authority having rejected it, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
Mr. Nagar, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the order passed by the Appellate Authority is vitiated as it has taken into consideration the past record of service.
Secondly, it has been contended that the accident had occurred on account of the failure of the brakes and not because of any negligence on the part of the petitioner.
Consequently, the impugned action cannot be sustained.
3.
A perusal of the order passed by the Appellate Authority indicates that the appeal ha been dismissed inter alia with the following observations :-  "I have heard the appellant personally and also gone through the record of the office of General Manager and also gone through the remarks on the appeal.
It was found during examination of the file of the appellant, that this was not an isolated case of the appellant that his services are terminated due to rash and negligent driving, but on 18.12.1990 his one Annual Increment was stopped with future effect for driving the bus negligently and rashly and thereby causing accident.
Then on 12.9.1989 he was issued warning for causing damage to the bus.
He was time and again given warnings on 171189, 2.4.90, 23.10.90 and 6695 for driving the bus carelessly.
It is clear from all above facts that in the past he had been driving the bus carelessly and from time to time, he was given warnings and he did not learn anything from his mistakes.
In this case also, he has pushed one person into the mouth of death.
It is clear that the appellant as a driver is not fit for driving the bus and the General Manager has rightly terminated his services."
It is clear that the past record of the petitioner has been taken into consideration.
However, it deserves mention that in the petition for appeal filed by the petitioner he had claimed that his record had "remained good through(out) the tenure of service.
Thus, the appellant has a right to hold the tenure of service.
Thus, the appellant has a right to hold the post till the date of superannuation....... the appellant has not committed any gravest act of misconduct for which he has been awarded the impugned major punishment without applying the mind to the facts and circumstances of the case".
It was the claim of the petitioner that he had served the Haryana Roadways "carefully and honestly".
He had also pointed that his record of service had remained good.
It was in order to repel this contention that the authority had referred to his past record of service.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the order is vitiated merely because a reference has been made to the past record.
The petitioner had invited this reference.
He cannot now complain that the authority has been influenced by material which was not put to him in the Show Cause Notice.
4.
Mr. Nagar has referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Shiv Kumar Sharama v. Haryana State Eelectricity Board Chandigarh and other, 1988(3) SLR 524.
The factual position in this case was totally different.
Herein besides awarding the penalty of stoppage of an increment, an order regarding change of seniority was passed.
This action was held to be illegal.
This decision cannot be read to mean that merely by reference to the past record, as in the circumstances of the present case, the order passed by the appellate authority shall be vitiated.
5.
It is undoubtedly correct that when the disciplinary authority takes into consideration the past record without giving the employee an opportunity to show cause against it, it may be said that the action is vitiated as the employee did not get a chance to submit his explanation with regard to a part of the material taken into consideration by the competent authority.
However, such is not the situation in the present case.
Herein, the reference to the past record was invited by the petitioner himself.
It was in order to deal with his contention that the authority had referred to it.
Thus, it cannot be said that the appellate authority had acted illegally.
6.
Mr. Nagar then submitted that the petitioner was not negligent.
In fact, the brakes of the bus had failed.
As a result, the vehicle had gone out of control and the man was run over.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
As already noticed, the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal and the punishing authority have found as a fact that the accident had occurred on account of the rash and negligent driving by the petitioner.
This finding is not even alleged to be wrong.
No other point has been raised.
Drivers like the petitioner are becoming a menace on the road.
If the department has been able to take some action against one of them and the enquiry proceedings have been in strict conformity with the rules, we find no infirmity with the order which may call for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.