Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is working as a Senior Divisional Manager in the Haryana Tourism Corporation.
He complains that the Corporation has illegally declined to grant him the benefit of the military service.
Consequently, he has filed this petition with the prayer for the quashing of the orders passed by the Corporation and for the issue of a mandamus directing the respondents to promote him with retrospective effect.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner had served in the Armed Forces of the Union during the period of National Emergency from January 10, 1964 to January 10, 1968.
After his release, the petitioner was appointed as a Reception Officer in the Haryana Tourism Corporation on July 25, 1973.
He was promoted to the post of Tourist Officer on April 21, 1976.
On May 11, 1981, the petitioner was appointed as an Additional Divisional Manager.
He was further promoted to the post of Divisional Manager on April 19, 1983 and as a Senior Divisional Manager on April 19, 1988.
3.
While working in the Corporation, the petitioner claimed the benefit of the military service rendered by him.
Vide order dated December 7, 1989, passed by the Director, Tourism, Haryana, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1, the petitioner was given the benefit of military service.
It was declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have been appointed on July 24, 1969 even though he had actually joined the service on July 24, 1973.
It was further observed in the order that his seniority in the other post will be decided by the Corporation.
The petitioner made another representation and claimed that he should be granted the resultant benefit of military service towards his further promotion as Tourist Officer/Additional Divisional Manager/Divisional Manager etc.
In pursuance of this representation, the Respondent-Corporation issued a notice dated January 14, 1993 to respondents Nos. 3 to 6 proposing that the benefit of military service should be given in the various higher posts as well.
According to this notice, the petitioner's date of appointment to each rank in the service was proposed to be ante-dated as under :-  Reception Officer T.O.
A.D.M.
D.M.
Sr.
Scale DM DGM Date of original appointment 2571973 2141976 11.5.1981 1941983 19.4.1988 Deemed date 24.7.1969 20.4.1972 10.5.1977 18.4.1979 18.4.1984 4.
The respondents were called upon to show cause as to why the benefits as above be not given to the petitioner.
It appears that respondents Nos. 3 and 4 filed civil suits challenging the proposed action.
The petitioner alleges that Civil Suit No. 150 of 1993 filed by respondent No. 4 was "rejected/dismissed in the court of Shri Raghuvinder Singh, Sub Judge Ist Class, Faridabad vide order dated 1461993.
In other suit filed by respondent No. 3, Senior Sub Judge, Faridabad, however, granted stay order against implementation of the government policy......." The petitioner filed an appeal against this order.
The matter being sub-judice, the Corporation did not grant the benefit to the petitioner and informed him about its view vide letter dated December 16, 1993.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P.3.
The petitioner kept on representing.
In spite of that the corporation promoted respondent No. 3 from the post of Deputy General Manager to the post of General Manager on 16.2.1995 even before the final judgment was passed by the Sub Judge.
A true copy of the order.. by which respondent No. 3 was promoted.. is annexed as Annexure P.5."
The petitioner again represented on Feburary 20, 1995.
This representation was rejected and vide order dated March 21, 1995, the petitioner was informed that the show cause notice issued to respondents Nos. 3 to 6 on January 14, 1993 has been withdrawn.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.7.
The petitioner challenges the orders by which respondent No. 3 was promoted and his claim for the grant of benefit of military service in each of the posts held by him was rejected.
He alleges that the date of promotion to each post has "to be advanced by the corresponding period which has been granted to him in his date of appointment."
5.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
The official and private respondents have filed separate written statements.
In the reply filed on behalf of the Respondent-Corporation, it has been alleged that the petitioner "is trying to mislead this Hon'ble Court by concealment of material facts."
After his discharge from the Indian Army.
"on compassionate grounds", the petitioner had joined the department of Tourism, Haryana on July 25, 1973.
He had not joined the Corporation as alleged by him.
On the creation of the Corporation in the year 1974, the services of some of the employees including the petitioner "were terminated in the Department of Tourism w.e.f.
3181974 (AN) and were re-employed in Respondent No. 2 Corporation w.e.f.
1.9.1974."
It was, however, decided by the Board that the benefit of service rendered in the Tourism department shall be given to the employees.
Accordingly, the petitioner's pay was protected.
Some time in the year 1989, the petitioner made a representation to the department of Tourism, Haryana for the grant of military service benefit.
The department granted the benefit "without examining the grounds of discharge, category of the post he was holding in the past..." The Department of Tourism also gave him the benefit of increments and fixed his pay accordingly.
This benefit was carried forward in the Corporation.
6.
It has been further pointed out that on receipt of the petitioner's representation for the grant of benefit of military service "on each and every post, respondent No. 2 Corporation without examining the matter in depth issued show cause notice dated 14.1.1993 upon respondent Nos. 3 to 6 for disturbing their seniority accordingly."
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 filed separate civil suits and obtained ex parte stay orders against the proposed action.
On being contested, the civil suit of respondent No. 4 was dismissed as premature.
In the suit filed by respondent No. 3, the interim stay order was made absolute.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Faridabad.
Meanwhile, the Corporation examined the case afresh.
It sought legal advice.
It was realised that the petitioner was entitled to the "benefit of military service on the initial post at the time of joining the Corporation and consequential benefits arising therefrom, which in fact were duly granted to the petitioner vide order dated 15121989, whereby the petitioner was made senior to Sh. YN Sadhu and Shri ND Khetarpal on the post of Reception Officer and was also granted promotions from the dates these two juniors of the petitioner were given promotions..." In this view of the matter, the show cause notice was rightly withdrawn.
The civil suit filed by respondent No. 3 was got dismissed as withdrawn, with the result that the appeal filed by the petitioner was rendered infructuous.
It has also been pointed out that the instructions issued by the Government for the grant of military service benefit "have not been adopted by the Corporation and with this point in view, none of the employees of the Corporation including respondent No. 5 have been granted the benefit of military service.
The petitioner has been granted the benefit.... because the same was granted by the department of Tourism, Haryana."
Each of the grounds raised by the petitioner has been controverted.
7.
Separate written statements have been filed by respondents Nos. 3 and 5 as well.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
The petitioner has filed separate replications reiterating his claim to which respondent No. 3 has filed a rejoinder.
8.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the initial date of appointment having been changed from July 25, 1973 to July 24, 1969, the Respondent-Corporation was bound to give the corresponding benefit at every stage in the service.
Secondly, learned counsel submitted that the suits filed by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 having been dismissed, the petitioner's claim had to be sustained.
The claim made by the learned counsel was controverted on behalf of the respondents.
9.
Admittedly, the petitioner had joined the Tourism department on July, 25, 1973.
The benefit of military service of four years and one day was given to the petitioner under the orders of the Director, Tourism.
The Corporation had implemented this order in spite of the fact that it had not adopted the instructions issued by the State Government regarding grant of benefit of military service to its employees.
As a result, the petitioner was deemed to have joined service on July 24, 1969.
This did not mean that the petitioner's date of appointment to every higher post had to be correspondingly ante-dated.
It is true that the petitioner had made such a claim.
Initially, even the Corporation had thought that the petitioner's claim was tenable.
It had even given a notice to respondent Nos. 3 to 6 vide its letter dated January 14, 1993.
However, the fallacy in the argument raised by the petitioner was soon discovered.
The notice was withdrawn.
The action of the Corporation has not been shown to be either contrary to the rules or otherwise unfair.
10.
It is true that the petitioner's date of appointment was ante-dated from July 25, 1973 to July 24, 1969.
As a result, the petitioner was granted four increments and his pay was accordingly fixed with effect from the date of his initial appointment.
Even his seniority as a Reception Officer was accordingly fixed.
However, in spite of being asked, learned counsel for the petitioner was unable to show that any one junior to him as a Reception Officer was promoted earlier than him.
Since no one junior to the petitioner as a Reception Officer was promoted as a Tourist Officer or to any other higher post earlier than him, the petitioner can have no legitimate claim that the date of his appointment to every post in the service should be ante-dated, by four years and one day.
The benefit of military service only implied the fixation of petitioner's seniority in the initial post held by him.
Thereafter, he had to earn promotion to every rank in accordance with the prescribed conditions on the basis of his seniority.
There being nothing on record to show that any one junior to the petitioner was promoted earlier than him, the claim made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
11.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Surya Kant raised a rather curious contention that the suits filed by respondents Nos. 3 and 4 having been dismissed, the petitioner's claim has to be decreed.
12.
Admittedly, one of the suits was dismissed as premature.
There was no decision on merits.
The second suit was not pressed after the Corporation had withdrawn the show cause notice issued to the respondents on January 14, 1993.
In neither of the suits, the issues raised by the parties had been heard and decided.
The claim made by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had not been held to be untenable.
As such, the plea raised by the learned counsel cannot be sustained.
13.
Mr. Kumar, counsel for the respondents contended that the petitioner had not disclosed full facts to this court.
He had withheld relevant information.
The counsel is not wrong in making that submission.
The petitioner had undoubtedly claimed that he was appointed as a Reception Officer in the Respondent-Corporation on July 25, 1973.
Actually, it is not so.
Still further, the petitioner has averred that he had represented to the Corporation for the grant of benefit of military service.
He alleges in para 3 that his representation was accepted by the Corporation and that vide order dated December 7 1989, "issued by respondent No. 2...." the claim was accepted.
It is not so.
The order was passed by the Director, Tourism, Haryana and not by respondent No. 2.
Even though, we cannot compliment the petitioner on these inaccurate averments, yet it does not appear to be necessary to examine this matter any further in view of the fact that we have found no merit in the petitioner's claim as made out in this writ petition.
No other point had been urged.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
The respondents shall be entitled to their costs.