Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a retired teacher, prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to re-determine his pension and other allied benefits by taking into consideration the service rendered by him in a school run by the District Board.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a JBT teacher in the District Primary School, Bija, on December 10, 1947.
He was posted at different places in different schools run by the District Board till September 30, 1957.
On October 1, 1957, the State Government provincialised the services of the teachers working in the District Board schools.
As a result, the petitioner's services were provincialised.
He was given benefit of the increments earned by him in the District Board schools.
The petitioner ultimately retired from service on March 31, 1976.
His retiral benefits were computed on the basis of the service rendered by him from October 1, 1957 to March 31, 1976.
The petitioner complains that the respondents had wrongly excluded the period of service rendered by him in District Board schools from December 10, 1947 to September 30, 1957.
He represented to the Director of Public Instruction.
Copies of some of the representations submitted by the petitioner have been produced as Annexures P-1 to P-4 with the writ petition.
When nothing was done, he filed the present writ petition.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
A written statement has been filed on their behalf by the Administrative Officer, Office of the District Education Officer, Ludhiana.
A number of preliminary objections have been raised.
However, the only objection which was pressed at the hearing was that the petitioner having retired on April 1, 1976, the writ petition was liable to be dismissed on account of delay.
On merits, it has been averred that the service book of the petitioner is not available.
The pension has been fixed in accordance with the provisions of Rule 13 of the Punjab Education Service (Provincialised Cadre) Class-III Rules, 1961, and Rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, after determining the qualifying service.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The questions that arise for consideration are :-  (1) Is the petition liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay ?
(2) Is the petitioner entitled to the benefit of the service rendered by him in the District Board schools from December 10, 1947 to September 30, 1957, towards his pension, etc. ?
Regarding (1)  4.
It is true that the petitioner had retired from service on March 31, 1976 (wrongly mentioned as April 1, 1976, in the writ petition and the written statement.)
It also appears that the first representation was submitted by the petitioner on January 8, 1988.
Still the fact remains that the petitioner is not being given the benefit of the service rendered by him in District Board schools towards the computation of his pension.
He continues to suffer the loss on this account.
Still further, the Government is under a statutory obligation to settle the retiral benefits of an employee.
If he is wrongfully denied certain benefits, the State cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong and plead that the claim is barred by limitation.
By the lapse of time, no third party rights have accrued.
The treasury only keeps the money belonging to the citizen.
That being so, the claim for pension or other retiral benefits cannot be denied on account of delay.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in SR Bhanrale v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1997 S.C. 27 : 1996(4) S.C.T.
573, that bar of limitation cannot be pleaded by the Government when the department itself had defaulted in making payments promptly.
Resultantly, we answer the first question in the negative and hold that a claim for pension or other retiral benefits cannot be denied on the ground of delay alone.
Regarding (2)  5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had served in different District Board schools from December 10, 1947 to September 30, 1957.
The specific averment made by the petitioner in this behalf has not been controverted.
The mere fact that the respondents have lost the petitioner's service book cannot affect the interests of the petitioner.
He was not the custodian of the record.
It was for the Department to preserve the record of service.
The loss of record by them cannot defeat the petitioner's claim.
Still further, it has not been denied that the service rendered by the petitioner in District Board schools was taken into consideration for the purpose of fixing his pay.
The benefit of the increments earned by him was given to him.
Consequently, it has to be assumed that the period of service rendered by the petitioner in District Board schools was recognised by the Government.
If the period of service was relevant for fixation of pay, it cannot become irrelevant for the purpose of fixing the pension.
Moreover, the District Boards were legal authorities and not private organisations.
These were instrumentalities of the State.
The service rendered by teachers in such schools was not under a private employer.
Nothing has been pointed out to show any real difference which may warrant the exclusion of the service from the period which qualifies for the grant of pension.
6.
Mr. Dhillon submitted that the benefit claimed by the petitioner is not admissible in view of the provision of Rule 13 of the Punjab Education Service (Provincialised Cadre) Class III Rules, 1961.
This rule provides inter alia that "a member of the service who was above thirty years of age on 1st October, 1957, shall not be entitled to pensionary benefits.
He shall subscribe to the Punjab Contributory Provident Fund, and his previous contributions with local authorities together with the interest accrued thereon shall be credited to his new Punjab Contributory Provident Fund Account under Government".
In case of a person who was not above the age of thirty years on October 1, 1957, it was provided that he "shall be entitled to pensionary benefits under the Punjab Civil Services Rules or such other rules as may from time to time be framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and the service rendered by him under a local authority in permanent capacity shall be counted for pension from the date he subscribed to the Contributory Provident Fund .....".
A perusal of the above provision does not show that the period of service rendered by a person under a local authority would not qualify for pension.
In fact, the rule permits the period to be taken into consideration.
Still further, the respondents have not even averred that the petitioner was working in a temporary capacity in the District Board schools.
It has only been averred that "the District Board service which is not confirmed one and during which no provident fund was deducted could not be taken into consideration for reckoning the qualifying service ....".
It has also been averred that the petitioner did not fulfil the condition of Rule 13.
However, it is the admitted position that the respondents did not have the petitioner's service book.
In the absence thereof, it is not understood as to on what basis this statement has been made.
7.
Besides the above factual position, it appears that similar claims have been sustained by this Court in various cases.
C.W.P.
No. 2191 of 1992 (Jai Gopal Singh v. State of Punjab) was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated January 19, 1993.
It was held that the service rendered in the District Board schools has to be counted for the grant of pensionary benefits.
This decision was followed by another Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 9814 of 1993 (Naurata Ram Singla v. State of Punjab and others) decided on May 3, 1994.
The respondents were directed to refix pension of the petitioner after taking into consideration the entire period of service ..... with the District Board."
8.
In view of the factual and the legal position as noticed above, we find no ground to take a different view.
Resultantly, this petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to re- determine the petitioner's retiral benefits in accordance with law.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Whatever is found due shall be paid to the petitioner within the aforesaid period.
In case of default, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of the default.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.