NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner joined service as a driver with Punjab Roadways on 1661959 in the erstwhile State of Punjab and on its reorganisation in the year 1966 he was allocated to the State of Haryana.
While going on a bicycle on 351972 he was knocked down by a speeding truck as a result of which he received severe injuries and remained in hospital.
On 16.1.1973 he joined duty as a Yard Master as he was not fit to drive a heavy vehicle.
He was medically examined by the Chief Medical Officer, Ambala who found him unfit for driving a heavy vehicle and consequently his services were terminated with effect from 3171973.
He preferred an appeal/mercy petition to the then Transport Minister with a prayer that he be reinstated and given some light duty.
It appears that with the passage of time his physical condition improved and he was in a position to drive a heavy vehicle.
The Transport Minister as per order dated 18.12.1979 directed that if the petitioner is found medically fit for driving a vehicle he may be given a fresh appointment as a driver.
Thereafter the petitioner was given a fresh appointment and he joined the Haryana Roadways again on 1131980 as a driver from which post he retired on 31101989 on attaining the age of superannuation.
He has not been given pension on his retirement on the ground that he does not have the qualifying service of 10 years.
He represented to the department that his past service as a driver be counted for the purpose of computing his qualifying service for pension.
This request was not granted and hence the present petition.
2.
The only prayer made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the past service of his client be counted for calculating the pension and if that is done he has the requisite qualifying service entitling him to claim pension.
Reliance in this regard has been placed on Rule 420 contained in the Civil Service Rules, Volume-II which is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "Rule 420(a): A Government employee who is dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or prematurely retired from public service but reinstated on appeal or revision, is entitled to count his past service.
(a) The period of break in service between the date of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement or premature retirement, as the case may be, and the date of reinstatement and the period of suspension, if any, shall not count unless regularised as duty or leave by a specific order of the authority which passed the order of reinstatement."
The learned counsel also relied on a decision of this Court in Gopal Singh v. State of Haryana, 1991(3) SLR 651.
3.
Writ petition has been contested on behalf of the respondents and it is pleaded that in pursuance to the order passed by the then Transport Minister, the petitioner was given a fresh appointment on 1131980 and, therefore, his past service could not be counted.
The action of the department in not granting pension to the petitioner is sought to be justified on the ground that he does not have the qualifying service of 10 years.
As regards Rule 420 referred to by the petitioner in support of his case it is submitted on behalf of the respondents that the same would be attracted only if the petitioner had been reinstated but that is not the case.
4.
I have heard counsel for the parties and find no merit in the writ petition.
Admittedly, the petitioner was given a fresh appointment on 1131980.
This being so, Rule 420 is not attracted and on that basis the past service rendered by the petitioner before he was removed with effect from 3171973 cannot be counted.
No other rule has been brought to my notice on the basis of which the past service could be counted.
The petitioner, therefore, did not have the qualifying service of 10 years to his credit at the time of his superannuation and the department was right in not granting him any pension.
5.
It was strenuously urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the office notings on his appeal which was disposed of by the then Transport Minister on 18.12.1979 would clearly indicate that the petitioner was reinstated in service but contrary to the office notings he was given a fresh appointment.
I sent for the original file but the learned counsel for the respondents stated that the same was not available.
However, if one looks at the order passed by the then Transport Minister which has been reproduced in the communication dated 2311980 addressed by the State Transport Controller to the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Ambala which has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P2 with the writ petition, it is clear that the petitioner was ordered to be given a fresh appointment.
In Gopal Singh's case (supra) the petitioner therein was removed from service with effect from 6.9.1971 because of his conviction by a criminal Court and since he was later acquitted in appeal he was taken back in service with effect from 1191972.
When he retired on 3041984 on attaining the age of superannuation he was not given pension as he did not have the qualifying service.
He too filed a petition in this Court claiming compensation on the ground that his past service ought to have been counted under Rule 420 of the Civil Service Rules.
The learned Single Judge proceeded on the basis that the petitioner therein had been reinstated in service and, therefore, on the basis of Rule 420 the respondents there were directed to take into consideration his past service for determining the pensionary benefits.
In the present case, the petitioner was reinstated but was given a fresh appointment after a gap of more than six years.
Gopal Singh's case (supra) is of no help to the petitioner.
In the result, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.