THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has filed this writ petition challenging the order dated 2781985 under which he was pre- maturely retired from Govt. Service.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Patwari in June, 1958.
He was placed under suspension on 1261979 and a charge sheet was served on him on 2061983 on the ground that he absented himself from the duty without leave and for delaying the submission of the periodical statements and for not attending the meetings and on same other grounds.
Pending departmental enquiry, he was reinstated.
Thereafter Show Cause Notice dated 2791984 was served on the petitioner on the basis of the enquiry report proposing the punishment of compulsory retirement.
The petitioner submitted his reply on 17101984.
Without passing any order on the disciplinary proceedings initiated against him, the petitioner was made to retire compulsorily by the impugned order.
The petitioner challenged the impugned order on the ground that when once the departmental proceedings were dropped the same cannot be made the basis to retire him compulsorily from service and no notice was issued to him and that there was no public interest involved and, therefore, the order of compulsory retirement is liable to be quashed.
3.
The respondents contended inter alia in the written statement that the petitioner was made to retire compulsorily under the relevant rules.
The petitioner joined the service on 3.6.1958 and he had put in 25 years of service and after considering his entire service record, it was found that it was not in the public interest to continue him in service, and therefore, the petitioner was made to retire compulsorily in the interest of public.
4.
The power of the appointing authority to order retirement of an employee after completion of 20 years of service is not disputed.
It is no doubt true that before ordering an employee to retire compulsory, it is the bounden duty of the authorities to consider the work of the employee.
There is no dispute about the fact that the petitioner has earned only 'average' and `below average' confidential reports throughout his career except two 'good' for the years 1969-70 and 1984-85.
Thus the authority having taken into account the confidential reports of the petitioner came to the conclusion that it was as not in the public interest to continue the service of the petitioner after completion of 25 years service.
5.
A Full Bench of this Court in Daya Nand v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(1) SLR 57, held that if the State Government decides as a policy that 'avarge' reports which are communicated or to be treated as adverse and taken into consideration at the time of deciding the question of compulsory retirement of Government Officer, no fault can be found with such instructions.
The Supreme Court in Post and Telegraphs Board and others v. C.S.N.
Murthy, 1992(2) SCT 325 (SC) : 1992(2) SCC 317, observed that the Courts will not interfere with the exercise of the power (of compulsory retirement) if arrived at bona fide and on the basis of the material available on the records and no mala fides have been urged.
6.
In this Case also, the petitioner has not alleged any mala fide on the part of the authority who passed the order of compulsory retirement.
The order of compulsory retirement came to be made on the basis of the service record of the petitioner.
7.
It is no doubt true that disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner, but the authorities have not chosen to take any action against the petitioner on the basis of the enquiry report, but they resorted to retire the petitioner compusorily on the basis of the service record.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the order of compulsory retirement is based on extraneous consideration and without any basis.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner further urged that the petitioner has not handed over the charge and, therefore he should be deemed to have been in service.
This contention does not hold any water.
The petitioner has already been relieved.
When the order of compulsory retirement was passed, it was not necessary to hand over the charge and there need not be any specific order relieving him.
The order of compulsory retirement itself shows that he has been relieved of the charge.
I do not, therefore, find any merit in this contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
9.
On a consideration of the entire record of the case, I am of the opinion that writ petitioner is liable to be dismissed.
The result is, the writ petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed with no order as to costs.