NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - What is challenged in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is the appointment/promotion of Mukhtiar Singh, respondent No. 3 as Labour Inspector Grade-II on the ground that claim of the petitioner, who is senior to the said respondent, had not been considered.
2.
Facts giving rise to this petition may first be noticed.
3.
Petitioner was appointed as a clerk in the office of Labour Inspector, Kapurthala on 24101969 and at present he is working as a Junior Assistant which is equivalent to the post of Senior Clerk in the same cadre.
There are two modes of promotion from the post of Clerk/Senior Clerk/Junior Assistant.
They may opt for promotion as Readers, Assistants or Supervisors or Superintendents Grade II or they may opt for the other line i.e. to the post of Labour Inspector Grade-II and onwards.
The Labour Commissioner, as per his letter dated 12111981, asked for options from the clerks whether they wished to be promoted in the Clerical cadre or in the cadre of Labour Inspectors.
In response to this letter, the petitioner opted for promotion as Labour Inspector Grade-II.
Options once exercised by the Clerks are final and they are not allowed to change them.
The petitioner was, however, promoted on 1141989 as Resident Supervisor in the Clerical cadre which post is equivalent to that of an Assistant.
This promotion was contrary to the option exercised by him and, therefore, he filed CWP No. 5799 of 1989 in this Court challenging his promotion.
When notice was issued to the respondents, they withdrew the order of promotion and stated before this Court that the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector Grade-II would be considered in due course in accordance with rules.
The writ petition was accordingly disposed of on September 18, 1989 as infructuous.
4.
The grievance now made in this petition is that respondent No. 3, who is far junior to the petitioner as a clerk, has been promoted by the Labour Commissioner as Labour Inspector Grade-II as per his order dated 11.9.1996 while the claim of the petitioner has not been considered.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it is averred that the petitioner is drawing a scale of 1500-2640 as Junior Assistant whereas pay scale of Labour Inspector Grade-II is 1350-2400 and since he is already drawing a higher scale of pay, he is not entitled to be promoted to the post of Labour Inspector Grade-II.
Reference in this regard is made to the Government instructions dated 951990 issued by the State Government to the Labour Commissioner in regard to the appointment to the posts of Labour Inspectors Grade-II and Grade-I from amongst the officials officiating in the higher grade.
The fact that the petitioner is senior to respondent 3 is not disputed.
In fact a look at the seniority list (Annexure P.13 with the writ petition) would show that the petitioner is at Serial Number 8 whereas respondent 3 is at Serial Number 61.
6.
We have heard counsel for the parties and in our opinion, the writ petition deserves to succeed.
A persual of the instructions would show that the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by those instructions and he is entitled to be promoted to the post of Labour Inspector Grade-II.
As per these instructions, persons officiating against posts carrying higher scale of pay may be deemed to have forfeited their right on their assuming charge of the posts carrying a higher scale in the actual line of promotion.
It is also provided in the instructions that those who deliberately forego promotion in the ministerial cadre and persons junior to them are promoted can, however, be considered for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector Grade-II and Labour Inspector Grade-I as the case may be.
The petitioner while working as Junior Assistant in the cadre of clerks is drawing pay in the scale of 1500-2640 which is higher than the pay scale of Labour Inspector Grade-II but he had foregone his promotion as Resident Supervisor which was within the clerical cadre only to get promoted in the cadre of Labour Inspectors.
As noticed earlier, the department was promoting him as Resident Supervisor and to get that order quashed he had to file CWP 5799 of 1989 in this Court to which reference has already been made.
This being so, he is entitled to be considered for promotion as Labour Inspector Grade-II because in the meantime persons junior to him have been promoted to that post, Respondent 3 is one such person.
7.
Learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab strenuously urged before us that the post of Junior Assistant was a promotional post on which the petitioner had been appointed and, therefore, he cannot seek further promotion as Labour Inspector Grade-II.
There is no merit in this contention.
The post of Junior Assistant is in the cadre of clerks as is clear from the First Schedule to the Punjab Civil Services Revised Pay (Third Amendment) Rules, 1990.
A perusal of this schedule would show that the basic entry scale of clerks is 950-1800.
Forty per cent of the clerks are given the higher scale of 1200-2100 after they have put in a minimum of 5 years of service as clerks in the same cadre.
Further, after putting in a minimum of 10 years of service as clerks, 40% of them are given the scale of 1500-2640 and they are designated as Junior Assistants.
They, however, continue to remain in the same cadre.
This being so, it cannot be said that the post of Junior Assistant is a promotional post.
It is a designation given to a clerk who has put in a minimum of 10 years of service.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector Grade-II with effect from the date when respondent 3 was promoted.
This shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case there is any vacancy, the same shall be given to the petitioner but, in case, there is no vacancy, respondent 3 who is admittedly junior to the petitioner will have to be reverted after affording him an opportunity of hearing.
There is no order as to costs.