Sat Pal J (Oral) - In this petition, the petitioners have prayed for a writ of Mandamus for a direction to the respondents to grant them selection grade of Rs. 3700-5700 from the date it became due to the petitioners in accordance with the Policy decision.
The petitioners have also prayed that while calculating 16 years service, the service rendered by the petitioners in different colleges be taken into account.
2.
The stand taken by the respondents in the written statement is that service in the same College can only be considered for entitlement of the above-mentioned grade.
3.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners, submits that the point involved in this case is squarely covered by a judgment of this Court in Dr. Romila Jain v. The State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 53 : 1995(4) SLR 238.
He further submits that the decision in the case of Dr. Romila Jain (supra) was challenged by the respondents in LPA No. 636 of 1995 and the said LPA was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on 12th January, 1996.
He further submits that even the SLP filed by State against the aforesaid decision dated 12th January, 1996 has been dismissed on 22nd November, 1996.
4.
Mr. Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, submits that full particulars of the service rendered by the writ petitioners in various colleges have not been mentioned in this writ petition.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having perused the judgment in the case of Dr. Romila Jain (supra), I am of the view that the point raised in this writ petition is fully covered by the aforesaid judgment.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the decision of the respondents not to grant senior scale to the petitioners is declared illegal.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners through the Screening Committee for grant of senior scale in the cadre of Lecturers in accordance with the University Grants Commission guidelines.
The respondents shall examine the case of the each petitioner to ascertain as to whether they fulfil all the conditions mentioned in the said guidelines and if the petitioners are found suitable by the Screening Committee, the petitioners shall be granted the benefit of the senior scale counting their continuous service.
The respondents are further directed to pass appropriate orders within a period of four months and necessary benefit in the form of arrears should be given to the petitioners within next two months thereafter.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.