Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is an employee entitled to the benefit of ad hoc service for the purpose of determination of seniority in a case where the rule provides that the seniority shall be determined "from the date of joining the service on regular basis".
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Junior Draftsman vide order dated August 30, 1976.
In pursuance of this order he had joined service on September 3, 1976.
Vide order dated December 21, 1979 the petitioner's services were regularised with effect from April 1, 1978.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
In this order it was categorically mentioned that "he will be assigned seniority as Junior Draftsman in terms of Secretary PSEB Patiala circular memo No. 110533/111333/Eng.27(44), Vol. III, dated 1991978".
A copy of the aforesaid circular has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
This was the circular by which the Board had decided to regularise the service of persons who had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis.
The conditions for eligibility for regularisation were laid down in paragraph 5.
It was further provided as under :-  "The Seniority of the ad hoc employees whose appointments are regularised in terms of the above policy shall be determined in the following manner :- (a) After approval by the appointing authority, the regularisation of their appointments shall date back to 1.4.1978 from which date their seniority shall be determined vis-a-vis candidates appointed on regular basis, after selection through the prescribed agencies; (b) The Service rendered on ad hoc basis shall be taken into account for purposes of determining inter-se seniority among the ad hoc employees themselves and a person having a longer service shall be senior and if the date of appointment on ad hoc basis is the same, then the older member shall be senior to a younger member."
Long after the regularisation of his services, the petitioner submitted a representation dated August 17, 1994, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.8/A, to the respondents claiming that the period of service rendered by him on ad hoc basis from September 3, 1976 to March 31, 1978 may be included while determining his seniority.
This representation was followed by various other representations.
On December 2, 1996 the respondents rejected the petitioner's claim on the ground that "according to the instructions issued by the Board from time to time, the benefit of ad hoc service cannot be given towards seniority."
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He prays that this order be quashed and the respondents be directed to determine his seniority by giving him the benefit of service rendered on ad hoc basis.
3.
This matter was listed before a Bench of this Court for preliminary hearing on July 3, 1997.
The counsel had asked for time to enable him to produce the seniority lists which had been issued by the Board after his recruitment.
The case was adjourned for today.
The petitioner has filed an affidavit along with which he has produced extract from the seniority list which had been issued by the Board vide its letter dated July 27, 1982.
He has also produced extract from another list which had been circulated by the Board vide memorandum dated March 9, 1992.
The affidavit as well as the seniority lists are taken on record.
4.
Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner's appointment in the year 1976 was regular for all intents and purposes.
It had been made after inviting names from the Employment Exchange and interviewing the candidates.
That being so, the petitioner is entitled to the grant of benefit of ad hoc service rendered by him from September 3, 1976 to March 31, 1978 for the purpose of determination of seniority.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment of the Full Bench in Romesh Kumar Singla v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) PLR 411.
5.
Mr. Arora has categorically admitted before us that the conditions of service governing the petitioner are embodied in the Rules called "The Punjab State Electricity Board Class III Service Regulations, 1972."
Regulation 16 governs the determination of seniority.
This regulation, inter alia, provides that `prior to confirmation the seniority inter se of members of the service in a particular class of post shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment in that class i.e. from the date of joining the service on regular basis ' (emphasis supplied).
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had been appointed vide order dated August 30, 1976 on purely ad hoc basis.
It was categorically mentioned in the order that the appointment is "on ad hoc basis............ your appointment is purely temporary for a period of three months.
Your services can be terminated by the Board at any time, without notice and without any reason before completion of the fixed period".
Thereafter the petitioner's service were regularised in pursuance of the instructions issued by the Board subject to the specific condition that "the regularisation will date back to 1.4.1978 from which date ......... seniority shall be determined vis-a-vis candidates appointed on regular basis after selection from the prescribed agencies."
This provision was in strict conformity with the regulation which prescribes that the seniority shall be determined on the basis of date of regular appointment.
The petitioner accepted it without the slightest demur and protest.
He remained silent from 1979 to October 6, 1994 when he submitted his first representation.
During this interregnum at least two seniority lists were issued by the Board the extracts from which have been produced by the petitioner with his additional affidavit.
The first of these was circulated vide letter dated July 27, 1982.
A copy of it has been produced as Annexure P-14 with the additional affidavit.
The second list was issued vide letter dated March 9, 1992 and copy of this communication is at Annexure P-15.
On both the occasions the petitioner's seniority was fixed on the assumption that he had joined the service on April 1, 1978.
In the list issued in the year 1982 the petitioner was shown at serial No. 971 while in the later list his name had been placed at serial No. 915.
After the petitioner has accepted this position for so many years, there is no ground to alter the inter se position and on account of delay alone, the petitioner's claim deserves to be rejected.
6.
Another fact which deserves mention is that in case the petitioner's claim is accepted, he would become senior to more than hundred persons whose names are shown in the seniority list.
None of them has been impleaded as party in this writ petition.
In the absence of the persons whose interests are bound to be materially affected we do not find any good ground to grant the relief as prayed for by the petitioner.
7.
Above all, the statutory provision contained in Regulation 16 is absolutely clear.
It has been clearly provided that the seniority shall be determined by the date of appointment on regular basis.
Admittedly, the petitioner was granted regular appointment with effect from April 1, 1978.
His seniority has been fixed on that basis.
In this situation, the action of the respondents is in strict conformity with the regulation.
It is also in conformity with the circular by which the petitioner's services were permitted to be regularised.
In fact, the benefit of the regularisation having been accepted by the petitioner, subject to the conditions given in the circular, he is now estopped from claiming that the period during which he had worked on purely ad hoc basis should be taken into consideration for determining his seniority.
8.
Mr. Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the Full Bench Judgment in Romesh Kumar Singla's case (supra).
We have considered this judgment.
The rule regarding determination of seniority was categorically laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(2) SCT 734 : JT 1993(2) SC 598 (SC).
In Romesh Kumar Singla's case (supra) the Court was primarily concerned with the question as to whether or not a person is entitled to the benefit of ad hoc service towards the computation of the period at the completion of which he becomes entitled to the higher scale.
The question of inter se seniority was not directly involved.
It was in that context that the Full Bench had taken the view that "the Government is proved to have intended to grant the benefit of senior scale of pay only on completion of the prescribed period of service provided that the same was not interrupted or rendered against the service rules."
9.
Mr. Arora made an attempt to contend that the notification of the vacancies to the Employment Exchange is one of the recognised modes of recruitment to the service, and, therefore, the appointment made in 1976 should be treated as regular.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
It has not been shown that the candidates were considered for selection by direct recruitment.
The appointment of the petitioner was purely temporary for a period of three months.
It was expressly stated to be ad hoc.
It is only in pursuance of the circular, a copy of which is annexure P-3, that the services of various employees appointed on purely ad hoc basis had been regularised.
The petitioner had accepted this position from the year 1976 till 1994.
At this late stage he cannot be allowed to take a somersault and claim seniority over persons who are not even parties to this case.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.