Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this case, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 13th November, 1992 (Annexure P-1) by which he was dismissed from service.
He has also challenged the order dated 23rd November, 1993 (Annexure P-2) and the order dated 22nd April, 1994 (Annexure P-6) by which the appeal and the revision filed by the petitioner were also dismissed.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the Punjab Police on Ist October, 1987.
He was governed by the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the rules).
While working as Constable at Police Station, Moonak, District Sangrur, the petitioner remained absent from duty from 9th February, 1991 till 21st November, 1991.
Thereafter, he was taken on duty on 22nd November, 1991.
3.
The petitioner was charge sheeted for his alleged unauthorised absence from 9th February, 1991 to 21st November, 1991.
Departmental inquiry was conducted and on the basis of the report of the Inquiry Officer, the petitioner was dismissed from service vide order dated 13th November, 1992 (Annexure P-1).
Before passing the aforesaid order, the petitioner was issued show cause notice and in the reply to the show cause notice, he submitted that he did not remain absent intentionally but he could not report for duty during the said period as he was suffering from neurosis and mild depression.
In support of his illness, the petitioner also filed medical certificate issued by Dr. Gurdev Singh Mangat, MBBS, Doraha (Punjab).
The disciplinary authority, however, rejected the contention of the petitioner with regard to his illness and held that the aforesaid medical certificate was procured by him with a view to cover the period of his absence from duty.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the order dated 13th November, 1992 (Annexure P-1) before the appellate authority but the appellate authority vide order dated 23rd November, 1993 (Annexure P-2) dismissed the appeal.
Thereafter, the revision petition filed by the petitioner was also dismissed by respondent No. 3 vide his order dated 22nd April, 1994 (Annexure P-6).
4.
Mr. Gurcharan Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submitted that the absence of the petitioner from duty for the period from 9th February, 1991 to 21st November, 1991, was not intentional but this was on the ground of his illness.
He further submitted that in support of the illness, the petitioner had produced medical certificate before the disciplinary authority along with the reply to the show cause notice.
He, therefore, contended that a lenient view should be taken in the matter.
He also submitted that the petitioner has been unemployed since his dismissal from the service and has a family consisting of wife and children.
5.
Mr. Anil Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the State, however, submitted that the petitioner had deliberately absented himself from duty.
He further submitted that during the departmental inquiry, the petitioner did not produce any medical certificate in support of his alleged illness though he was given full opportunity.
He, therefore, contended that there was no merit in the petition and as such the petition was liable to be dismissed.
6.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records of the case.
It is true that the petitioner was employed as a Constable and the petitioner being a member of the disciplined force, was required to maintain discipline and to submit an application for leave accompanied by the medical certificate immediately after he fell ill, but the fact that the petitioner had produced medical certificate in support of his illness along with the reply to the show cause notice before the disciplinary authority cannot be ignored.
Keeping in view the aforesaid special facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that it would meet the ends of justice if an opportunity is given to the petitioner to work efficiently to prove his excellence.
7.
In view of the above discussion, the impugned orders dated 13th November, 1992 (annexure P-1) 23rd November, 1993 (Annexure P-2) and 22nd April, 1994 (Annexure P-6) are set aside and the respondents are directed to take the petitioner into service forthwith.
It is, however, made clear that in case the petitioner absents himself again for two consecutive days within one year without prior permission, appropriate disciplinary action be taken against the petitioner.
The petitioner, however, shall not be entitled to any back wages.
The view I have taken finds full support from a judgment of the Supreme Court in Malkiat Singh v. Punjab State etc., JT 1996(2) SC 648.
In that case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :  "It is true that discipline is required to be maintained.
However, absence may sometimes be inevitable.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, an opportunity may be given to the appellant to work efficiently to prove his excellence.
The order of discharge is set aside.
The respondents are directed to take the appellant into service forthwith.
If the appellant absents himself again for two consecutive days within one year without prior permission, appropriate action may be taken by dismissing him from service.
The appellant, however, is not entitled to back-wages."
8.
The petition is accordingly allowed in the above mentioned terms.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.