THB Chalapathi, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner challenges the order of the Director, Local Government, Punjab (vide Annexure P6) wherein it was stated that the Authority appointed by the Government under sub-section 6 of Section 38 read with Rule 5 of the Punjab Municipal Services (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1975 has not found the petitioner fit for recommending as Member of the Municipal Service of Accountants vide its decision on 2341996.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in February 1950 by Municipal Committee, Guniana, District Bathinda.
Later on, the Committee appointed him as Accountant on 1.4.1954 and he was also confirmed as Accountant by the resolution passed by the Municipal Committee.
Thereafter, the Government framed rules called ``The Appointment and Examination of Accountants of Municipal Committee Rules, 1958''.
But, the said rules were not applicable to the Accountants who have already been regularised before the framing of the Rules.
According to the petitioner, he also held the additional charge as Secretary of the Municipal Committee from September 1965 to February 1974.
Thereafter, Section 38 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 was amended by Punjab Act No. 24 of 1973.
The said amended Act came into force with effect from 1.12.1975.
In pursuance of the said amended Section, the State Government regularised the services of the employees and constituted a Committee to absorb the Accountants working in various Municipal Committees into State cadre.
The case of the petitioner was also referred by the Municipal Committee, Guniana to the Director Local Government vide its letter dated 331976.
But, according to the petitioner, no action was taken and the case of the petitioner was not placed before the Screening Committee which is the Authority constituted by the Government.
The petitioner also referred several correspondence between the Director, Local Government and the Municipal Committee in regard to the submission of the record of the petitioner for the consideration of the Committee.
It was only on 271986, the Director, Local Government (Directorate of Local Government, Punjab) alongwith its Memo No. 3LLG(TSG)-86/5423 enclosed an order passed under Section 38(6A) of the Municipal Act 1911 for being served on the petitioner.
Said letter was exhibited as P-25.
The order which was sought to be served as per the letter did not contain any date, but in paragraph 4 of the order, it is stated that the Authority appointed by the Government under sub-section 6 of Section 38 of the Punjab Municipal Act 1911 has not found the petitioner fit for recommending for the Municipal corresponding service vide its decision taken on 23.4.1976 and that the post on which the petitioner was serving before the constitution of the aforesaid service shall be deemed to have been abolished on 14101976.
As already stated, the petitioner challenges this order which was served on him in the year 1986.
3.
There is no dispute of the fact that the petitioner was appointed as Clerk in February 1950 in the Municipal Committee, Guniana and later on he was appointed as an Accountant on 1.4.1954 and the petitioner has been in service at the time when Section 38 of the Punjab Municipal Act was amended.
Sub- section 6 of Section 38 as amended in 1975 reads as follows :-  ``Every person, who, immediately before the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), is serving in a committee on a post in relation to which a Municipal Service is constituted, shall, on the issue of such notification, become a member of the corresponding Municipal Service, if he is found fit by an authority appointed by the Government in this behalf for becoming such a member on the basis of his qualification and service record :  Provided that his terms and conditions of service in so far as they relate to remuneration, gratuity and provident fund shall not be varied to his dis- advantage on his becoming a member of the Municipal Service :  Provided further that any such person may, by notice in writing given to the State Government, within a period of thirty days of the constitution of the Municipal Service, intimate his intention of not becoming a member of such service and where such an intimation is given that person will not become a member of the corresponding Municipal Service and will continue to be governed by the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to him immediately before the constitution of the Municipal Service.''
Thereafter, sub-section 6(A) to Section 38 was introduced in the year 1976 which reads as follows :-  ``6-A.
- In the case of a person who is not found fit under sub-section 6 for becoming a member of the corresponding Municipal Service the post on which he is serving shall be deemed to have been abolished on the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Second Amendment) Act, 1976, if the decision that he is not so fit was taken at any time before such commencement and in the case of others as and when such a decision is taken :  Provided that the Government may appoint such a person, with his consent on a post in any other Municipal Service to which he may be found suitable.''
Thus, it is clear that the post shall be deemed to have been abolished if the decision was taken before the commencement of the Punjab Municipal (Second Amendment) Act, 1976.
It is not sufficient to take a decision.
It has to be communicated to the person concerned as his rights are affected.
There is nothing on record to show that the decision which was allegedly taken by the Authority on 23.4.1976 was ever communicated to the petitioner.
In fact, the petitioner continued to be in service as Accountant of the Municipal Committee till 1986.
That is for over a decade after the alleged decision said to have been taken.
This does not fulfil requirement of Section 38 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
Further, the record produced before this Court clearly show that from 1976, the Directorate was asking for production of the service record of the petitioner for being considered by the Screening Committee vide Annexures P5 dated 20101980, P6 dated 111981, P7 dated 1321981, P8 dated 21.8.1981 and P-11 dated 1241984.
Thus, it can be seen from the correspondence that the service record of the petitioner was not available with the Directorate till 1241984.
Therefore, the Authority constituted under sub-section 6 of Section 38 could not have taken any decision in respect of the petitioner for his absorption in the cadre of Accountants.
No record has been produced before this Court to show that the Authority has considered the case of the petitioner on 23.4.1976.
4.
After perusing the relevant record, in the absence of the material showing that the case of the petitioner was considered, the only conclusion one can arrive at is that the petitioner's case had not been properly considered by the Authority.
Further, the Authorities slept over the matter for over a decade and the correspondence between the Municipal Committee and the Director, Local Government clearly shows that the Directorate was asking for the service record of the petitioner for being considered by the Authority/Screening Committee.
As already pointed out that there is nothing on record to show that any decision was taken in the year 1976.
It was only in the year 1986, the Municipal Committee, Guniana was informed that decision was taken by the Authority on 23.4.1976.
The decision taken by the Authority/Screening Committee as already observed, was not produced before this Court.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the impugned order Annexure P-25 is liable to be quashed and the petitioner should be deemed to have been in service as Accountant till he reached his superannuation.
5.
It is to be noticed that during the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner died and his wife and sons were impleaded as his legal representatives.
They are entitled to all the service benefits including the arrears of pay, if any, and the family pension payable to the wife of the deceased (petitioner) in accordance with Rules applicable to the case of the petitioner.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and Annexures P-25 and P-26 are hereby quashed and the respondents are directed to pay the arrears of salary as if the petitioner Ram Singh was in service till the date of his superannuation or his death which ever is earlier and the legal representatives are entitled to the arrears of pay, if any, and also retiral benefits in accordance with rules applicable to the case of the petitioner.