THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner filed this writ petition to quash order dated 1861976 by which the services of the petitioner were terminated vide Annexure P.1.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Manager in the Sirsa Cooperative Marketing Society Sirsa, on 18121963.
Thereafter, he was appointed as an Accountant.
Again, he was appointed as Manager with effect from 591969.
The Government of Haryana framed the Haryana State Supply and Marketing Cooperative Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the Common Cadre Rules) and the petitioner was appointed under the said Common Cadre Rules as Manager Grade `C' w.e.f.
111970.
In the tentative seniority list of Managers and Accountants, the petitioner was shown at serial No. 11 and his date of appointment was shown as 591969.
When the petitioner was working at Mandi Adampur, a charge-sheet was served on him for certain irregularities when he worked at Sirsa and an Enquiry Officer was appointed, but the said enquiry was subsequently withdrawn.
Thereafter the services of the petitioner were terminated by the impugned order dated 1861976 under Rule 210 of the Common Cadre Rules.
3.
The petitioner filed an appeal as provided under Rule 213 of the said Rules.
But, the appeal was dismissed as not maintainable by the Managing Director of the Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited by its order dated 251979 (Annexure P3).
Further the revision filed by the petitioner against the said order of the HAFED was dismissed as time barred by the Addl.
Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana by his order dated 2481981.
The petitioner, therefore, approached this Court by way of filing this writ petition.
The petitioner also challenged Rule 210 of the Common Cadre Rules, 1969 on the ground that the said Rule does not provide safeguards for the employees and no guidelines were issued and, therefore, it confers arbitrariness on the authorities.
4.
In the written statement, the respondents contended that the order of termination was a simplicitor and the petitioner approached this Court after a lapse of nearly seven years and, therefore, the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
It is further averred that the appeal does not lie under Rule 213 of the Common Cadre Rules.
Consequently, writ petition is not maintainable and further as per Rule 210 while terminating the services of an employee no punishment is imposed and therefore it does not violate any right of the petitioner and, therefore, the challenge to the said rule has no substance.
5.
Though a ground was taken in the written statement that the writ petition is not maintainable against the Cooperative Society, yet the same was not argued by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
There is no dispute of fact that the petitioner was appointed as Manager in the Sirsa Marketing Cooperative Society, Sirsa and thereafter the State Government provincilaised the services of the employees of the Societies and framed Common Cadre Rules, 1969 and that the petitioner was covered by the said rules and the petitioner was shown in the common seniority list of Managers and Accountants at serial No. 11 and his date of appointment was shown as 591969.
The services of the petitioner were terminated by an order dated 1861976.
The said order reads as follows :-  ``As your services are no longer required, you are hereby relieved of your duties from the Hafed with immediate effect.
You will be given one month's salary in lieu of one month's notice.
You can collect the salary from the District Manager, Hafed, Jind after furnishing `No Dues Certificate'.''
7.
The order of termination is simplicitor.
It does not contain any stigma.
There is no dispute that Rule 210 of the Common Cadre Rules provides as follows :-  ``Subject to the overall control of the Board, the service of any employee of the Societies governed by these rules may be terminated by the Administrative Committee by giving him one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof, provided that; (a) No employee shall be entitled to one month's notice or pay unless and until he has been in the service continuously for a period of three months.
(b) No employee shall be entitled to the notice or pay in lieu thereof if he is removed from service on account of misconduct established on record.''
Thus, the power is given to the Administrative Committee of the Society to terminate the services of the employee by giving him one month's notice or one month's pay in lieu thereof.
Though the services of the petitioner was terminated in the year 1976, he filed an appeal before the Managing Director of the Hafed on 741979.
As can be seen in Annexure P3, The Managing Director of the Hafed dismissed the appeal on 251979 on the ground that appeal lies only if the penalty is imposed under Rule 213.
Rule 213 provides as follows :-  ``Notwithstanding anything contained in any other regulation and without prejudice to such action to which an employee becomes liable under any other law, or regulation for the time being in force, any or all of the (sic) good and sufficient reason on any member of the service :- (a) Censure.
(b) Withholding of increment.
xx xx xx (c) Dismissal from service.
xx xx xx'' Rule 2.16 provides for an appeal against the order imposing penalty in Clause `C' of Rule 213.
Thus, the Managing Director of the HAFED is correct in dismissing the appeal of the petitioner on the ground that no appeal lies as the services of the petitioner were not terminated by way of punishment as provided under Rule 213.
Therefore, no fault can be found with the order of the Managing Director, Hafed dated 251979.
Further the revision before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies is also not maintainable as under Rule 217, revision lies only against an order passed by the Appellate Authority under Rule 2.16.
Thus, the appeal and the revision filed by the petitioner to the Managing Director and to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies are not maintainable.
Even the appeal before the Managing Director, Hafed was filed after a lapse of three years from the date of termination.
Services of the petitioner were terminated on 1861976 and the appeal was filed by the petitioner on 741979 i.e. nearly after a lapse of three years.
8.
When the rules do not provide for any appeal or revision, the proper course for the petitioner would be to file a writ petition challenging the order of termination or seek civil remedy according to law.
Writ petition is filed in the year 1983.
Thus, I am of the opinion that the writ petition is highly belated as the petitioner is seeking challenge of the termination order which was passed in 1976 by way of this writ petition.
The petitioner cannot take advantage of the proceedings taken by him in the appeal and revision which are not maintainable under the rules.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any ground to set aside the order of termination after a lapse of nearly 7 years prior to filing of writ petition.
Writ petition is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
It is accordingly dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.