Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as Principal, MN College, Shahabad, on October 1, 1982.
On May 31, 1985, he was served with a charge sheet.
After inquiry, the Management decided to dismiss him from service.
The Director of Public Instruction vide order dated Feburary 10, 1988, decided that the petitioner should be removed from service.
Accordingly, the orders for the petitioner's removal from service were issued.
The revision petition filed by the petitioner before the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Department of Education, was rejected vide order dated July, 14, 1988.
Aggrieved by the orders dated Feburary 10, 1988 and July 14, 1988, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It is alleged that the orders are violative of the provisions of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1980.
The allegations of bias and mala fides have also been made.
It is urged that the impugned orders deserve to be quashed.
The petitioner prays that the orders dated Feburary 10, 1988 and July 14, 1988, be set aside and he be reinstated in service with consequential benefits.
2.
This writ petition was originally heard by MR Agnihotri, J Vide order dated Feburary 25, 1991, his Lordship had allowed the writ petition on the ground that the enquiry conducted by the Management was violative of the principles of natural justice and rule 4(14).
The Management had filed a letters patent appeal which was dismissed.
However, Civil Appeal No. 5265 of 1992 filed by the third respondent was allowed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court vide order dated November 23, 1992.
The case was remanded for rehearing.
It has consequently been heard.
3.
This case had come up for hearing on December 5, 1996.
Mr. JS Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner, had made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it was contended that the charge sheet was neither drawn up nor served by the competent authority as contemplated under rule 4, Secondly, it was submitted that the members of the Managing Committee who had appeared as witnesses during the inquiry proceedings had ultimately taken the decision to punish the petitioner.
As a result, it was claimed that the entire action was vitiated.
4.
On behalf of the respondents, it was contended by Mr. AS Virk, that the petitioner had not raised such an objection specifically in the writ petition.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties at some length, the case was adjourned to give the respondents a chance to specifically state as to whether or not the charge sheet had been drawn up and served in accordance with the provisions of rule 4(2 and 3).
6.
Mr. RL Gulliani, President of the Governing Body, has filed an affidavit.
It has been averred that a meeting of the Governing Body was held on May 19, 1985, to consider to take disciplinary action against Mr. SK Budhiraja.
The agenda dated May 2, 1985, for convening the meeting of the Governing Body was "to consider taking disciplinary action against Mr. SK Budhiraja, Principal of the College on account of serious irregularities and illegalities committed by him during the tenure of his office."
In this meeting "the allegations and complaints regarding the charges, later on supplied to Shri SK Budhiraja vide charge sheet dated 3151985 were discussed in detail ...... and on looking into the seriousness of the allegations, it was unanimously decided to place Shri SK Budhiraja under suspension and serve charge sheet on him within a week thereof.
"The charge sheet was served "on Shri SK Budhiraja on 3151985 by Dr. KG Chadha, Acting President of the Governing Body on behalf of the Governing Body in compliance of the Rules of Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1980."
7.
Mr. Khehar submits that there is nothing on the record to show that the charges had been drawn up against the petitioner by the competent authority.
Learned counsel also submits that even the issue of charge sheet was not by the competent authority.
Resultantly, he submits that the proceedings were void ab initio.
Learned counsel also reiterates his claim that the members of the Managing Committee having appeared as witnesses during the course of the inquiry proceedings, they were judges in their own cause and thus the impugned orders cannot be sustained.
8.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been submitted by Mr. Virk that the charges had been duly discussed during the meeting of the Managing Committee.
The drawing up of the charges was purely a ministerial act.
It cannot be said that the action was vitiated merely because the charge sheet had been served by the Acting President.
Learned counsel further submits that the fact that some of the members of the Managing Committee had appeared as witnesses, does not invalidate the proceedings.
9.
It is the admitted position that the legislature had enacted the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979, with the object of providing "security of service to employees of affiliated colleges".
The Act lays down the procedure which has to be observed before the penalties of dismissal or removal can be imposed on an employee.
In exercise of the powers under the Act, the State Government has framed the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1980.
Rules 4(2 and 3) which are relevant for the present case may be usefully noticed.
These provide as under :-  "4.
Procedure for imposing major penalties of dismissal/removal from service or reduction in rank.
-  (1) xx xx xx (2) Where it is proposed to proceed against an employee for the award of major punishment the Managing Committee shall draw up - (i) the substance of the imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour into definite and distinct articles of charges; (ii) a statement of allegations on which each charge is based including the statement of all relevant facts including any admission or confession made by the employee.
(iii) a list of documents by which and a list of witnesses by whom the articles of charges are proposed to be substantiated.
(3) The Managing Committee shall deliver to the employee a copy of the articles of charges, the statement of allegations and a list of documents and witnesses by which each article of charge is proposed to be substantiated and shall require the employee to submit, within such time, not being less than fifteen days, as may be specified, a written statement of his defence and to state whether he desired to be heard in person."
10.
On a perusal of the above provisions, it appears that the charge sheet has to be drawn up and issued by the punishing authority viz. the Managing Committee.
The provision appears to have been made with the object of ensuring that no member of the Managing Committee should be free to issue a charge sheet on his own.
The matter should be considered by the Committee collectively before the career of the employee is put into jeopardy.
Still further, it is the admitted position that there are representatives of the University and the Government on the Governing Body.
Consequently, the rule ensures that the matter is considered by impartial outsiders as well.
Thus, on a plain construction of the provision and keeping in view the object thereof, it is clear that the charges should be drawn up by the Managing Committee.
A combined reading of clauses (2) and (3) implies that the Managing Committee shall draw up the charges and not leave the matter to any individual.
The orders for the issue of the charge sheet have to be passed by the Managing Committee.
Of course, the actual service of the charge sheet can be treated as a ministerial act which can be performed by the Managing Committee with the help of ministerial staff.
11.
What is the position in the present case ?
In the affidavit filed by Mr. RL Gulliani, an effort has been made to suggest that the charge sheet was issued after the matter had been discussed in detail and it had been resolved to proceed against the petitioner.
Thus far there is no problem.
However, the crucial question is - Did the Managing Committee draw up or even approve the charges which were levelled against the petitioner ?
It is the admitted position that the meeting was held on May 19, 1985.
The charge sheet was actually issued to the petitioner on May 31, 1985.
The meeting of the Managing Committee was thereafter held on October 12, 1985.
Thus, each article of charge should have been considered and approved by the Managing Committee on May 19, 1985.
Was it so ?
A perusal of the charge sheet shows that the charge No. 15 against the petitioner was in the following terms :-  "You deliberately avoided receiving in time the order of your suspension and handing over the charge of your office to the Acting Principal, Shri VK Ahluwalia.
Thus you are charged with disobedience and non-compliance of orders passed by the Governing Body in its meeting held on 1951985."
This charge could not have been discussed in the meeting held on May 19, 1985.
It could not have been considered by the Governing Body after the meeting.
Thus, it is clear that the charge sheet was drawn up and delivered to the petitioner by Dr. KG Chadha, the Acting President.
The charge sheet could not embody an allegation which was not considered by the Managing Committee.
The charge sheet was not in conformity with the provisions of rule 4(2).
In this situation, the first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner has to be accepted.
12.
It was also contended that the persons who had appeared as witnesses were also present in the meeting when the report of the Inquiry Officer was considered and the decision to impose the penalty was arrived at.
In paragraph 24(xii) of the writ petition, it has been specifically stated that Sarvshri KG Chadha, Malik Kharaiti Lal, Ram Lubhaya, VK Ahluwalia, HK Kasaab and AK Dhamija had appeared as witnesses against the petitioner during the course of the inquiry and had deposed against him.
These very gentlemen had subsequently considered the matter on receipt of the report from the Inquiry Officer.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the third respondent, the factual position has not been controverted.
It has only been averred that "only such members had appeared as witnesses before the Inquiry Officer who were directly concerned with the relevant charges and there is no prohibition that a member of the Managing Committee cannot appear as a witness against an employee under the provisions contained in the Act and the Rules."
Undoubtedly, there is no prohibition.
However, it is also one of the fundamental principles that no one shall be a judge in his own cause.
Equally, whenever there is a conflict between interest and duty, the person concerned shall not participate in the proceedings.
Admittedly, the Managing Committee consisted of 21 persons.
Even if the persons who had appeared as witnesses had not participated in the proceedings and the decision regarding the acceptance or rejection of the inquiry report was left to other members, there would have been no violation of the rules.
In any event, the persons who had appeared as witnesses were not entitled to sit in judgment and hold whether or not the charges were approved.
The petitioner could entertain a legitimate apprehension that those who had appeared as witnesses were bound to say that their evidence was correct and that the respective charges were approved.
The doctrine of bias is clearly attracted in this case.
Reference in this behalf can be made to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Rattan Lal Sharma v. Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram (Co-education) Higher Secondary School and others, 1993(3) RSJ 673 : JT 1993(3) SC 487 : 1993(3) S.C.T.
525.
In view of the above, this writ petition has to be allowed.
It is ordered accordingly.
Resultantly, the impugned orders are set aside.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the consequential benefits.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.