Sudershan Reddy, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by an order passed by the 2nd respondent in proceedings No. 1130/RGTM/AD/DG/94 dated 18.4.1995 terminating the services of the petitioner with effect from 18.4.1995 in view of the decision of the General Council of the Rajiv Gandhi Technology Mission for Rural Poor to dissolve itself with effect from 18.4.1995.
2.
The petitioner herein was appointed as an Office Assistant by the 2nd respondent through its proceedings dated 25111991.
He was appointed by the AP State Council of Science and Technology, Hyderabad on a consolidated pay of Rs. 1850/- per month with effect from 2181991.
The order itself would show that the appointment is purely temporary and does not confer any right on the incumbent and the services to be terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
The petitioner submits that for all purposes he was being treated as an employee of the 2nd respondent and was never treated as an employee of the 3rd respondent.
3.
The petitioner submits that the 3rd respondent could not have dissolved itself and the dissolution is politically motivated and the same shall not affect the interest of its employees.
It is stated that the termination order is totally illegal as the dissolution of the 3rd respondent Mission itself is illegal.
It would be appropriate to refer to the point raised in the writ petition as it is and as narrated in Paragraph No. 5 of the affidavit.
``I submit that if one reads by laws of the dissolved mission, there is no power vested within the Managing Committee or any other person to dissolve the Mission.
Even if there is such power, the interest of employees shall have to be considered into and not on pick and choose system.
I submit that along with me some other persons were appointed and all of them were taken back by the 2nd respondent and if found surplus, the 2nd respondent/to distribute them in any other State owned corporation like it.
When that is the case it is not open to the 2nd respondent to single out me and terminate my services because the Mission was dissolved.
I submit that even the Rajiv Gandhi Technology Mission for Rural Poor is also a State owned organisation and its dissolution is politically motivated and even then the dissolution shall not affect the interests of its employees.
I submit that even a look into the contracts of the Lr.
No. RGT/PF/GC/95 dated 18.4.1995 to addressed to the Chief Secretary would disclose that there is a recommendation to retain me in any of the other State-owned organisation.''
The Government G.O.Ms.
No. 630 EFES and T (S and T) Department dated 2081991 had decided to set up Rajiv Gandhi Technology Mission for Rural Poor to commemorate the memory of Sri Rajiv Gandhi and for the said purpose appointed a committee headed by the Chairman with the status and rank of the Cabinet Minister of the Government of AP to study the proposal in depth and come up with the recommendations regarding the course of action.
The Government in G.O.Ms.
No. 293 Energy, Forest, Environment, Science and Technology (S and T) Department dated 30101991 declared that the Chairman of Rajiv Gandhi Technology Mission is entitled for personal staff as indicated therein and the 2nd respondent was requested to fill up the said posts.
The petitioner herein was selected as Public Relations Asst.
of Chairman and was appointed as such by proceedings dated 25111991.
The Rajiv Gandhi Technology Mission was established pursuant to the orders of the Government in G.O.Ms.
No. 60, Energy, Forests, Environment, Science and Technology (S and T) Department dated 1831992 as an autonomous registered society and registered under the Societies Registration Act.
Accordingly the staff appointed pursuant to G.O.
Ms. No. 293 dated 30101991 were taken under the control of the 3rd respondent-Mission.
All the employees appointed were thus sent to the 3rd respondent Mission and became their employees and the amounts spent by the 2nd respondent herein was reimbursed by the 3rd respondent to 2nd respondent.
4.
It is stated in the counter-affidavit that the petitioner at all points of time was an employee of the 3rd respondent though initially appointed by the 2nd respondent.
5.
There is no dispute that the General Council of the 3rd respondent-Mission by its Resolution on 18.4.1995 dissolve itself with effect from 18.4.1995.
It was resolved that the employees who have come from the 2nd respondent along with the schemes shall be transferred to the 2nd respondent and the services of other employees that were recruited by the Society shall stand terminated.
In such view of the matter, the Special Officer of the 3rd respondent-Mission terminated the services of the petitioner with effect from 18.4.1995.
It is stated in the counter-affidavit that as the petitioner was appointed only for the purpose of the 3rd respondent-Mission and he was under the employment of the 3rd respondent till it was dissolved, there was no other go except to terminate the services of the petitioner upon the dissolution of 3rd respondent-Mission.
It is also stated that the petitioner was appointed as a member of personal staff for Chairman of Rajiv Gandhi Technology Mission and has nothing to do with the schemes which are now transferred to the parent Department along with staff.
Since the organisation of the 3rd respondent itself is dissolved, the petitioner cannot be allowed to continue in service.
6.
It is stated in specific terms that the petitioner was aged 37 years old even at the time when he was appointed as one of the members of the personal staff of the Chariman of the 3rd respondent-Mission and he was not qualified for being appointed into any of the Government service.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be absorbed into any of the Government service as prayed for by the petitioner.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the dissolution of the 3rd respondent-Mission is not in accordance with the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh (Telengana Area) Public Societies Registration Act, 1350 Fasli, for short `the Act'.
It is urged by the learned counsel that the Society registered under the said Act with the Government as a Member cannot be dissolved without the consent of the Government.
The learned counsel placed reliance upon Secs.
10 and 18 of the said Act.
The pleadings in the case are totally insufficient to express any opinion on the said aspect of the matter.
At any rate, I express any inability to go into the question at the instance of the petitioner who is an employee of the dissolved society.
Employees of the Society cannot raise any dispute regarding the dissolution of the Society and such dispute, if any, can be raised only by a member of the Society in the prescribed manner by way of application in the District Court concerned.
In my considered view, this Court cannot issue a writ of Mandamus compelling a Society to continue its activity for the sake of its employees.
It is clear that with the dissolution of the Society, all its activities have come to an end and the petitioner cannot ask for a writ compelling the Society to continue its operation, so that he can remain in employment.
The relief prayed for by the petitioner is totally misconceived.
8.
It is clear from the counter-affidavit that certain schemes which were being looked by after the 2nd respondent was transferred to the 3rd respondent after its advent and some employees of the 2nd respondent were transferred along with the scheme and also their services were placed at the disposal of the 3rd respondent-Mission.
After the dissolution of the Mission only such of those employees who were transferred to the 3rd respondent organisation were taken back into the services of the 2nd respondent as they have always continued in the services of the 2nd respondent.
The petitioner's case stands entirely on a different footing as he was never appointed as an employee by the 2nd respondent for any of its purposes.
But he was recruited by the 2nd respondent as one of the personal staff for the Chairman of the 3rd respondent and as such it cannot be said that he is an employee of the 2nd respondent.
The petitioner, therefore, has to sink or sail with the 3rd respondent-Mission.
The relief prayed for by the petitioner cannot be granted by this Court.
9.
The writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed