Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on October 31, 1979.
A case under sections 420/465/471 IPC was registered against him.
Vide judgment dated January 24, 1986, the Judicial Magistrate found that the charges were proved.
The petitioner was accordingly convicted.
In view of the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules, the Superintendent of Police ordered his dismissal from service vide order dated August 30, 1986.
In the meantime, the petitioner had filed an appeal against the order of his conviction.
This appeal was allowed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge vide judgment dated November 25, 1986.
Thereafter, the petitioner alleges that he submitted a representation for his reinstatement.
The respondents having taken no action, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to treat him as continuing in service and that the order dated August 30, 1986, be quashed.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner has wrongly referred to the unamended provisions contained in rule 16.2(2) of the Punjab Police Rules.
A copy of the gazette notification dated August 28, 1981, by which the rule was amended has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
It has been further averred that the judgment of the learned Additional Sessions Judge has been challenged by the State Government before this Court.
Consequently, it is prayed that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief as claimed by him.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. HS Mann, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that Criminal Appeal No. 289-DB of 1987, The State of Punjab v. Jaswinder Singh was dismissed by the Division Bench vide judgment dated October 7, 1991.
Since the order of the petitioner's acquittal has been upheld, the respondents are bound to treat the petitioner as continuing in service since the date of his dismissal.
On the other hand, Mr. DS Dhillon, learned counsel for the respondents, has submitted that the petitioner had actually produced a bogus certificate at the time of his recruitment.
Even if he has been acquitted of the criminal charge levelled against him, he is not entitled to claim reinstatement.
4.
Rule 16.2(2) which is relevant for the decision of the present case provides as under :-  ``If the conduct of an enrolled police officer leads to his conviction on a criminal charge and he is sentenced to imprisonment, he shall be dismissed : Provided that a punishing authority may, in an exceptional case, involving manifestly extenuating circumstances, for reasons to be recorded and with the prior approval of the next higher authority impose any punishment other than that of dismissal : Provided further that in case the conviction of an enrolled police officer is set aside in appeal or revision, the officer empowered to appoint him shall review his case keeping in view the instructions issued by the Government from time to time in this behalf.''
A perusal of the above provision shows that whenever an enrolled police officer is convicted and unless it is found that there are manifestly extenuating circumstances, he has to be dismissed from service.
The obvious purpose is that a police officer who is charged with the duty to maintain law and order cannot be entrusted with that duty if he is himself found guilty of a criminal charge.
The second proviso to the rule, however, provides that the appointing authority shall ``review his case _________'' when the conviction is set aside in appeal or revision.
5.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the petitioner's conviction has been set aside by the appellate Court.
It is also not disputed that the appeal filed by the State has been dismissed.
In this situation, it was clearly incumbent on the appointing authority to review the petitioner's case keeping in view of the instructions, if any, that may have been issued by the Government.
Such a review does not appear to have been carried out by the competent authority.
6.
Resultantly, the writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana, shall review the petitioner's case in accordance with the provisions of rule 16.2(2).
In case the authority feels that it is proper to held an inquiry into the petitioner's conduct in accordance with the rules, it will be free to do so.
However, if it is found that the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated, he will be given all consequential benefits.
No costs.