M.H.S.
Ansari, J - Heard Sri G Peda Babu, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri RS Murthy, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the Central Government on behalf of the respondent.
2.
The petitioner has questioned the orders dated 1141996 of the Respondent dismissing the petitioner from service based upon the enquiry conducted into certain charges levelled against the petitioner.
It is the contention of the petitioner that the petitioner was served with a Memorandum of Charges dated 381995 and later on, some more charges were framed against the petitioner by Memorandum dated 22.11.1995 and 2621995.
The petitioner underwent Coronary Artery By-pass Graft Surgery on 20.11.1995 in Mediciti Hospital, Hyderabad and was advised complete bed rest for a period of three months in the first instance and thereafter one month more and was given a Certificate to resume duty from 131996.
In the meanwhile, an Enquiry Officer was appointed who issued a Notice dated 1611996 stating that the enquiry would be held on 2911996 into the charges levelled against the petitioner.
The petitioner by a letter dated 2211996 requested adjournment by one month for participation in the enquiry on Medical grounds.
The Enquiry Officer, However, proceeded with the said enquiry ex parte on 30th and 31st January, 1996 holding the petitioner guilty of all the charges.
The petitioner has assailed the said Enquiry proceedings on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice and consequently sought a direction for declaring the impugned proceedings dated 1141996 dismissing the petitioner from service based on the said Enquiry Report as illegal.
3.
A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the Respondent.
The maintainability of the above writ petition is questioned on the ground of availability of an efficacious alternative remedy of appeal under Rule 37 of the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1995 of TRIFED.
It is submitted in the Counter that the petitioner is involved in grave misconduct and failure to safeguard the financial and commercial interests of the Respondent.
With regard to the Departmental Enquiry, it is stated that the petitioner did not participate and that the Departmental Enquiry was held on 3011996 and 3111996.
It is stated that the petitioner sought postponement of the Departmental Enquiry vide a letter dated 2611996 on health grounds without offering any documentary evidence.
The same was received on 2911996 and the enquiry was therefore held ex parte.
Based on the findings of the Enquiry Officer, the petitioner was given another opportunity by Disciplinary Authority vide its letter dated 631996 enclosing a copy of the Enquiry Report and the petitioner without any explanation sought further documents thereby establishing that he has no defence to the charges.
It is further stated that the Disciplinary Authority based on the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the evidence on record, imposed the punishment of dismissal from service with effect from 1141996, since the petitioner failed to offer any explanation or adduce evidence rebutting the charges and allegations.
4.
On behalf of the respondent Sri RS Murthy, learned Additional Standing Counsel for Central Government submitted that the petitioner was afforded adequate opportunity which he failed to avail and that the Disciplinary Authority based on the findings of the Enquiry Officer and evidence on record imposed the punishment of dismissal.
The nature of charges levelled against the petitioner relate to grave financial impropriety.
The punishment of dismissal from service is in accordance with law and both the Enquiry Report as well as the Order of the Disciplinary Authority are just and proper.
It is further contended that the petitioner has a remedy of appeal against the impugned order of dismissal and therefore the invocation of jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, contends learned counsel for the Respondent, is not proper.
5.
Sri G Peda Babu, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, contended that the petitioner had undergone Heart Surgery and was not in a position to attend the Enquiry which was fixed for 2911996.
The petitioner had sought postponement by only one month on health grounds.
That was the first sitting of the enquiry and it is contended by Sri Peda Babu, learned counsel for the petitioner, that no prejudice would have been caused if the enquiry had been postponed as requested by the petitioner by his letter dated 2211996.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also contended that the petitioner had sent a letter dated 2211996 requesting postponement by one month and the Counter affidavit does not advert to nor deny the receipt of such letter.
In short the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Enquiry conducted against the petitioner is in utter violation of principles of natural justice.
6.
It is true that in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent, the allegation made in paragraph 5 of the Affidavit filed in support of the above writ petition that the petitioner had sent a letter dated 2211996 requesting postponement of enquiry by one month to enable petitioner to participate in the enquiry on account of Heart Surgery has not been adverted to in the counter affidavit.
However, it is stated in the Counter affidavit that the petitioner sought postponement of the Departmental Enquiry vide letter dated 2611996 (received on 2911996) on health grounds and that the Enquiry was held ex parte as the Enquiry Officer reached Hyderabad by 2911996.
7.
The medical condition of the petitioner is not in dispute.
The petitioner contended that he has undergone By-pass Surgery on 29111995 and therefore sought postponement of the enquiry which was scheduled to be held on 2911996 on health grounds.
The respondents in its Counter have stated that the Departmental Enquiry was held on 3011996 and 3111996 by keeping due regard to the physical condition of the petitioner since he was admitted in the Hospital on 14.11.1995 and discharged on 30111995.
It is not in dispute that 2911996 was the first date of hearing before the Enquiry Officer and the same was intimated to the petitioner by letter dated 1611996.
While it is not in dispute that the petitioner by letter dated 2611996 sought adjournment on health grounds, there is no denial about the receipt of the letter sent by the petitioner on 2211996 seeking postponement of the enquiry.
However, from the Enquiry Report, which is filed amongst material papers, the enquiry Officer has stated as under:  ``I had issued a notice to the Charged Officer vide letter dated 16th January, 1996 thereby informing him that the hearings of this case in question would be held on 2911996 in the Regional Office of TRIFED at Hyderabad and as such he was asked to attend the proceedings on the appointed date, time and place.
However, in reply to my said notice, the Charged Officer vide his application dated 2211996 (received in the HO of TRIFED on 2311996) requested to postpone the hearings on health grounds.
Pursuant to the orders of the Disciplinary Authority as recorded on the body of the said application, the Charged Officer's request was rejected and accordingly a notice dated 2311996 was issued by me to the Charged Officer stating that sufficient time had already been given to him and therefore, it would not be in the interest of the justice to postpone the proceeding any more.
He was once again advised to attend the proceeding on the appointed date, time and place failing which proceedings would be held ex parte.
As notified and scheduled, the proceedings of the case were taken up by me in the TRIFED's Regional Officer at Hyderabad on 2911996 at 1030 am And whereas the Presenting Officer was present to present the case on behalf of the Disciplinary Authority, but the Charged Officer did not turn up for hearings and as a result proceedings on the saidday could not be held.
In the interest of natural justice, the Charged Officer was given one more opportunity to appear before me for the proceedings on the next day ie, on 3011996 at 1030. a.m. at the same place.
For this purpose, a notice was served on the Charged Officer on 2911996 itself.''
(emphasis supplied) 8.
It is now well settled that judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is directed not against decision but is confined to the examination of the decision-making process.
The judicial review of the decision-making process includes examination, as a matter of law, of the relevance of the facts.
9.
We are therefore concerned in the instant case with the decision-making process and not with correctness of the decision itself.
The point for consideration is whether, in the instant case, principles of natural justice were duly observed in the enquiry before the Enquiry Officer.
10.
Principles of natural justice ensure fair decision where the function is quasi judicial.
The petitioner was in the instant case entitled to a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the enquiry into the charges levelled against the petitioner.
There can be no doubt that if a reasonable opportunity to be heard has not been given to the petitioner in the enquiry by the Enquiry Officer, the enquiry is vitiated and is liable to be set aside on the grounds of violation of principles of natural justice.
11.
The requirement that a reasonable opportunity of being heard must be given has two elements.
The first is that an opportunity to be heard must be given.
The second is that this opportunity must be reasonable.
Both these matters are justiciable and it is for the Court to decide whether an opportunity has been given and whether that opportunity has been reasonable.
12.
In the instant case, the Enquiry Officer by his letter dated 1611996 informed the petitioner that the enquiry would be held on 2911996.
The petitioner had by his letter dated 2211996 sought adjournment on health grounds.
That was the first request of the petitioner seeking postponement of the very first hearing before the Enquiry Officer.
The rejection of the said request was not reasonable.
As already noticed, the petitioner had undergone by-pass surgery and if the petitioner's request for postponement by one month was not considered reasonable or appropriate, the petitioner could have been given a shorter adjourment by postponing the enquiry to enable the petitioner to make appropriate arrangements and prepare himself for the enquiry.
It was the first request made by the petitioner for postponement.
The petitioner had undergone heart surgery and was discharged from hospital in November, 1995.
The request of the petitioner for adjournment was considered by the Disciplinary Authority and not by the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer had no occasion to independently apply his mind.
Pursuant to the endorsement of the Disciplinary Authority, the Enquiry Officer rejected the request of the petitioner and issued a notice to the petitioner stating that it would not be in the interest of justice to postpone the proceedings and the petitioner was asked to attend the enquiry on the appointed date as already notified.
The petitioner did not turn up for the enquiry on 2911996 and instead repeated his request for adjournment by letter dated 2611996 received on 2911996.
The enquiry was thereupon taken upon on the very next date ie, 3011996 after issuing a notice dated 2911996 to the petitioner.
The enquiry then proceeded ex parte and was concluded on 3011996.
Inspite of the request of the petitioner for adjournment of the very first hearing on health grounds, the enquiry was conducted ex parte without postponement.
13.
In the circumstances, I find it not possible to hold that the petitioner was given reasonable opportunity of being heard at the said Enquiry.
The order passed by the Enquiry officer is therefore in disregard of the principles of natural justice and consequently the impugned order dated 1141996 dismissing the petitioner from service passed by the Respondent based on the said enquiry are illegal and are accordingly declared void and set aside.
14.
When the impugned order is questioned on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice, alternative remedy of statutory appeal does not bar the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondent as to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground of availability of alternative remedy of appeal has therefore to be rejected.
15.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed in part setting aside the order passed by the Enquiry Officer dated 631996 as also the consequential order dated 1141996 passed by the Disciplinary Authority based on the said enquiry.
It is directed that the Enquiry Proceedings shall proceed from the stage at which they existed before the Enquiry Officer when the date of enquiry was fixed.
The respondent shall accordingly issue notice afresh to the petitioner intimating the date of enquiry and the enquiry shall be held and disposed of expeditiously and in accordance with law after affording an opportunity to the petitioner of being heard in the matter and placing such oral or documentary evidence as the petitioner may choose and with liberty to cross-examine any witnesses that may be presented on behalf of the Respondent-Management.
The petitioner shall cooperate in early disposal of the said enquiry without seeking any undue adjournments or prolonging the said enquiry.
16.
It is, however, clarified that till the enquiry is concluded, the petitioner shall be kept under suspension and the question of reinstatement of the petitioner can be considered depending upon the result of the Enquiry.
17.
With directions, as above, the writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
But, in the circumstances without costs.
Order accordingly.