NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Petitioner is a pensioner having retired from the Army on 30.4.1988 in the rank of Lt. Col.
It is his case that after retirement he was paid all the retiral benefits including the provident fund that was due to him.
He was re-employed by the Army authorities on 27101988 and after working for a little more than a year he submitted his resignation which was accepted w.e.f.
30.6.1990.
During the period of his re-employment provident fund was deducted from his salary.
He has filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution with a grievance that the provident fund due to him on his resignation which was deducted during the period of his re- employment has not been paid to him.
The only prayer made in the petition is that the respondents be directed to release the said amount.
2.
Mr. SK Pipat, Senior Advocate appearing for the Union of India submits that a sum of Rs. 34, 766/- is due to the petitioner and this amount has not been released as he did not submit a contingent bill for the same.
It is further submitted on behalf of the respondents that if the petitioner submits a contingent bill the amount would be released to him within a period of one month.
3.
When this case came up for hearing on 971993 it was observed by this Court that the petitioner should approach the concerned Commanding Officer with the contingent bill who would countersign the same and on its submission the respondents were directed to release the amount within one month therefrom.
Petitioner who is appearing in person states that he did not approach the Commanding Officer as, according to him, it is not necessary to submit such a bill and that the rules governing the release of provident fund do not require such a bill to be submitted.
It may be mentioned that the petitioner filed a civil suit for the recovery of the aforesaid amount and it is stated that a copy of the contingent bill was submitted in the trial Court.
The suit was later withdrawn with permission to file this petition.
4.
Today again when the case was taken up for hearing it was put to the petitioner if he was willing to submit a contingent bill duly countersigned by the concerned Commanding Officer.
He states that he will not submit this bill to the respondents.
5.
In view of the adamant attitude adopted by the petitioner, I have no option but to dispose of the writ petition with a direction to the respondents to release the provident fund to the petitioner within one month of his submitting a contingent bill for the aforesaid amount duly countersigned by the concerned Commanding Officer.
No costs.
Order accordingly.