Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who claims to be physically handicapped submitted an application dated February 21, 1995, to the State Transport Commissioner for appointment to the post of Assistant District Transport Officer.
Vide letter dated April 19, 1995, the authority informed him that the ``posts of Assistant District Transport Officer are to be filled up in the near future through Punjab Subordinate Service Selection Board.
So, you can apply to the SSS Board at the appropriate time''.
Aggrieved by this communication, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that the letter dated April 19, 1995, by which the State Transport Commissioner had informed him that he can apply to the Subordinate Services Selection Board may be quashed and that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondent to consider his claim for appointment to the post of Assistant District Transport Officer without subjecting him to the rigour of selection by the Board.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that 14 posts of Assistant District Transport Officers which are to be filled up by direct recruitment have been notified to the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
An advertisement has been issued.
In terms of the policy of the State Government, one per cent of the posts under the State are reserved for the blind and deaf and another one per cent for the orthopaedically handicapped persons.
For this purpose, a 100 point roster is maintained.
The vacancies falling at point No. 11 is reserved for the blind and the deaf and point No. 71 is reserved for the orthopaedically handicapped persons.
At present, there is no reserved point earmarked for the orthopaedically handicapped persons.
Consequently, the petitioner has no right to claim appointment to one of the posts merely on account of his being a physically handicapped person.
The respondents consequently pray that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
The petitioner has filed additional affidavit to contend that the roster point reserved for the blind and the deaf is inter-changeable with that for the orthopaedically handicapped persons.
It has been further claimed that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for appointed against roster point No. 11.
Counsel for the parties heard.
4.
Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that vide instructions dated April 24, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition, the State Government has inter alia provided that the physically handicapped persons have to be appointed on priority.
For this purpose, their suitability has to be adjudged by the appointing authority.
It is not required to ``get the approval of the Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Departmental Selection Committee ______''.
Consequently, the petitioner's claim had to be considered by the appointing authority without subjecting him to the process of selection.
The action of the respondents in advising the petitioner to submit an application for appointment to the post to the Board is contrary to the instructions and cannot be sustained.
5.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. DS Dhillon, learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution guarantee equality of opportunity.
In particular, Article 16 ordains that every citizen shall have equality of opportunity in the matter of appointment to posts under the State.
It is no doubt true that special provision can be made for the weaker sections of the society.
However, it cannot be done in such a way that the guarantee of equality is thwarted.
The preparation of the priority list as postulated under the instructions issued by the Government can only mean that reservation can be made for these categories and the claims of all persons belonging to one or the other of the six classes as mentioned in these instructions have to be considered against a post which may have been reserved for that class.
However, it cannot mean that a person who comes to know of the availability of a post can surreptitiously submit an application and the appointing authority is bound to appoint him if he fulfils the qualifications.
Even when the appointing authority introduces a classification and makes a reservation for a certain class, it is bound to guarantee equality of opportunity to all persons who belong to that class.
If a post is reserved for the physically handicapped persons, all persons who fulfil the qualifications and suffer from the kind of handicap as stipulated in the instructions have a right not only to submit their applications but also to be considered in accordance with law.
It is not permissible under the Constitution that an authority may entertain an application from an individual without giving a notice of the availability of the vacancy and granting an opportunity to various eligible persons to compete.
7.
In the present case, the petitioner probably came to know of the availability of the posts in the office of the State Transport Commissioner through some one.
He submitted an application on February 21, 1995.
The competent authority after consideration of the matter informed him that the posts are to be filled up in the near future through the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The petitioner was advised to apply for the post at the appropriate time.
The action of the authority was in strict conformity with the requirements of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The apparent intention of the authority was to advertise the posts through the Board, invite applications and to appoint the persons who were recommended by the Board.
It is the admitted position that the posts were in fact advertised.
However, the petitioner did not apply.
That being so, the Board could not have considered his claim or recommended his name to the competent authority.
8.
Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that in accordance with the instructions issued by the State Government, the matter of appointment of a handicapped person has to be considered by the appointing authority without reference to the Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Departmental Selection Committee.
He further submits that it is open to the authority to advertise the posts.
However, it cannot subject the candidate to the rigour of selection through the Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Departmental Selection Committee.
9.
This contention is wholly lacking in merit.
Firstly, the instructions issued by the Government do not mean that if a handicapped person applies for a post, the Government is bound to consider his claim for appointment.
The grant of priority only means that a provision for a preferential treatment can be made.
It is the admitted position that the instructions for reservation of 2 per cent posts for physically handicapped persons have been issued by the Government vide letter dated November 24, 1982.
Thereafter, vide instructions dated April 24, 1986, it was inter alia provided that the appointment shall be on `priority'.
When the two sets of instructions are harmonised, it is clear that preference is admissible to the physically handicapped persons only in respect of 2 per cent of the posts.
In order to effectuate this reservation, the Department has reserved point Nos. 11 and 71 on the 100 point roster for the handicapped persons.
While point No. 11 has been treated as reserved for the blind and the deaf persons, the point at No. 71 is reserved for the orthopaedically handicapped persons.
Admittedly, the post at point No. 71 has not been advertised.
So far as point No. 11 is concerned, it is reserved for the blind and the deaf.
Even if it is assumed that the roster point was inter-changeable, though I am extremely doubtful if it is permissible, yet the petitioner cannot get any benefit.
The reserved point is not shown to have reached.
No post reserved for the orthopaedically handicapped persons has been advertised.
The petitioner has not even submitted his application in response to the advertisement issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Still further once it is conceded that the posts can be advertised by the competent authority, some process of selection will have to be followed.
After advertisement, all persons who apply shall have a right to be considered by the competent authority.
For selection, the authority shall have to lay down a criteria and conduct a written test and/or interview.
The candidate shall not be entitled to escape the requirement of facing competition.
This is precisely what the respondents are doing in the present case.
The petitioner was only interested in getting a back door entry into service.
The State Transport Commissioner has not permitted him to do so.
He has acted within the letter and spirit of law.
The petitioner has suffered no injustice which may call for any intervention by the court.
9.
No other point has been urged.
10.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
However, since the petitioner is a handicapped person, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.