G Bikshapathy, J - The Petitioner is a Graduate in Arts and Education.
He was appointed by selection to the unaided post of B.Ed.
Assistant with effect from 171992.
Necessary registers and documents were prepared and attested by the authorities, manifesting his regular appointment.
2.
On 1131995, the 1st respondent issued notification for filling up the post of S.G.B.T.
Teacher and B.Ed.
Assistants.
The Petitioner applied for B.Ed.
Assistant post as in-service candidate.
However, he did not get interview call and the reasons gathered by the petitioner were that he was overaged.
The said action is challenged.
3.
This Court on 22.3.1995 granted interim directions to interview the petitioner.
Later on, the results of the interview was directed to be declared.
The petitioner was selected for the post of B.Ed.
Assistant.
However the respondents were not inclined to approve the appointment on the ground that the petitioner was overaged on the date of selection and hence he cannot be appointed to the post of B.Ed.
Assistant.
In the counter filed by the 2nd respondent it was contended that the earlier appointment of the petitioner in unaided post was not in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government.
There was no valid constitution of the selection committee as the nominee of the Government was present in the selection committee.
In the later selection, the petitioner was overaged and hence the appointment is illegal.
The respondent submits that the Government issued rules for the recruitment for the teachers in GOMs.
No. 1 dated 111994.
Under Rule 10(13) the institution shall not appoint any Teacher whose certificate has been suspended or who has been convicted for offences involving moral turpitude or who has crossed the prescribed age limits or superannuated persons.
The prescribed age is 36 years.
Admittedly, the petitioner crossed 36 years as on the date of selection.
Hence, the petitioner cannot be appointed.
4.
Therefore, the question that arises for consideration is the age which is prescribed.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Government have not prescribed any age under the rules framed under AP Education Act, 1982.
The expression `prescribed' is defined as `prescribed by the rules made by the Government under the Act'.
Since no rules have been framed prescribing the age, the claim of the petitioner cannot be rejected on the ground that the petitioner crossed 36 years of age.
He relies on the decision of the Court in K. Vidyasagar v. The Director of School Education, Andhra Pradesh and others, WP No. 14458 of 1994, dated 6.12.1994.
On the other hand, the learned Government Pleader submits that the prescribed age should be construed as the age prescribed by the Government for entry into service.
She relied on the decision of the learned single Judge in WP No. 21979 of 1994, dated 16121994.
6.
It is necessary to extract Rule 10(13) of the Rules framed in GO Ms. No. 1, Education (P.S2) dated 111994, thus:  ``that the education agency shall not appoint any candidate as a teacher whose certificate has been suspended or who has been convicted for offences involving moral turpitude or who has crossed the prescribed age limits or superannuated persons''.
7.
Interpreting the above rule, my learned brother Sri Parvatha Rao, J held thus :  ``No doubt, this sub-rule requires that the educational agency shall not appoint any candidate who has crossed ``prescribed'' age limit, among others, but what is missed by the 2nd respondent is that sub-rule (13) also does not prescribe any age limit.
In fact, the learned Government Pleader accepts the position that the rules do not prescribe any age limits.
If any age limit is prescribed, there is no doubt that in view of sub-rule (13) of Rule 10, no person who has crossed that particular age limit which has been prescribed, can be appointed.
But unless an age limit is prescribed by rule under the Act, it cannot be taken for granted that 36 years is the age limit prescribed for OCs under sub-rule (13) of Rule 10.
No other rule prescribing the age limit as 36 years has been placed before me, as already stated above......
The present GOMs.
No. 1 of 1994 superseded the said GOMs.
No. 524 dated 20121988 and even under the rules made under GOMs.
No. 1 dated 111994, as already pointed out above, no upper age limit was fixed.
In view of this, it is clear that the present position is that there is no upper age limit prescribed for appointment of teachers in private aided schools.
It follows that the respondents cannot refuse to consider the application of the petitioner on the ground that he has crossed 36 years of age on the erroneous assumption that the upper age limit fixed for appointment as teachers by the private aided schools - there is no legal basis for the said assumption''.
8.
In the decision rendered in WP No. 21979 of 1994 the learned Judge dismissed the writ petition at the admission stage on the grounds that the petitioner was over-aged.
He refused to accept the view expressed by this Court in M. Raji Reddy v. The Superintending Engineer, APSEB Warangal and another, 1994(1) APLJ 54 : 1995(1) S.C.T.
688(HC).
However, the decision in WP No. 14458 of 1994 was not brought to the notice of the learned Judge.
Moreover, there was no discussion on Rule 10(13) and the relevant provisions under the AP Education Act.
I am, therefore, inclined to follow the judgment in Writ Petition No. 14458 of 1994.
9.
Under these circumstances, I have to necessarily reject the contention of the Government that the prescribed age for recruitment to the post of Teacher is 36 years.
Since the petitioner was selected by the duly constituted selection committee his case cannot be rejected on the ground that he crossed the age of 36 years.
10.
In view of the foregoing discussions, the writ petition is allowed and the Mandamus shall issue to the respondents to accord necessary permission for the selection/appointment of the petitioner as B.Ed.
Assistant.
11.
No costs.
Petition allowed.