VK Bali, J (Oral) - Jagdish Singh and another, through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seek writ in the nature of mandamus so as to direct the respondents to issue them appointment letters for the post of Constables as also allow them to join the post with effect from August, 1992.
2.
Brief facts giving rise to this petition reveal that the petitioners were selected to the post of Constables by the Commandant, 5th Bn.
HAP, Madhuban, District Karnal, alongwith others.
After undergoing all required physical tests, they were declared fit by respondent No. 3-the Commandant 5th Bn.
HAP, Madhuban.
They were asked to go through the physical test vide two different orders dated 671992 and 6121992 respectively.
Respondent No. 3 also got their antecedents verified by writing separate letters dated 671992, copies whereof were sent to the District Magistrate, Rohtak and D.I.G., CID, Haryana, Chandigarh.
The detailed procedure for recruitment of Constables and series of stages, petitioners were required to go through, have been mentioned in the writ petition.
All these formalities were completed.
It is in the this background that the petitioners aver that they were selected after following the required procedure but were not issued appointment letters.
They have, thus, come to this Court complaining about non-issuance of appointment letters to them.
3.
The facts as have been given in the petition have been admitted by the respondents.
The cause of petitioners is, however, being opposed and sought to be denied on the sole ground that the petitioners were verbally asked to join their duty in August, 1992 but they did not join.
It has also been pleaded that there was general ban no appointments.
4.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the State, concedes that the respondents had no option but for to proceed to appoint the petitioners as the matter stands clinched in their favour by decisions rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 16119 of 1991 Satish Kumar and others v. State of Haryana, 1996(3) SCT 154(P&H) decided on 1281996 and C.W.P.
No. 16399 of 1991 Ram v. State of Haryana, decided on 2771991 as also Pawan Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(3) SCT 98 (P&H) (DB) : 1992(3) RSJ 146.
It has been held in the judgment referred to above, that after all formalities have been completed and a person is selected as a constable, there is no option for the respondents but to appoint him.
Mr. Malik, during the course of arguments, had to admit that other candidates, who were selected alongwith the petitioners have been appointed and, therefore, the plea taken that there was general ban on appointments does not hold good.
The plea of the respondents that the petitioners refused to join when they were verbally asked to join cannot be accepted in the absence of documentary evidence on that score.
No details whatsoever have been given as to who was deputed to ask the petitioners to join their duty.
This court is of the considered view that an offer of appointment had to be made in writing and it appears to this Court that plea has been raised only with a view to contest the case of the petitioners.
5.
In view of what has been said above, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioners as Constables as early as possible and in any case no later than four months from today.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.