Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner has a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, he complains that his full pay and allowances have not been released for the period of his suspension from December 28, 1972 to January 8, 1981.
Secondly, the petitioner prays for issue of direction to the respondents quashing `` the departmental inquiries based on charge-sheets dated 1251971, 7.7.1972 and 18.12.1972.''
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter-alia stated that ``the petitioner had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1881 of 1976 for the grant of subsistence allowances etc.
It was dismissed with the observation that the petitioner may, if so advised, seek his remedy in the ordinary court of law....'' It has been further pointed out that the petitioner had taken Rs. 1,000/- from a consumer but had not issued any receipt.
He had pocketed the money.
Accordingly, the charge-sheet was issued to him vide Memorandum dated May 12, 1971.
Thereafter, he had accepted ``illegal gratification'' from various consumers and a charge-sheet was issued to him vide letter dated July 7, 1972.
Even the charge-sheet issued to the petitioner vide letter dated December 18, 1972 pertains to ``serious allegations of acceptance of illegal gratification from the various consumers and wrong refund to the consumers....'' Furthermore, it has also been pointed out that on receipt of complaint dated November 16, 1972, a preliminary probe was made.
On the basis of investigation an FIR was lodged against the petitioner.
The petitioner was prosecuted.
The trial Court had convicted him.
However, on appeal the Additional Sessions Judge, Gurgaon, acquitted him.
The inquiry proceedings had remained pending as the petitioner was facing a criminal trial.
Still further, he had got employment during the period of suspension.
3.
Mr. Sethi, learned counsel for the petitioner, is not in a position to say as to what is the present position of the proceedings.
The fact remains that these have been pending for a long time.
Initially, the Board may have waited for the result of the preliminary cases.
However, thereafter, the Board should have concluded the inquiry proceedings expeditiously.
It is true that the petitioner had filed the present writ petition in April, 1981.
However, this Court had not stayed the proceedings.
4.
In any event, nothing has been pointed out to show that the Board had acted unfairly or arbitrarily in proceeding to inquire into the charges of corruption and illegal gratification against the petitioner.
In case the inquiry proceedings have not been completed so far, the needful shall be done as expeditiously as possible.
These shall be concluded within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
In case the inquiry proceedings have already been concluded, the Board shall be at liberty to pass orders in accordance with law.
As for payment of salary etc., the matter shall be decided as expeditiously as possible on the basis of result of inquiry proceedings.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
No costs.
Petition disposed of.