Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Sub Divisional Engineer (Maintenance) in the respondent-University Ludhiana was suspended vide order dated 1881994, copy Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
Charge-sheet, copy Annexure P-2 with the writ petition, was served upon him for certain omissions committed by him.
The petitioner submitted reply to the charge-sheet, copy Annexure P-3 with the Writ Petition.
The Vice-Chancellor constituted a Committee to look into the charges levelled against the petitioner, vide order dated 131995, Copy Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
The petitioner had been making representations for revocation of his suspension on the ground that a period of more than six months had elapsed but the enquiry had not been finalised.
The petitioner has sought revocation of his suspension on the ground that in the letter dated 11111987, the Vice Chancellor has ordered that no employee should be kept under suspension beyond a period of three months and the entire process of enquiry, if any, be completed within the stipulated period.
The petitioner, by order dated 21121995, copy Annexure P-8 with the writ petition, was informed that a copy of the charge-sheet and the reply submitted by him were sent to the Committee.
The enquiry report alongwith comments of the Estate Officer were submitted to the Vice-Chancellor who had accepted the findings of the Enquiry Committee in respect of the petitioner and the punishment of stoppage of three increments was ordered.
The petitioner was also called upon to show cause why the penalty of stoppage of three increments be not inflicted upon him.
The petitioner filed reply pleading innocence.
The petitioner also requested for the supply of Enquiry Report.
However, vide communication dated 1111996, copy Annexure P-10 with the writ petition, the petitioner was informed that the copy of Enquiry Report could not be supplied to him.
The petitioner also gave reply to the Show Cause Notice on 1711996, copy Annexure P-11 with the Writ Petition, with a plea that the report of the Enquiry Committee has not been supplied to him and as such he has been deprived of an opportunity to defend himself against the specific charges/lapses attributed to him in the report which has vitiated the proceedings.
However, by an order dated 1521996, copy Annexure P-12 with the Writ Petition, the proposed punishment of stoppage of three increments of the petitioner was confirmed and the petitioner was reinstated with an order that his suspension period was not to be treated as `duty' and that the subsistence allowance of the petitioner was increased from 50% to 75% with effect from 1881995.
2.
The petitioner, in the Writ Petition, has prayed for quashing the order dated 1521996, copy Annexure P-12 with the Writ Petition directing the respondents to pay him subsistence allowance from August 1995 till 1521996.
Challenge to the said order is on the ground that major punishment of stoppage of three increments with cumulative effect without supplying copy of report of Enquiry Committee is violative of principles of natural justice.
The petitioner has further averred that some other employees were also charge-sheeted but they were not suspended and have been let off and no penalty has been imposed upon them.
3.
This Court, on April 16, 1996 had issued notice of motion to the respondents and in response thereof, they filed joint written statement.
4.
In the Written Statement, it has been admitted that the petitioner was not supplied Enquiry Report as the punishment proposed to be inflicted did not fall within the purview of clause 12(vi).
The said provision provides that the Enquiry Report is to be supplied to the employees where the penalty proposed is dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
5.
Mr. Patwalia has argued that non-supply of copy of Enquiry Report has vitiated the entire proceedings.
Had the Enquiry Report been supplied to the petitioner, he would have been in a position to know on which material the Enquiry Committee had arrived at the conclusion and the petitioner would have been in a position to submit a detailed reply.
In support of his contention, he has cited Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319(SC) : Judgments Today 1993(6) S.C.1.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents has also argued that by not supplying copy of the Enquiry Report, no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner.
He further submits that even if the copy of the Enquiry Report had been supplied to the petitioner, the result would have been the same.
7.
We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the law cited at the Bar.
8.
In this case, three increments of the petitioner have been stopped with cumulative effect.
The petitioner will suffer permanent loss during his entire service career and his salary will be considerably reduced.
The Services Rules which are being enforced in the University contemplate an enquiry before punishment is awarded.
If an enquiry is conducted, the delinquent official is found guilty and inflicted major punishment, the employee must have access to the report.
In Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad's case (supra), the Apex Court held that the report should be furnished to the employee even when the statutory rules laying down the procedure for holding the disciplinary inquiry are silent on the subject or against it.
Since the denial of the report of the Enquiry Officer is a denial of reasonable opportunity and a breach of the principles of natural justice, it follows that the statutory rules, if any, which deny the report to the employees are against the principles of natural justice and, therefore, invalid.
It is the right of the employee to have the report to defend himself effectively and to know in advance whether the report is in his favour or against him.
It will not be proper to construe the failure of the employee to ask for the report, as the waiver of his right.
Whether the employee asks for the report or not, the same has to be furnished to him.
In this case, the petitioner had made a request for the supply of copy of Enquiry Report but the same was declined.
It is not a case where the petitioner had admitted glaring omission on his part.
Had the copy of Enquiry Report been supplied to the petitioner, he would have filed a detailed reply and would have been in a position to know as to what charges were held to have been proved against him.
We are not convinced with the argument that the employee is to be supplied with a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer only if the penalty proposed is dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
9.
It is no longer res-integra that whenever Service Rules contemplate enquiry before punishment is inflicted, when the Enquiry Officer is not the Disciplinary Authority, the delinquent employee will have right to receive Enquiry Officer's report notwithstanding the nature of punishment.
10.
It is also equally settled that whether the employee asks for the supply of the report, the report has to be furnished to him.
11.
This Court also finds that no show cause notice was issued by the Disciplinary Authority to the petitioner before forfeiting portion of the subsistence allowance for the suspension period which is also violative of principles of natural justice.
12.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned order, copy of which is Annexure P-12 to the Writ Petition, is quashed and the case is remitted to the Disciplinary Authority to proceed from the stage of supply of Enquiry Report.
If the Disciplinary Authority is not satisfied with the representation which the petitioner may like to submit against the Enquiry Report and also wants to restrict the subsistence allowance at less than 100% for the suspension period, the petitioner is to be afforded an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
13.
It is, however, made clear that our above observations will not prejudice the case of either party on merits as we have quashed the impugned order only on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
The Disciplinary Authority is directed to conclude proceedings within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
The petitioner shall fully cooperate with the proceedings and shall not adopt any delaying tactic.
Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.