VK Jhanji, J - This shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 13109 and 15676 of 1993 and 7187 of 1994 as identified questions of law and facts are involved therein.
2.
Briefly, the facts giving rise to the filing of the Writ petition may be noticed :  As per the averments made in the Writ petitions, petitioners after acquiring the qualification of Matriculation joined two years' JBT (Home Craft/Home Science) course in various recognised institutions in the State of Haryana.
On completing the two years' JBT course, the Department of Industrial Training, Haryana awarded certificates to the petitioners.
On 2951984, 2091985 and 1681990, the State of Punjab issued instructions, derecognising the JBT Course & (Home Craft/Home Science) and Diploma in Art and Crafts which had been obtained from the institutions of State of Haryana and JBT course from Rajasthan respectively.
Because of derecognition, the respondents refused to consider the petitioners and other similarly situated candidates for their slection and appointment as JBT teachers in the State of Punjab.
This led to the filing of number of writ petitions in this Court.
According to the petitioners, most of the petitioners also filed similar writ petitions in this Court, including Civil Writ Petition No. 11753 of 1989.
In one of the writ petitions, i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 13174 of 1991, the matter was referred to the Full Bench.
The Full Bench delivered the judgment on 24.9.1992, observing therein that candidates who have acquired the qualification before its derecognition would be considered eligible and the derecognition of the certificates would be effective only prospectively and will not apply retrospectively.
In terms of the judgment of the Full Bench, the learned Single Judge decided the writ petition of the petitioners on 12111993.
In the present writ petitions, the grievance of the petitioners is that instead of complying with the judgment delivered by the Full Bench as well as the learned Single Judge, respondent No. 1 on 18.3.1993 issued a letter stating therein that only those candidates who have undergone six months' condensed course after two years' JBT course would be considered eligible for appointment as JBT teachers in the State of Punjab.
Petitioners have further averred that in response to advertisement dated 2931993, petitioners applied for the post of JBT teachers, whereafter they were called for interview.
However, in the interview letters the petitioners were asked to bring along with them the certificates of six months' condensed course.
Again on 10.9.1993 respondent No. 3 invited applications from the eligible candidates for recruitment to the post of JBT teachers.
In the advertisement, again a condition had been laid down that the candidates should also possess six months' condensed course in addition to two years' JBT course certificate awarded by the Industrial Training Department, Haryana.
It has been stated that in view of the condition of six months condensed course the petitioners are not being considered by respondent No. 3.
It has thus, been prayed that petitioners who have acquired the qualification of JBT from the Industrial Training Department, Haryana, prior to 2951984, i.e. prior to the date of its derecognition, have to be treated as fully qualified and have a right to compete with others for their selection and appointment as JBT teachers.
Prayer made is for directing the respondents to consider the names of the petitioners for appointment as JBT teachers treating them to be fully eligible and qualified for the said posts in view of law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(2) SCT 440 (P&H) : 1993(1) RSJ 327 and subsequent judgment delivered in Raj Karni v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(2) RSJ 551.
3.
Prayer made by the petitioner is being seriously contested by the respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, it has been stated that the qualifications possessed by the petitioners are not recognised by the State from where they acquired it equivalent to the JBT certificates awarded by the Education Department, Punjab, and therefore, the action of the respondents in not considering the petitioners eligible for appointment as JBT teachers in the State of Punjab is not arbitrary.
4.
It has been contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the condition of passing of six months' condensed course after passing two years' JBT course from the Industrial Training Department of the State of Haryana deserves to be quashed as the condition of six months' condensed course has not be made applicable to those who have acquired the JBT qualification from the Education Department of State of Punjab.
Counsel contended that this condition has been put to nullify the effect of the judgment delivered by the Full Bench.
Against this, counsel for the State contended that the condition of passing six months condensed course has not been imposed by the State of Punjab, but to the contrary it has been imposed by the Haryana Education Department and as such, the petitioners are not entitled to the direction as prayed for in their petitions.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find no merit in the writ petitions.
In Neelam Kumari's case (supra), the only question before the Full bench was whether the derecognition of a course would affect all those persons who had passed such course prior to the date of derecognition.
The Full Bench, and subsequently the learned Single Judge in Raj Karni's case (supra) placing reliance on the judgment of the Full Bench held that once particular professional courses were recognised, the derecognition would not affect those persons who had obtained such qualifications prior to the date of derecognition, meaning thereby that all such persons who had obtained this qualification prior to the date of derecognition from the State of Punjab would be deemed to be qualified for the purpose of appointment to the various posts in the State of Punjab and the derecognition would be effective only qua those persons who might have obtained or may obtain the basis professional qualifications after the date of derecognition.
The case of the petitioners in these petitions is altogether different.
In these petitions, petitioners are seeking declaration that the JBT (Home Craft) certificates awarded by the State other than the State of Punjab be recognised equivalent to the JBT certificates awarded by the Education Department of the State of Punjab.
In our opinion, the petitioners are not entitled to such a declaration.
The State of Punjab vide letter dated 951960 imposed two conditions before the certificate awarded by an Institute in the State other than the State of Punjab is recognised.
The conditions are :-  (1) It has been awarded after two years training.
(2) In the event of its being awarded by any institution it is recognised by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the institution is situated.
6.
In the case of the petitioners, the first condition that certificate or diploma has been awarded after two years' training is fulfilled, but the second condition that the certificate awarded by an institute in a State other than the State of Punjab must be recognised by the State in which the Institute is situated, is lacking.
The State of Haryana does not recognise the JBT (Home Craft) certificates awarded by the Industrial Training Department of the State of Haryana equivalent to JBT certificates awarded by the Education Department of Haryana unless the holder of the certificate has undergone six months' condensed course.
On successful completion of the course, the certificate awarded by the Industrial Training Department of the State of Haryana is considered equal to two years' JBT certificate awarded by the Education Department of Haryana.
The averment to this effect made in the written statement has not been denied by the petitioners.
If the qualification possessed by the petitioners is not recognised by the Education Department of Haryana equivalent to that of JBT course run by it, the petitioners have no legal right to claim that the same be derecognised in the State of Punjab as it is for the Government to lay down the requisite qualification for recruitment to the service.
Accordingly, there being no merit in the writ petitions, the same shall stand dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.