Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Superintendent in the office of the Director, Health Services, Punjab has a two fold grievance.
Firstly, he is aggrieved by the order dated July 21, 1993 by which a penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was imposed on him.
The petitioner has filed Civil Writ Petition No. 9970 of 1993 to challenge this order.
Thereafter, on January 17, 1994 the Government has passed an order directing the issue a fresh charge sheet and orders for suspension of the petitioner.
In pursuance of these orders, the petitioner was actually suspended vide order dated January 20, 1994.
Aggrieved by the order of suspension the petitioner has approached this Court through a second petition No. 1508 of 1994.
A few events which are relevant for the disposal of these two petitions may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner had initially joined service in the Health Department as a Clerk on November 3, 1960.
He was promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade II in the year 1985.
While the petitioner was working as such, a charge sheet dated September 20, 1990 was issued.
A copy of this charge sheet is at Annexure P 11 in Civil Writ Petition No. 9970 of 1993.
Firstly, it was alleged that the petitioner was "running a private business under the banner of JJ Enterprises in the name of his wife and other family members."
Secondly, it was stated that in the year 1983, 20 ECG machines "were supplied to the Health Department by JJ Enterprises, .. During the course of investigation by the Vigilance Department, it as come to light that some of the machine supplied by the firm were found to be not according to N.I.T.
specifications.
In spite of this, full payments were got released from certain officers".
On this basis, it was infered that the petitioner "had played a positive role in this purchase, acceptance of the machines by using his official position/status in this Directrate".
A third charge was also levelled against the petitioner.
It was inter alia alleged that he had been asked to send "property returns on the prescribed proforma indicating the detail of the moveable and immovable property in his name and also in the name of all family members which he did not supply in spite of issue of reminders".
Furthermore, in accordance with the provisions of the Conduct Rules, 1996, "he was required in inform the department about the business being run by his family members which he did not do ....." It was, thus, alleged that the petitioner had acted in violation of the conduct rules.
The petitioner submitted a reply to the charge sheet.
After consideration of the matter, an enquiry officer was appointed who submitted a report dated August 27, 1991.
A copy of enquiry report has been produced as Annexure P/18.
The enquiry officer found that except charge No. 2, "regarding misuse of official position" the remaining charges were established against the petitioner.
On the basis of this report, a show cause notice dated March 3, 1992 proposing a penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect only was served on the petitioner.
He submitted a reply on March 25, 1992.
Curiously, the Director, Health and Family Welfare by a very cryptic order disposed of the matter vide order dated August 31, 1992.
He observed that "keeping in view the arguments put forth by the employee concerned at the time of personal hearing, he was administered a warning to remain within discipline instead of stopping his two annual grade increments with cumulative effect."
Emboldened by this order, the petitioner represented for the grant of retrospective promotion.
It appears that the matter came to the notice of the Government.
It is not surprising that the Government took cognizance of the case and cancelled the order passed by the Director.
Since the penalty proposed in the show cause notice was stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect, the Government passed an order awarding that punishment to the petitioner.
This order was conveyed to him vide letter dated July 21, 1993.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P.25.
The petitioner challenged this order through Civil Writ Petition No. 9970 of 1993.
The primary ground of challenge is that the petitioner was not given any opportunity before the Government passed the impugned order.
3.
While the writ petition was pending, it appears that the Vigilance Department was looking into the affairs of M/s JJ Enterprises which was being managed by the petitioner's wife and his father.
On January 17, 1994, the State Government informed the Director, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab of its decision to "black list M/s JJ Enterprises, SCO 345-46, Sector 35-B, Chandigarh ..................." It was further directed that the petitioner may be placed under suspension immediately" and that "he may be served with a charge sheet with the approval of Government within 15 days".
In pursuance to this order, the then Director, Health and Family Welfare (Mr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi) issued an order dated January 20, 1994 by which the petitioner was placed under suspension.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1508 of 1994.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.23 with the writ petition.
This petition was filed on February 1, 1994.
It had come up for hearing before the Bench on February 2, 1994.
Their Lordships were pleased to direct the issue of notice of motion.
On February 21, 1994, the Bench passed an order directing the respondents to "serve the charge sheet within two weeks".
Thereafter, the charge sheet was actually served on March 18, 1994.
On March 21, 1994, the writ petition was admitted and the suspension order, a copy of which is at Annexure P 23 was stayed.
It was, however, observed that the "enquiry may proceed."
4.
Both the petitions have now come up for hearing.
Mr. AG Masih, learned Assistant Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the respondents has stated that during the pendency of the petitions, the enquiry proceedings in the charge sheet issued to the petitioner on March 18, 1994 have been concluded and that the enquiry officer is likely to submit the final report within a few days.
He has further submitted that the Department is willing to re- consider the action in pursuance to the enquiry report dated August 27, 1991 (Annexure P. 18 in CWP No. 9970 of 1993) and the enquiry proceedings in pursuance to the charge sheet dated March 18, 1994 de novo.
On consideration of both the reports, the department shall issue a show cause notice to the petitioner for imposition of such penalty as it may consider appropriate.
He has further pointed out that even though the punishing authority of the petitioner is the Director, Health Services, yet in the peculiar circumstances of this case and particularly the fact that the present Director, Dr. (Mrs.) Manmohan Kaur had been given a charge sheet relating to the supply of equipment etc. by M/s JJ Enterprises, which had been later on withdrawn, it would not be appropriate for her to deal with the case.
Consequently the matter came be considered by the Special Secretary, Department of Health and in the event of any order prejudicial to the petitioner being passed, he would still have the remedy of appeal before the Principal Secretary/the Government.
He further states that the order passed by the Director on August 31, 1992 which was cancelled by the Government on January 17, 1994 and the order dated July 21, 1993 by which the decision of the Government regarding stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was conveyed to the petitioner shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
5.
Mr. Patwalia on instructions from the petitioner who is present in court states that he accepts this offer.
He submits that the enquiry report dated August 27, 1991 as well as the report regarding the charge sheet issued to the petitioner on March 18, 1994 may be considered by the Special Secretary to the Government.
He states that the petitioner shall have no objection to the consideration of the matter by the Special Secretary and that he would not raise the objection that the show cause notice etc. or that the final order were not passed by the Director, Health and Family Welfare.
He further states that in the event of an order prejudicial to this interest being passed, the petitioner shall seek his remedy before the Principal Secretary/the Government as he may be advised.
6.
In the circumstances of the case, the offer made by the counsel for the parties appears to be fair.
Since the order dated July 21, 1993 had been passed without the grant of any opportunity to the petitioner, it is only fair that the matter is re-considered.
Equally, it appears that even the Director had passed a very cryptic order on August 31, 1992.
Therefore, it is not surprising that the Government found it necessary to rescind it.
Still further, since the two charge sheets issued to the petitioner vide letter dated September 20, 1990 and March 18, 1994 are inter-connected, a consideration of the matter on the basis of cumulative effect of the two reports shall be just and fair in the circumstances of the case.
Moreover, in view of the fact that payment in pursuance to the equipment supplied by M/s JJ Enterprises is said to have been made by Dr. Mrs. Manmohan Kaur and a charge sheet in that behalf was initially issued to her, it would not be appropriate to remit the case to her.
It is true, as has been pointed out by Mr. Masih that the charge sheet issued to Dr. Mrs. Manmohan Kaur had been ultimately withdrawn.
However, the fact remains that she had dealt with the case at an earlier stage and an accusing finger had been pointed out at her.
In this situation, it is appropriate, as agreed to by the counsel, that the matter is considered by a person who is only senior to the Director viz. the Special Secretary.
7.
Mr. Patwalia has further pointed out that on account of the contemplated/actual enquiry, the petitioner's claim for further promotion has not been considered for a long time.
Mr. Masih states that a decision in that behalf shall be taken after the final decision on the enquiry proceedings which are pending.
Mr. Masih also clarifies that so far as the petitioner's suspension is concerned, appropriate orders for the period from January 20, 1994 when he was actually suspended till March 21, 1994 when the order was stayed, shall be passed by the Government in accordance with law.
For the subsequent period, since the petitioner is performing the duties of the post, he is being paid the salary and shall continue to remain on the post till the final decision of the matter.
8.
The writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms.
The Show Cause Notice dated March 3, 1992 as well as the orders dated August 31, 1992 and July 21, 1993 are set aside.
The Special Secretary to the Government in the Health Department shall consider the enquiry reports and decide the matter after giving a fresh Show Cause Notice to the petitioner in accordance with law.
The needful should be done expeditiously, preferably within four months, from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.