VK Bali, J (Oral) - Jarnail Singh through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash orders passed by respondent No. 1 - Secretary, Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, dated 22.5.1981, Annexure P-2, as also order dated 30.7.1981.
He further prays for issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents 1 and 2 not to permit respondent No. 3 to join the post of Accountant and treat the petitioner as an Accountant w.e.f.
the date of his promotion.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner was appointed as Auction Recorder in the Market Committee, Nawanshahr on 27.4.1974 and was later confirmed on the said post from the date of his appointment.
He was promoted to the post of Clerk in June, 1977 on which post too he was confirmed.
It is the case of the petitioner that in Market Committee, Nawanshahar, there were seven persons working as Mandi Supervisor and they were senior to him.
The post of Accountant fell vacant on which a senior Mandi Supervisor was to be promoted.
All the seven Mandi Supervisors gave in writing to the Administrator, Market Committee, Nawanshahar that they did not want to be promoted as Accountant.
Immediately below, in seniority, from seven Mandi Supervisor, petitioner claims himself to be next in seniority.
In asmuch as seniors to petitioner had refused promotion to the post of Accountant, he was promoted as Accountant vide resolution No. 3 dated 14.4.1981.
It was mentioned in the resolution aforesaid that 7 senior Mandi Supervisors had refused to be promoted as Accountant and the petitioner was next senior person who was entitled to be promoted on the said post.
Despite the position as has been mentioned above, respondent No. 1 passed an order directing therein that Mandi Supervisor shall be promoted to the post of Accountant.
It is in consequence of this order that respondent No. 1 further directed respondent No. 2 to revert the petitioner.
The petitioner sent a letter to respondent No. 2 requesting for the supply of orders passed on 30.7.1981 and the applications of the Mandi Supervisors vide which they had refused in writing to be promoted as Accountant.
Subsequently, a telegram was also sent to respondent No. 2 by counsel for the petitioner informing that the orders were required for filing writ petition in this Court.
It is also pleaded that respondents 1 and 2 had no authority whatsoever to thrust promotion upon seven mandi Supervisors who had given in writing that they do not want to be promoted.
In the event of non-availability of seniors of the petitioner, who were to be promoted to the post of Accountant, there was no choice with the respondents but for to promote him.
Petitioner was actually promoted but the said order was set at naught by directing promotion of Mandi Supervisors despite the fact that they had declined to be promoted.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 through S. Onkar Singh Bains, IAS, Secretary, Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, it has, inter alia, been pleaded that even though petitioner was recommended for promotion as Accountant by the Committee vide resolution, referred to in the petition, recommendation of the Committee was subject to prior approval of the Secretary, Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and as provided under the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), petitioner was not entitled to promotion irrespective of his seniority, merit and experience as the post of Accountant is of higher responsibilities.
On number of occasions, in the absence of Secretary, he has to discharge the functions of Secretary and as such a petty junior person, such as petitioner, could not be promoted to the post of Accountant.
As per pay Committee's report dated 851980, post of Accountant has to be filled from amongst the Mandi Supervisors Fee Collectors, who are found suitable for the post in question.
4.
In the context of the defence projected in the written statement, this Court is of the view that there is no merit in this petition and, therefore, the same must fail.
There were no statutory rules for promotion to various posts with regard to employees, such as petitioner and respondent No. 3 and it is for the first time in 1989 that the said Rules came into being.
The Rules are known as Punjab Market Committees (Class III) Service Rules, 1989.
Rule 8 and Appendix `B' which are relevant, provide method of recruitment and qualifications.
By virtue of Sub-Section (1) of Section 8, Appendix `B' has been made part of the Rule.
A post of Accountant is to be filled up by way of promotion from amongst the Mandi Supervisors/Fee Collectors, who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of five years and who have qualified the departmental examination to be specified by the Board separately from time to time.
Insofar as, thus statutory rules are concerned, petitioner, who at the relevant time, was holding the post of Clerk, could not straight away be promoted to the post of Accountant.
The Rules, as mentioned above, however, came into being in 1989.
Prior thereto, promotions to various posts were governed by various instructions and Pay Committee's report.
It is categoric case of the respondents, as has been mentioned above that as per Pay Committee's report dated 851990, the post of Accountant could be filled from amongst the Mandi Supervisors/Fee Collectors only, who were suitable for the post of Accountant.
This specific averment of the respondents has not been denied as no replication has been filed.
5.
Despite the fact that seven senior Mandi Supervisors had declined to accept promotion on the post of Accountant, petitioner in any case had no right to be promoted on the post under contention.
It rather appears to this Court that the respondents had no choice in the matter but for to bring a person from another Committee as those who were already working at Nawanshahar had declined to be promoted.
Ample power vests with the respondents to transfer an employee of one Committee to another as shall be evident from Section 11 of the 1961 Act.
Finding no merit in this petition, I dismiss the same, leaving however the parties to bear their own costs.