GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed by the petitioner with the prayer to quash the order of his suspension and to direct the respondents to reinstate him and also to allow him promotion to the next higher post.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Deputy Superintendent of Police under the Central Reserve Police Force (for short, `CRPF') on 1581986.
Wife of the petitioner, Smt. Jaswinder Kaur, lodged a First Information Report against the petitioner on 7.8.1990 at Police Station, Keshav Puram, New Delhi.
The petitioner was arrested by the Police and he remained in custody between 1781990 and 28.8.1990.
He was placed under suspension vide order (Annexure P-7) dated 28101993 issued under Rule 10(2) of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1965.
The petitioner represented against his suspension but he failed to persuade the departmental authorities to revoke his suspension.
At the same time, adverse remarks were made in his Annual Confidential Report ending on 3131991 with reference to the registration of the criminal case and the representation made by him was rejected.
3.
While the petitioner was facing criminal trial, his case for promotion as Deputy Commandant, Central Reserve Police Force, was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee and a person junior to him namely, Shri Randeep Dutta of 5th Battalion was promoted w.e.f.
1711992.
The petitioner says that his recommendations have been kept in sealed cover due to pendency of the criminal case.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition, relations between the petitioner and his wife became normal and both of them started living happily.
His wife filed affidavit dated 2681995 before this court and after perusing the same this court passed an order on 18101995 staying the future operation of the order Annexure P-7.
The criminal case instituted against the petitioner ended in his acquittal as would appear from the judgment (Annexure P-11) dated 10.11.1995 passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi.
5.
Petitioner has challenged his suspension on the ground of arbitrariness and non-application of mind.
He has also pleaded that the respondents have illegally denied him promotion because there was nothing adverse against him as on 1711992 and in any case after his acquittal by the competent Court, there remains nothing which could constitute basis for not promoting him to the post of Deputy Commandant.
6.
Prayer of the petitioner for quashing of the order of suspension deserves to be accepted on the short ground that very substratum of the order of suspension has disappeared with the acquittal of the petitioner and virtual withdrawal of the complaint by his wife.
After the petitioner and his wife patched-up the existing differences, there does not remain any justification to prolong the suspension of the petitioner any more.
Claim of the petitioner for due consideration for promotion w.e.f.
1711992 also appears to be justified.
The First Information Report lodged by his wife constituted the foundation of adverse remarks made in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner ending on 3131991 as would appear from Annexure P-3 and his promotion was withheld presumably because of the adverse entry.
Now that criminal case has ended in his acquittal, the petitioner's right to be considered for promotion from a date his junior was promoted stands revived and it is just and proper to direct the respondents to consider his case for promotion by opening the sealed cover and to give hims promotion with retrospective effect if he is otherwise suitable.
7.
We, therefore, allow the writ petition and quash the suspension of the petitioner.
The respondents are directed to open the sealed cover, if any, and consider the case of the petitioner for promotion with effect from a date his junior was promoted, i.e. 1711992.
In case the petitioner is found entitled to be promoted, he be given retrospective promotion with all consequential benefits.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed by the respondents within a period of three months of the submission of certified copy of this order before the respondent No. 2.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.