Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner has impugned order dated February 24, 1993 copy Annexure P-4 vide which the State Government had retired him from Government service on February 28, 1993 afternoon on his attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years with the condition that his pension/gratuity will be withheld till criminal case registered against him vide FIR No. 18 dated 28.8.1986 by the State Vigilance Bureau and the other matters pending against him under Rules 7 and 8 of the puniishment and Apppeal Rules are finalized.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the order of the State Government, copy Annexure P-4, on the ground that though charge sheet was issued in the year 1988 yet no Inquiry Officer was appointed till his retirement and that it is not within the competence of the State Government to withhold pension and gratuity.
3.
Mr. Hooda appearing for the petitioner contends that since the petitioner has not been found guilty of any offence, his pension and gratuity cannot be withheld.
He further contends that after the retirement of the petitioner, departmental proceedings cannot proceed against the petitioner.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused paper book.
5.
From the case file, it is revealed that the charge-sheet under Rule 7 was served upon the petitioner on September 3, 1992 on various charges.
The Inquiry Officer was appointed vide order dated November 17, 1992 for holding departmental inquiry.
The inquiry proceedings are at evidence stage.
The inquiry proceedings were, therefore, initiated against the petitioner before he retired.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show any provision of any Rule or Regulation under which a Government employee cannot be proceeded departmentally after retirement.
The criminal case against the petitioner was instituted by the State Vigilance Bureau under Sections 420/467/468/471/120-B I.P.C.
The case has not been decided so far.
6.
According to clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 22 of the Civil Services Rules, volume II, the State Government is competent to withhold pension or any part of it if the pensioner be convicted of serious crime or be guilty of grave misconduct.
Section 22(a) envisages that good conduct is an implied condition of every grant of pension.
The appointing authority reserves to itself the right of withholding or withdrawing pension or any part of it if the pensioner be convicted of serious crime or be guilty of grave misconduct.
7.
In the case State of Orissa and others v. Kalicharan Mohapatra and another, 1996(1) RSJ 61, the Supreme Court has held that withholding of gratuity during the pendency of prosecution is permissible.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to convince this Court to arrive at any conclusion other than the one taken in Kalicharan Mohapatra's case (supra).
The case against the petitioner is still pending.
In view of pendency of criminal case and the departmental proceedings, the State can withhold gratuity.
Therefore, we are of the considered view that gratuity and pension have rightly been withheld.
However, there is no justification to withhold the entire pension of the petitioner who had retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation.
In order to save the petitioner from starvation, it would be just and proper to issue direction to the respondent to grant provisional pension to the petitioner within three months from today.
8.
In case the petitioner is absolved in departmental inquiry and is acquitted in criminal case, he can approach this Court again for the release of his pension and gratuity in case the same are not released.
9.
Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition disposed of.