Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the charge sheet dated 11th January, 1991 (Annexure P1) and he has further prayed that the respondents be directed to release to him all the pensionary benefits along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner, who at the relevant time, was posted as Block Primary Education Officer, Jagaon (Ludhiana) was issued charge sheet dated 11th January, 1991 for certain acts of misconduct of financial irregularities which were alleged to have been committed by him.
The petitioner submitted reply to the charge sheet on 4th February, 1991 vide annexure P1.
Therefore, an inquiry officer was appointed to enquire into the allegations levalled against the petitioner vide letter dated 13th June, 1991 (Annexure P3).
It has been alleged in the writ petition that the petitioner attended the inquiry but the Inquiry Officer had been adjourning the case from time to time as the records of the case had not been received from DEO (P), Ludhiana.
The petitioner retired from service on 30th April, 1991.
The petitioner, therefore, has prayed in this writ petition that the charge sheet dated 11th January, 1996 (Annexure P-1) be quashed and the respondents be directed to release the retiral benefits.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that a regular Departmental inquiry is still pending against the petitioner and the inquiry need not be completed as the relevant records were taken into custody by the Jagraon Police on 301091 for investigation in connection with FIR No. 144 dated 11th August, 1991 against S Mukhtiar Singh, Clerk, office of the B.P.O.,Jagraon.
It has further been stated that complete records had been received from Jagraon on 5.9.1996 and the inquiry officer had been requested to further proceed in the inquiry, and the inquiry will be completed within a period of three months.
4.
We are informed by the learned AAG Punjab that the inquiry officer has already proceeded further in the matter.
5.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submitted that the charge sheet was issued to the petitioner in January, 1991 and since the respondents have failed to complete the inquiry till date, the charge-sheet was liable to be quashed.
In support of this submission, he placed reliance on the decision dated 12th February, 1996 rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 10629 of 1995, Inder Parkash Gupta v. State of Haryana.
He further submitted that in any case, during the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings, the payment of pension could not be withheld.
In support of this submission, he placed reliance on a judgment rendered by a Full Bench of this Court in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(1) SCT 563(P&H)(DB) : 1994(1) S.C.T.
563.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
As stated in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the Departmental inquiry could not be completed as the relevant records had been taken into custody by the Police of Jagraon.
Since the complete record has already been received back from the Police and the inquiry is likely to be completed within a period of three months, we are of the opinion that the charge sheet (Annexure P-1) cannot be quashed at this stage.
We, however, direct the respondents to complete the inquiry within a period of three months from today.
We also hope that the petitioner will cooperate in the inquiry proceedings.
7.
The point regarding the release of pensionary benefits during the pendency of the inquiry came up for consideration before a Full Bench of this court in the case of Dr. Ishar Singh (supra) and in this case it was held that the Government has no right to withhold or postpone the pension or payment on account of commutation of pension during the pendency of the departmental inquiry proceedings.
It was further held that the State is bound to release 100% pension at the time of superannuation, may be provisionally.
It was, however, held that the Government can withhold the gratuity and other retiral benefits except pension during the pendency of an inquiry.
8.
Keeping in view the law laid down by the Hon'ble Judges of the Full Bench in the case of Dr. Ishar Singh (supra), we hold that the respondents have no right to withhold or postpone the pension or the payment on account of commutation of pension during the pendency of the departmental inquiry proceedings.
The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to withhold the amount of gratuity or postpone the payment of the same during the pendency of the inquiry proceedings.
Accordingly, we direct the respondents to release the pension to the petitioner within two months from today with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date it was due.
The respondents are also directed to complete the inquiry proceedings within three months from today.
With these directions, the writ petition stands disposed of.