Om Parkash, J - The controversy arising in this petition is simple and, therefore, we rush up through the relevant facts.
2.
The petitioner, who was appointed as Lecturer in Economics by a letter dated 1271968, seeks quashing of impugned order dated 1081984 (Annexure ``17'' to the writ petition) passed by the Tribunal of Arbitration under Section 36 of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 (For short, `the Act').
3.
The petitioner was served with a charge sheet dated 2011975.
Thereafter an enquiry was conducted against the petitioner and the Vice-Chancellor eventually accorded approval for terminating the services of the petitioner on 1621977.
Then the Committee of Management passed a resolution dated 2121977 to terminate the services of the petitioner.
4.
Aggrieved, the petitioner made a representation to the Vice-Chancellor, which was rejected on 671978.
The petitioner then filed a Writ Petition No. 8292 of 1978 in this Court.
By an order dated 1471983 (Annexure ``9'' to the writ petition), this Court disposed of the writ petition observing that the petitioner could raise the dispute under section 36 of the Act before the Tribunal of Arbitration.
5.
Thereafter in view of Section 36 of the Act the Tribunal of Arbitration was constituted comprising of three members - one being the nominee of the petitioner, the other being the nominee of the Committee of Management and third being the nominee of the Vice Chancellor.
The Tribunal of Arbitration was constituted on 2711984 and its first meeting was scheduled to be held on 1131984.
6.
The petitioner addressed a letter to the Vice Chancellor dated 931984 (Annexure ``11'' to the writ petition) stating that one Sri BB Lal, who was working in place of the petitioner, was married to the daughter of Sri BK Khare, the nominee of the Committee of Management, and, therefore, he had no hope of justice from him and that the Committee of Management be asked to replace the said nominee by someone else.
Without taking cognizance of such protest of the petitioner, the Tribunal passed the impugned order dated 1081984 (Annexure ``17'' to the writ petition).
The said order shows that whereas Sri BK Khare - the nominee of the Committee of Management and the Convener - the nominee of the Vice Chancellor decided against the petitioner, the nominee of the petitioner accepted the petitioner's case.
7.
The only question for consideration before us is whether it was just, proper or reasonable for the Tribunal to proceed in the matter despite the complaint of the petitioner that Sri.
BK Khare, nominee of the committee of Management, is biased against him and that he be replaced by some impartial nominee.
The case of the petitioner is that Sri BB Lal was appointed in his place and considering the close relationship of Sri.
BK Khare and Sr. BB Lal, the petitioner apprehended a biased view from Sri BK Khare and injustice from the Tribunal.
Learned Counsel for the Committee of Management submits before us that the Management, the petitioner and the Vice Chancellor are free to nominate their members and the nominee of the Management, howsoever deeply interested he is in the Management, cannot be sought to be replaced by the petitioner as the petitioner, is free to have his own nominee.
We do not see any logic in this argument.
Simply because each party is free to have his own nominee, it does mean that he is free to nominate a relation or a person deeply interested in him.
Justice should not only be done but it should appear to have been done.
This has become a cliche for the judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings.
The order of the Tribunal is nothing but a quasi- judicial order, and therefore, all safeguards must have been taken to nominate such a member as to inspire confidence and obviate apprehension of being biased.
In our view, the Committee of Management has transgressed the ordinary norms of justice delivery system by nominating Sri BK Khare, who being the father-in-law of Sri BB Lal, is deeply interested in the latter.
The petitioner by presence of Sri BK Khare may legitimately apprehend that the latter will render a decision helping his son-in-law.
From the close relationship of Sri BK Khare and Sri BB Lal, who has been appointed in place of the petitioner, the petitioner may reasonably infer the biased attitude of Sri BK Khare.
8.
In AK Kraipak and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1970 SC 150, it was ruled down that reasonable likelihood of bias is enough and it is not necessary to prove the actual injury or actual bias on the part of an authority against whom allegations of malice or bias are made.
Therefore, it is immaterial whether Sri BK Khare, in fact, gave a decision helping his son-in-law or injuring the interest of the petitioner but from the relationship of the two Sri BK Khare and Sri.
BB Lal the petitioner may reasonably infer the likelihood of bias and that is enough to vitiate the decision of the Tribunal.
9.
For the reasons, the writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
The impugned order dated 1081984 (Annexure ``17'' to the writ petition) passed by the Tribunal of Arbitration is quashed directing the Vice Chancellor of the University, respondent No. 1, to constitute the Tribunal of Arbitration afresh within (sic) weeks from the date a certified copy of this order is presented to him by the petitioner, who undertakes to produce to same within one week from today.
After constitution of an afresh Tribunal, as aforesaid, we hope and trust that the Tribunal of Arbitration will decide the petitioner's case within two months from the date of its re-constitution.
Petition allowed.