VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, petitioners are seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing orders, Annexures P-7 and P-8, whereby petitioners have been directed to pass the Bridge Course in April, 1995, failing which their candidature for B.Ed.
course would be cancelled.
2.
Petitioners are graduates in Arts from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (in short the GNDU) having passed the said degree examination after 1985.
GNDU held Joint Entrance Test for admission to B.Ed.
course for the session 1994-95 for admission in various colleges affiliated with GNDU, Amritsar, Panjab University, Chandigarh and Punjabi University, Patiala.
Petitioners appeared in Joint Entrance Test and were declared successful.
All the petitioners were admitted in Dayanand Amar Nath College, Nawanshahr Doaba, District Jalandhar, which is affiliated to GNDU The GNDU vide order dated 121995 directed respondent No. 2, i.e.
Principal Dayanand Amar Nath College to ask those students, including petitioners, who had passed BA under old system to pass Bridge course in April 1, 1995, lest the admission to B.Ed.
course granted in July, 1994 shall stand cancelled.
A similar notice was issued by respondent No. 2, on 221995, directing the petitioners to clear the Bridge course in April 1995, failing which their admission to B.Ed.
course would be cancelled.
Petitioners have challenged orders dated 121995 and 221995 on the ground that they were granted admission on the basis of result of the Joint Entrance Test and that too after satisfying the eligibility conditions and therefore, the respondents having granted admission to them are now estopped from enforcing the condition of passing Bridge Course.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of GNDU through its Registrar, it has been stated in preliminary objection No. 1 that :  ``1.
The petitioners' cases is covered by the already decided three cases, i.e. (1) Civil Writ Petition No. 12333 of 1994; Vijay Kumar v. State of Punjab and others, (2) Civil Writ Petition No. 12533 of 1994; Satnam Singh v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, both decided by a common order of Hon'ble Mr. Justice GC Garg on November 9, 1994; Sunita Kumari v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, decided by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ms. Liberhan and Hon'ble Mr. Justice JB Garg on 6.12.1994.
In the third case i.e. C.W.P.
No. 11704 of 1994, Hon'ble Mr. Justice MS Liberhan and Hon'ble Mr. Justice JB Garg, passed the order in the same terms as in C.W.P.
Nos. 12333 and 12553 of 1994, decided by Hon'ble Mr. Justice GC Garg.
In all the three cases.
Eligibility Qualification for admission to Colleges of Education affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, came up for adjudication and it was held, inter alia, that the `Important Note' incorporated in the Prospects, Joint Entrance Test for B.Ed., 1994-95, with regard to the Eligibility qualifications for appointment to colleges of Education affiliated to Panjab University, Chandigarh, was actually a part and parcel of the Eligibility Qualifications for admission to College of Education affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
In the light of the aforesaid judgments passed in the three writ petitions, the relevant eligibility Qualifications for admission to Colleges of Education affiliated to Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, are that a candidate desirous of joining Entrance Test for B.Ed.
must hold a graduation degree under 10+2+3 system or graduation degree under old system before 1985 of 10+1+3 system with not less than 45% marks in the aggregate of the degree examination.
As per the `Important Note' incorporated at page 5 of the Prospectus, the candidates who have passed BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
Examination after 1985 (14 years course under the old system) shall be eligible to seek admission to B.Ed.
Course, provisionally subject to the condition that they shall be required to pass an additional course as prescribed by the University within the total duration of the B.Ed.
course.
The relevant and concluding portion of the judgment passed by Hon'ble Mr. Justice G.C.Garg dated 9111994, relating to the interpretation of the `Important Note' reads as under:  `` A glance of the provisions would show that in the absence of reference to the Important Note, the Graduates who obtained Graduation degree before 1985 have been made eligible but no provision has been made regarding Graduates who obtained Graduation degree after 1985.
It is in this context the Important Note assumes significance.
If a candidate of the type referred to above was sought to be rendered ineligible irrespective of the fact that he obtained more than 45% marks in the aggregate of the degree examination then under the heading Exception relating to the eligibility qualifications of GND University, a third category would have been carved out namely, the candidates obtaining Graduation degree after 1985 under the old system (10+1+3) shall not be eligible.
This was, however, not done and in order to render the candidates who passed Graduation under the old system (10+1+3) after 1985, eligible, the Important Note was inserted at the end that such candidates shall be eligible to seek admission to B.Ed.
course provisionally subject to the condition that they shall pass an additional course as prescribed by the University within the total duration of the B.Ed.
course.
Thus the provisions relating to the eligibility qualifications lead one to the conclusion that the Important Note has to be read with the eligibility qualifications applicable to the GND University.
The petitioner having passed the Joint Entrance Test and candidates lower in merit having been admitted, is clearly entitled to admission to the B.Ed.
course provisionally subject of course to the condition that he will pass an additional course as prescribed by the University within the total duration of the said course.
For the foregoing discussion, these writ petitions are allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant provisional admission to the petitioners herein as per their merit in the Joint Entrance Test which shall of course be subject to the condition that the petitioners will pass an additional course as prescribed by the University within the total duration of the B.Ed.
course No costs.
Thus as per the decision arrived at in the above said three cases, the petitioners deserve the grant of admission as per their merit in the Joint Entrance Test, which shall of course be subject to the condition that they will pass an additional course as prescribed by the University within the total duration of the B.Ed.
course.''
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and on going through the Prospectus issued by the GNDU under which Joint Entrance Test for Admission to B.Ed.
Course for the session 1994-95 and eligibility qualifications for admission to Colleges of Education affiliated to GNDU were prescribed, we are of the view that the impugned orders suffer from no illegality.
The matter is squarely covered by the law laid down by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12333 of 1984 Vijay Kumar v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 9111984, However, having regard to the fact that petitioners besides completing the B.Ed.
course have also appeared in the examination and that the University has agreed that in the event of petitioners' passing the Bridge Course within one year from the date of order of this court their results would be officially declared whereafter they would be awarded degrees of B.Ed.
examination, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction to respondent No. 1 to declare the result of the petitioners provided the petitioners pass the Bridge Course, as prescribed by the University, within a period of one year.