Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his claim for the promotion to the post of Watch and Ward Assistant with effect from November 16, 1967 when Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal, a person junior to him was promoted.
A few facts may be notified.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Frash in the Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat on April 16, 1958.
On December 25, 1959, he was promoted as a Peon.
In the year 1963, when emergency had been declared, the petitioner opted to join the Army.
He was recruited in the Army as a Sepoy on January 10, 1963.
He served there till September 18, 1970 when he was discharged.
In the meantime, the petitioner was promoted as a Door Keeper with effect from October 1, 1965.
He was confirmed as such with effect from November 30, 1967.
3.
After his discharge from the Army, the petitioner made a request for the grant of benefits which had been granted to his juniors.
His claim was rejected vide order dated March 30, 1989.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1457 of 1991.
While this Writ petition was pending, the respondents passed on order dated May 29, 1991 by which it was declared that ``the military service rendered by Sh. Prithi Chand (petitioner) is counted towards seniority, promotion, annual increment, leave and pension in civil, service''.
Thereafter, the writ petition was disposed of vide order dated August 6, 1991.
It was directed that the petitioner's representation shall be decided expeditiously.
The petitioner submitted a representation which was rejected vide dated January 9, 1992.
With regard to the petitioner's claim for promotion as Watch and Ward Assistant with effect from November 16, 1967, the representation was rejected on the ground that it was a selection post.
It was also observed that the petitioner had already been promoted as Watch and Ward Assistant with effect from April 15, 1974.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed CWP No. 2798 of 1992.
It was disposed of by the Motion Bench vide order dated August 19, 1992.
It was represented on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners's claim shall be considered.
In pursuance of this undertaking, the Deputy Secretary, Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, conveyed an order dated April 28, 1993 informing the petitioner that ``it is not possible for this Secretariat to give him the benefits of promotion as Watch and Ward Assistant from the date Shri Ajit Singh Normal was appointed ....'' No reason whatsoever was assigned.
Thereafter, the petitioner served a notice through his counsel no May 12, 1993.
Nothing fruitful ensued.
On the contrary, by the order dated August 11, 1993, the petitioner was informed that the post of Watch and Ward Assistant is not a promotional post for the cadre of Door Keepers.
Accordingly, his claim was declined.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents controverting the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the Punjab Government National Emergency Rules, 1965 which had been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution are not applicable to the employees of the Punjab Vidhan Sabha as no approval of Hon'ble the Speaker had been obtained in terms of Article 187(3) of the Constitution.
It has been further pointed out that after his release from the Army, the petitioner was promoted as a Watch and Ward Assistant on regular basis on April 15, 1974.
Prior to that, he had officiated as such against the leave vacancies.
It has also been pointed out that the period of petitioner's military service has been counted towards increments, leave and pension.
He is also getting pension for the period during which he has served in the Army.
It is maintained that the post of Watch and Ward Assistant is not a promotional post.
Consequently, the petitioner cannot claim promotion with effect from the date Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal was appointed as such.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the petitioner entitled to be considered for promotion as Watch and Ward Assistant with effect from November 16, 1967 when Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal was promoted as such ?
6.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had a lien in the Vidhan Sabha Secretariat during the period of he was serving in the Indian Army.
It was on this basis that he was considered for promotion as a Door Keeper and was actually promoted with effect from October 1, 1965.
He was also confirmed as such with effect from November 30, 1967.
Still further, it is not disputed that a senior person has a right to be considered for promotion or appointment to any post to which any one junior to him is being appointed.
In is also not disputed that the petitioner's claim was not considered.
Since the petitioner had a lien in the Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, he had a right to be considered for appointment to the post of Watch and Ward Assistant when Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal was so appointed.
The action of the respondents in not doing so was illegal and unfair.
7.
After his release from the Army, the petitioners had claimed that benefits as admissible to him under the rules as well as the instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
Even if it is assumed that the statutory rules were not applicable, the respondents had to grant increments etc. to the petitioner on the hypothesis that he had continued to serve as he had a lien in the Secretariat.
When his legitimate claims were declined vide order dated March 30, 1989, he had filed CWP No. 1457 of 1991.
During the pendency of this Writ petition, the order dated May 25, 1991 was passed.
Certain benefits were granted.
The petitioner had also claimed proforma promotion as Watch and Ward Assistant.
He was permitted to make a representation.
He did so.
However, vide order dated January 9, 1992, his claim was rejected without assigning any reason.
The petitioner again approached the court.
The respondents undertook to consider his claim.
However, the claim was declined, initially without assigning any reason.
When the petitioner persisted, the claim had been rejected vide order dated August 11, 1993 on the ground that ``the post of Watch and Ward Assistant was not a promotional post for the cadre of Door Keepers.''
This stand is apparently false.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was promoted from the post of Door Keeper to that of Watch and Ward Assistant on regular basis with effect from April 15, 1974.
Still further, it has not been disputed that even Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal was working as a Door Keeper when he was appointed to the post of Watch and Ward Assistant.
No rule or instructions have been produced to show that the post had to be filled by direct recruitment.
In this situation, the stand taken on behalf of the respondents cannot be sustained.
8.
Ms. Jaishree Thakur, learned counsel for the respondents has pointed that the petitioners's claim is belated.
9.
It is undoubtedly correct that the writ petition has been filed in August 1993.
However, it is the admitted position that the petitioner has been making his claim for a long time.
As already noticed, he has approached this court on two earlier occasions.
The respondents had undertaken to consider his claim.
It was rejected vide orders dated April 28, 1993 and August 11, 1993.
Soon thereafter, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He cannot be blamed for the delay caused by the respondents.
Consequently, the petition cannot be dismissed on the ground of laches.
10.
It has also been contended by the counsel for the respondents that Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal is not a party and in his absence, no relief can be granted to the petitioner which may prejudicially affect the interests of Mr. Nirmal.
11.
In this regard, Mr. Brar, counsel for the petitioner has submitted that he would not claim any seniority above Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal in the cadre of Watch and Ward Assistants.
However, he is entitled to the re-fixation of his pay on the post of Watch and Ward Assistant on the assumption that he had started working as such with effect from November 16, 1967.
Mr. Brar also states that the petitioner shall accept his seniority below Mr. Ajit Singh Nirmal in the cadre of Watch and Ward Assistants.
In this situation, even the second objection raised on behalf of the respondents loses all significance.
No other point has been urged by either side.
In view of the above, the orders dated January 9, 1992, April 28, 1993 and August 11, 1993, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-7, P-8 and P-10 with the writ petition, are set aside.
It is declared that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion as Watch and Ward Assistant with effect from November 16, 1967.
The respondents are directed to do the needful within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary but not in matter of seniority.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5000/-.