GS SINGHVI, J - Order annexure P/7 passed by the Director, Social Defence and Security Department, Haryana terminating the services of the petitioners has been called in question in this writ petition.
The petitioners have prayed for quashing of the condition incorporated in the order annexure P/1 limiting the appointment of the petitioners to a period of six months.
It has also been prayed that the order annexure P/7 be quashed and a direction be issued to the respondents to allow the petitioners to continue in service on ad hoc basis till regularly selected candidates are made available.
2. parties are in agreement that the petitioners had been appointed as drivers on ad hoc basis after respondent No. 2 had made selection from amongst the candidates sponsored by the employment exchange, Haryana and the Soldier Board, Haryana.
One of the conditions enumerated in the order of appointment was that the ad hoc appointment would last for six months or till candidates recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana join duty, whichever is earlier.
After the expiry of the tenure of six months, respondents extended term of the petitioner service but vide annexure p/6, respondent No. 2 directed the termination of the services of the petitioners on the ground that as per the policy of the government, the term of services of the ad hoc appointees cannot be extended beyond a particular date.
3.
The petitioners have questioned the condition incorporated in annexure P/1 as well as annexure P/7 on the ground of arbitrariness and violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of india.
4.
In reply, the respondents have admitted that the petitioners were appointed on ad hoc basis after their selection by respondent No. 2.
They have pleaded that as per instructions issued by the Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana, appointment of ad hoc appointees cannot be continued beyond a specified period of six months and, therefore, the action taken by the departmental authorities is consistent with the policy decision taken by the Government.
5.
In compliance of the directions given by the Court on 851996, learned Deputy Advocate General has produced an affidavit of Shri Depinder Singh Dhesi, Director, Social Defence and Security Department, Haryana.
A perusal of this affidavit shows that the department requires the services of Drivers but is unable to continue the services of the petitioners solely on account of the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary, Haryana directing the various departments not to make ad hoc appointments for a duration of more than six months.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana.
7.
Conditions similar to condition No.1 have often been incorporated in the appointment letters of various ad hoc appointees.
Such conditions had been challenged before this court in Rajni Bala v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 390(P&H) : 1995(4) A.I.J.
394.
This Court has reviewed the previous decisions and held that the conditions incorporated in the order of appointment limiting the term of appointment to six months is arbitrary, unreasonable and unconstitutional.
It has been held that after a person is appointed on ad hoc basis, his service cannot be terminated except on the ground of unsatisfactory performance, abolition of posts or availability of regularly selected candidates.
8.
In view of the detailed decision given in Rajni Bala's (supra) it is not necessary for us to make a detailed analysis of the rival contentions.
In our opinion, decision in Rajni Bala's case (supra) directly applies to the claim made by the petitioners.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
Condition No. 1 contained in Annexure P-1 and the Order annexure P-7 are quashed.
We, however, make it clear that the continuance of the petitioners in service shall be subject to the following conditions :  (1) their work and performance is found satisfactory; (ii) the posts of Drivers continue to be available; and  (iii) candidates recommended by the Subordinate Services Selections Board do not become available.
9.
We also make if clear that this order of ours shall not prevent the respondents from terminating the services of the petitioners or any one of them on the basis of misconduct.