PS Mishra, CJ.
- Heard learned counsel for the appellant Government of Andhra Pradesh is representated before us.
Having found that no one was appearing for the second respondent i.e., the Andhra Pradesh Public Service Commission, we directed on 381995 for notice to issue making the rule returnable by 1181995 and directed the Registry to issue notice at the cost of the Court through special messenger.
Notice has been served upon the second respondent.
It appears that the Public Service Commission in its proceedings No. 117/HI/HE/93 dated 811993 informed the petitioner that his application for appearing before the Commission for recruitment as a District Munsif was rejected for the reason that he had not produced the Practice certificate beyond 9.10.1986.
Petitioner-appellant made immediately a representation on 9.4.1993 bringing to the notice of the commission that he had fully complied with the requirements of the Rules and the conditions on which applications for recruitment were invited.
The Public Service Commission gave however no response and the petitioner-appellant accordingly missed the opportunity of appearing for selection as a District Munsif.
He filed the writ petition claiming compensation for the improper rejection of his application and further directions to the Commission.
The learned single Judge has rejected the writ petition stating as follows :  " I do not think at this belated stage when admittedly the process of selection is over and the selected candidates' names have been sent up, the petitioner shall be allowed to raise the question regarding the legality of rejection of his application which was done more than nine months back.
However, I would like to clarify that in case the petitioner's application is rejected for the same reason in any future recruitment, it is open to the petitioner to question the same.
Subject to the above direction, the writ petition is dismissed."
2.
One of the sovereign responsibilities of the Court, for which its extraordinary writ jurisdiction is created, is to ensure that no person suffers at the hands of the Government or any other constitutional and statutory functionaries and discrimination and no injury is caused to them at their hands.
In cases where injury inflicted by the authorities is such that it cannot be removed, the Courts order for payment of compensation to give atleast some relief to the victim and caution to the authority concerned that it should not act arbitrary.
Order to pay compensation in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution however are besides the common law right of any victim to claim compensation from the person who has inflicted the injury and caused disablement.
In the instant case, if the application of the appellant has been wrongly rejected by the 2nd respondent, it is obvious, the second respondent has caused irreparable injury to him.
Before however any compensation is ordered, it will be necessary for the Court to examine whether actually there has been any infringement of the right of the appellant for being considered for appointment as District Munsif and by rejection of his application such a right of his has been infringed.
We are inclined for the said reason to interfere with the order of the learned single Judge and to remit the matter for a hearing of the writ petition on merit after affording opportunity to the respondent to show cause if any.
3.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned single judge is set aside.
The writ petition is admitted to hearing.
Let the same be placed for hearing before appropriate Bench.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.