Sat Pal, J - This Writ petition has been filed by the petitioner under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and in this writ petition it has been prayed that the respondent be directed to sanction and pay disability pension to the petitioner from 2nd May, 1968 onwards at the rate admissible from time to time along with arrears till date with interest at the current bank rate till the realisation of the same.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner was enrolled in the army (Army Medical Corps) as a sepoy/driver on 2311963 and he served at various stations for about five years till 2nd May, 1968 when he was finally boarded out of service after being declared unfit under medical category 'E' (EEE) as he was found suffering from psychoneurosis.
3.
It has been alleged in the petition that after his discharge from service, the petitioner applied to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad for grant of disability pension but his claim was rejected by the said Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) vide letter dated 17.9.1968, copy of which is Annexure P.1.
It has then been stated in the petition that the petitioner preferred an appeal against the said order but his appeal was also rejected by the Government of India vide order dated 2791972, copy of which is Annexure P.3.
It has further been stated in the petition that thereafter the petitioner had been making various representations including the representations dated 461975, 1191978, 29.11.1983, 931987 and 1421992, but no reply to these representations was received by the petitioner.
It was in these circumstances that the present petition was filed by the petitioner.
The writ petition was admitted on 731994.
4.
Written statement on behalf of the respondents has also been filed.
In the written statement, inter alia, it was submitted that the petitioner had suffered from constitutional disorder as found by the Medical Board as well as pension sanctioning authority.
It was further submitted that disability of the petitioner was neither attributable to nor aggravated by his military service and as such the petitioner was not entitled to any disability pension.
5.
The case was taken up for hearing on 7.5.1996 and 851996 but the same had to be adjourned, as none was present on behalf of Union of India.
Even today the case was taken up at 1230 PM but none appeared on behalf of Union of India.
6.
I have, however, heard the learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
Mr. KS Sivia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that the disability suffered by the petitioner accrued to him when he was on duty and the same was attributed to the military service and hence the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension under regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, (Part I) 1961.
He further submitted that under rule 7(b) of the Appendix 2 (Entitlement Rules), a disease which led to an individual discharge will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen if no note of it was made at the time of individual's acceptance for military service.
He contended that since no such note was made at the time of petitioner's acceptance for military service, it has to be presumed that the disease which had led to the discharge of the petitioner was arisen in the service.
The learned counsel, therefore submitted that the petitioner was entitled to disability pension.
In support of his case, the learned counsel placed reliance of the following Judgments of this Court.
(i) Union of India and others v. Shyam Lal Malhotra, 1995(2) Recent Services Judgments 493 (Pb.
& Hry.)
(ii) Ex SPR Santokh Singh Gill v. Union of India and others, 1992(3) Recent Services judgments 216; and (iii) Hoshiar Singh Ex Sepoy v Union of India, (1996-2) 113 Punjab Law Reporter 5.
8.
The entitlement of disability pension is governed by the provisions of Pension Regulation 173, which reads as under :-  "Regulation 173.
Unless otherwise specifically provided a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalidated from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent, or over."
9.
In this connection, rule 7(b) of the Appendix II (Entitlement Rules) is also relevant which reads as under :-  "(a) In respect of disease, the following rules shall be observed : (b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of individual acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
A combined reading of the provisions reproduced above shows that the cause of disability which has led to the person concerned being discharged from service will be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of entry in the Armed Forces or unless a note is recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined the service.
Admittedly, the petitioner suffered from disease of psychoneurosis and was ultimately boarded out of service w.e.f.
2.5.1968 because of this disease.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent it has not been contended by the respondent that there existed any note that the petitioner was suffering from disability at the time of his entry in the armed forces nor there is any averment that any note was recorded on any subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected on medical examination before he had joined service.
In view of these facts it is to be presumed that the disease the petitioner suffered from and which had led to his discharge, had arisen during his service and as such the same was attributable to his military service.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the writ petition filed by the petitioner has to be allowed as the petitioner is entitled to his disability pension.
The view I have taken finds full support from the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Shyam Lal Malhotra (supra) and the judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Hoshiar Singh (supra).
10.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to release the disability pension to the petitioner in accordance with the rules within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
The parties, are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.