GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against the order (Annexure P-9) issued by the Director, Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab, on 19.4.1994 appointing respondent No. 6 as Inquiry Officer to investigate into the allegation levelled against the petitioner under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the 1970 Rules).
2.
The petitioner joined service as a Teacher in 1974 on fixed salary of Rs. 150/- per month.
He is said to have applied for grant of leave from 1531978 to 15.12.1978 for the purpose of prosecuting the B.Ed.
course at the Gandhi Memorial College of Education, Srinagar (J&K).
According to the petitioner, his leave was sanctioned by the competent authority and he prosecuted the course in the State of Jammu and Kahsmir.
After his return from leave, the petitioner was not allowed to join his duties and he was informed that his service stood terminated w.e.f 2461978.
This led to the filing of a civil suit by the petitioner, which was decreed by the Sub Judge, Kapurthala, on 741989.
The appeal filed by the Department was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Kapurthala, on 591991.
However, keeping in view the observation made by the learned Appellate Court, the Director, Public Instructions (Schools), issued Memo dated 2141993 for holding an inquiry again the petitioner under the 1970 Rules.
Shri PL Handa was appointed as Inquiry Officer to hold inquiry into the allegation of absence from duty levelled against the petitioner.
It is said that Shri Handa made a detailed inquiry and submitted his report to the respondent No. 2 with a finding that the petitioner was not guilty of the allegation of absence from duty.
However, the respondent No. 2 passed the impugned order (Annexure P-8) and appointed the respondent No. 6 to investigate into the allegation levelled against the petitioner.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the ground of violation of Rule 9 of the 1970 Rules, non-application of mind and arbitrariness.
His contention is that the punishing authority is not empowered to appoint a new Inquiry Officer and to direct holding of a de novo inquiry merely because the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer are not to its liking.
Another contention of the petitioner is that the impugned order does not contain any reason for ignoring the findings recorded by the previous Inquiry Officer.
The respondents have justified the order (Annexure P-8) on the ground that Shri PL Handa, who had earlier made inquiry into the allegation levelled against the petitioner, did not refer to the evidence produced before him by the department to prove the allegation of absence from duty levelled against the petitioner and, therefore, the respondent No. 2 was constrained to appointed Smt. Gulshan Raj Kaur, Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar, to hold further inquiry.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has chosen to abstain from hearing.
We have, therefore, heard the arguments of the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General and have gone through the record of the case.
5.
A look at Annexure P-8 shows that it simply contains a reference to the charge-sheet issued to the petitioner vide letter dated 22.4.1993 and then it goes on to say that Mrs. Gulshan Raj Kaur, Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar, has been appointed as an Inquiry Officer and an Assistant from the District Education Officer, Kapurthala's office be detailed to appear on behalf of the department.
it is, therefore, evident that this order does not even refer to the previous inquiry held by Shri PL Handa, who had been appointed as Inquiry Officer by none else than the respondent No. 2.
Indeed it is not in dispute that Shri PL Handa had been appointed as Inquiry Officer and he had submitted a report favourable to the petitioner.
Therefore, in the absence of any reason in the order (Annexure P-8) to show as to what was the cause for entrusting the inquiry to Smt. Gulshan Raj Kaur, the impugned order is liable to be quashed simply on the ground of it being a non-speaking order.
6.
Even then we have considered the submissions of Shri Chhina that Annexure R-3 which has been filed along with the reply may be read as a part and parcel of Annexure P-8 and if that is done the reason for passing of the order (Annexure P-8) can be discerned.
A look at the Annexure R-3 shows that the respondent No. 2 has made a reference to the inquiry report/proceeding submitted by Shri PL Handa and then recorded one line conclusion that he had not taken into account the charges levelled vide officer order dated 1931993.
Respondent No. 2 then proceeded to observe that "I do not agree with the report of the Inquiry Officer".
To be precise, we deem it proper to reproduce English version of Annexure R-3, wichi reads as under:-  "After examining the regular enquiry report/proceedings submitted by PL Handa regarding absence of Shri Satnam Singh, Math Master, I have come to the conclusion that the Enquiry Officer had not taken into account the charges levelled vide this office order No. 10/44-92-Estt.III(1) dated 1931993 (Just as attendance register/service book/leave account and Pay Roll etc.) Report of the Enquiry Officer is one sided.
I do not agree with the report of Enquiry Officer.
I reject this report.
Smt. Gulshan Raj Kaur, C.E.C., Jalandhar is appointed as Inquiry Officer and Dealing Asstt., o/o DEO, Kapurthala, Sh. Sahib Singh is appointed as Peshi Officer.
This inquiry be completed immediately.
Sd/- DPI (S), Punjab 1941994."
In our opinion, this document also failed to satisfy the requirement of recording of reasons as envisaged in Rule 9(1) of the 1970 Rules.
That Rule empowers the punishing authority, if it is not the inquiring authority, to remit the case to the enquiring authority for further inquiry and report.
However, for exercise of this power, the punishing authority must record reasons in writing.
It is, thus, clear that one of the principles of natural justice, namely, that the order passed by the quasi-judicial authority must contain reasons has been incorporated in the Rules itself.
The object of laying down the requirement of recording of reasons is to protect an employee against successive inquiries into the same set of allegations.
The report submitted by a particular inquiry officer may be favourable to the employee.
Therefore, in a case where a punishing authority does not want to accept that report, it is imperative for such punishing authority to record reasons.
The requirement of recording of reasons provides another safeguard to the employee namely that he can challenge an order passed by the punishing authority before Court of law by showing that the reasons recorded by the punishing authority are extraneous or irrelevant.
7.
At the cost of repetition, we may say that the Annexure P-8 is totally silent about the reasons which impelled the punishing authority to appoint a new inquiry officer to make investigation into the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Even Annexure R-3 does nothing more than to record one line conclusion that respondent No. 2 does not agree with the report of the inquiry officer.
Apparently, respondent No. 2 has not been able to appreciate the fine distinction between the reason and the conclusion.
For this reason, we have no hesitation to hold that Annexure R-3 is not sufficient to meet with the requirement of recording reasons in writing under Rule 9 of the 1970 Rules.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the order (Annexure P-8) is illegal and the same is liable to be set aside.
We order accordingly.
However, liberty is given to the respondent No. 2 to pass a fresh order under Rule 9(1) of the 1970 Rules for holding further inquiry against the petitioner.
We make it clear that if the respondent No. 2 comes to the conclusion that there are special reasons for appointing a new inquiry officer, it shall be open to the respondent No. 2 to entrust the inquiry to any person other than Shri PL Handa and Smt. Gulshan Raj Kaur.
Keeping in view the fact that the matter has already been prolonged, we direct the respondent No. 2 to pass appropriate order within a period of two months after the receipt of certified copy of this order.
We further direct that further inquiry proceedings, if any, held against the petitioner should be completed within a period of next nine months.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner, indicated above.