RP Sethi and RL Anand JJ.
- In response to the advertisement No. 9 of 1984, the petitioner appeared in the examination conducted by the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short the 'Commission') for the post of Haryana Civil Services ('Executive Branch') and other allied services.
Vide Annexure P/1, the petitioner was informed by the Commission the that his merit number in the list of candidates recommended for aforesaid post was 11.
The petitioner was offered the post of Assistant Employment Officer in the Department of Employment Exchange, Haryana on temporary basis vide letter dated 24.3.1986 (Annexure P/2).
He was, however, directed to get himself medically examined from the Chief Medical Officer and submit his fitness certificate to the Government at the earliest.
The petitioner complied with the direction and submitted the medical certificate (Annexure P/3).
However, on account of the interim stay granted by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 2289 of 1986, the petitioner could not be appointed to the post.
Unfortunately, even after the stay order was vacated, the petitioner did not get the requisite relief with the result that he was forced to approach this Court in CWP No. 16625 of 1992 wherein a direction was issued to the respondents to consider and decide his pending representation.
The representation was rejected vide Annexure P/7 by passing a telegraphic order.
Despite the fact that the petitioner was at number 11 in the merit and not appointed, the persons who were inferior in merit being at numbers 17, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25 and 27 were appointed to the post.
Without impleading the aforesaid persons, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of direction to the respondents for his appointment retrospectively alongwith all consequential benefits.
2.
The claim of the petitioner has been resisted on various grounds including the ground that mere selection had not conferred any right upon the petitioner and that the respondents were not under a legal obligation to appoint him to the post of Assistant Employment Officer despite his being at serial number 11.
It is further contended that as the selected persons have not been impleaded as party respondents in the case, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
Alternatively, it is argued that no relief can be granted to the petitioner at this stage adversely affecting the interests of those who have not made party respondents in the case.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
4.
The conduct and attitude of the respondents in this case reflects a sorry state of affairs.
Despite selection and his merit, the petitioner was deprived of the appointment and the persons who were admittedly inferior in merit were appointed to the services completely ignoring the mandate of law and the constitutional guarantees as incorporated in Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was for the respondent-State to accept or not to accept the recommendations of the Commission but once they had decided to make the appointment on the basis of the selection made by the Commission, they had no option but to offer appointments strictly in accordance with the provisions of law and on the basis of the merit as determined by the Commission unless some inherent defect was observed and notified to the concerned disentitling him to be appointed to the civil service.
On account of the alleged acts of commission and omission attributable to the official respondents, the petitioner cannot be deprived of the benefit of selection and the right accruing to him under the constitutional guarantees as enshrined in Part III of the Constitution.
The respondents cannot escape their liability to appoint the petitioner to the post of Assistant Employment Officer with effect from the date when the persons inferior to him in merit as determined by the Commission, were appointed to the aforesaid post.
5.
It is true that the appointed persons have not been impleaded as party respondents in the present case.
However, the petition cannot be dismissed on this ground inasmuch as such plea has been raised by the respondents.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and the injustice done to the petitioner, the Court can issue directions by appropriately moulding the relief.
Care can be taken of not adversely affecting the interests of those who have not been impleaded as party respondents in the case.
6.
Under the circumstances, the impugned order (Annexure P/7) is set aside and the petitioner is held entitled to the appointment from the date when his juniors were appointed to the post of Assistant Employment Officer.
Upon his appointment retrospectively, the petitioner shall not be held entitled to the payment of salary for the period he has not served the State and his appointment would not adversely affect the seniority of those who were appointed earlier in time.
The petitioner is, however, held entitled to costs which are passed at Rs. 500/-.
Appropriate orders for the appointment of the petitioner shall be issued within a period of one month from today.
Petition allowed.