Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner complains that he has been arbitrarily superseded for promotion from Senior Management Grade Scale-IV to Senior Management Grade Scale V by the respondent Punjab National Bank.
His petition for review having been rejected vide order dated July 16, 1992, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays for the quashing of the order dated July 16, 1992 by which the review petition was rejected for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to "promote" him with all consequential benefits.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Probationary Officer in the year 1971.
In 1976, the petitioner was promoted to the Middle Management Grade Scale II.
In 1981, he was promoted to Middle Management Grade Scale III.
Finally, in the year 1984, the petitioner was promoted to the Senior Management Grade Scale IV.
The petitioner claims that he has had a consistently brilliant record and has held positions of responsibility and discharged his duties ably.
He has handled five assignments as Regional Manager, Himachal Region, Chief Manager, Hazarat Ganj, Lucknow, Regional Manager, Varanasi, Regional Manager, Amritsar and Regional Manager, Ferozepur.
During his posting at Amritsar and Ferozepur the petitioner was on the hit list of the terrorists.
In spite of the threat, he had shown excellent results.
3.
In the year 1991, the respondent-Bank considered the claims of various officers for promotion to Senior Management Grade Scale V The petitioner was interviewed by the Directors' Promotion Committee on December 24, 1991.
On December 28, 1991, the petitioner came to know that he had been over- looked for promotion.
Consequently, he submitted a representation on December 29, 1991.
A copy of this representation has been produced Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
The Committee met to consider the representation on April 18, 1992.
Vide order dated May 8, 1992, it rejected the petitioner's representation.
However, before the order of rejection could be ratified and conveyed to the petitioner, he filed the present writ petition on July 16, 1992.
It appears that the order of rejection was ratified and issued on July 16, 1992 and reached the petitioner during the pendency of the writ petition.
He, consequently, amended the writ petition so as to even impugn the order rejecting his petition for review.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the proceedings of the Directors' Promotion Committee and the order rejecting this representation on various grounds.
He alleges that he has an excellent record and has been wrongly superseded for promotion.
Even the review petition, the petitioner states, has been rejected illegally.
He, consequently, prays from the quashing of the order passed by the Review Committee and for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote him to Senior Management Grade Scale V with all consequential benefits.
5.
The respondents have filed a detailed written statement controverting the claim made by the petitioner.
It has been stated that the petitioner "was duly considered in accordance with the promotion policy".
He "having been not found up to the mark was not promoted."
The respondents further state that this Court "will not substitute its own judgment over the experts regarding the inter-se merit of the petitioner and the candidates who have been selected."
They further point out that the petitioner had been considered in the year 1988 also.
Even then, he was not selected.
According to the respondents, the petitioner's performance for the years 1989-90 and 1990-91 was "assessed and reviewed only as satisfactory."
In merit based promotion, getting merely satisfactory reports is not sufficient.
The respondents point out that the promotion policy does not provide for any statutory appeal or review.
The petitioner's case was considered by the Directors' Promotion Committee.
This Committee consisted of the Chairman and the Managing Director, the Government Director and the Director from the Reserve Bank of India who is on the Board of the Bank.
This Committee had examined the petitioner's case thoroughly and objectively and in accordance with the promotion policy.
The representation submitted by the petitioner was placed before the Directors' Committee in accordance with the promotion policy.
The Committee reconsidered the whole case in accordance with the provisions of the policy.
Thereafter, the decision was placed before the Board of Directors of the respondent-Bank.
The Board had also ratified the decision taken by the Committee.
It was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated July 16, 1992.
The orders are legal.
As such, these call for no interference by this Court.
The respondents have appended various documents with the written statement.
6.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
Thereafter, both sides have filed various other affidavits as well.
Resultantly, there is a paper book running into more than 367 pages.
However, a detailed reference to the various affidavits etc. does not appear to be necessary for the consideration of the limited questions that have been raised by the counsel for the parties.
7.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the Directors' Promotion Committee had erred in assessing the petitioner's merit.
It had accepted the reports made by the Zonal Manager mechanically and had not perused the relevant data which was on record to assess the performance to the petitioner and allocate marks therefor.
He further contended that the order rejecting the petitioner's representation for review is vitiated inasmuch as the persons who were members of the Directors' Promotion Committee had also participated in the meeting of the Board of Directors.
It has been further submitted that the records which had been taken into consideration by the Promotion Committee were not placed before the Board of Directors.
Consequently, the Board of Directors could not consider the matter while ratifying the decision.
It was also contended that selection was arbitrary and various persons who were ineligible had been wrongly selected.
8.
On the other hand, Mr. HL Sibal, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner's case had been duly considered by the duly constituted Committee.
It consisted of very senior officers.
There is no allegation against any one of them.
Consequently, the proceedings of this Committee call for no interference.
It has been further contended that the proceedings of the Committee were reviewed and no reason for interference having been made out, the representation submitted by the petitioner was rejected and the decision of the Review Committee was ratified by the Board of Directors.
Accordingly, the learned counsel submitted that no case for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution was made out.
Mr. Sibal also produced the relevant record.
He pointed out that the petitioner had secured a total of 55 marks while the last candidate who had been selected by the Committee had secured 67 marks.
There was, thus, a wide margin between the last of the selected candidates and the petitioner.
Consequently, the learned counsel submitted that the petition deserves to be dismissed.
9.
Before proceeding to consider the respective submissions of the counsel for the parties, it deserves mention that the respondent-Punjab National Bank was nationalised and taken over by the Union of India under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1970.
Under Section 19 of this Act, the Board of Directors were empowered to make regulations and to lay down the terms and conditions of service of the officers/officials.
In exercise of this power, the Bank has framed regulations called the Punjab National Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979.
Regulation 4 provides for the "Grades" and "Categorisation of Posts".
Scale I constitutes the Junior Management Grade.
Scales II and III are the Middle Management Grade.
Scales IV and V constitute the Senior Management Grade and Scales VI and VII are the top Execute Grade.
Regulation 17, inter alia, provides that the "promotions to all grades of officers in the Bank shall be made in accordnace with the policy laid down by the Board from time to time having regard to the guidelines of the Government, if any."
10.
In accordance with the provision in Regulation 17 and the guidelines issued by the Government of India, a promotion policy has been framed.
It has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
A few of the relevant provisions in this policy may be briefly noticed.
A person with three years of satisfactory service in Senior Grade Scale IV is eligible for promotion to Scale IV.
The procedure for selection as prescribed in this policy is as under :  "Process of Selection Officers will be called for interview in the order of seniority.
The marks for different parameters shall be as under : Max.
Marks Min.
Marks Performance 60 30 Interview 40 15 (to assess job and general knowledge, personal characteristics and potential for shouldering higher responsibilities."
The assessment of performance shall be made after evaluation of performance for the preceding 2 years (emphasis supplied) and the rating of marks shall be as under :-  Rating Marks Very Good 30 Good 22 Satisfactory 15 Unsatisfactory 0 " Provision for constitution of 'Interview Committee' the 'competent authority to approve promotions' has also been made for different categories of posts.
In the case of promotion from Senior Management Grade Scale IV to Scale V and above, the Directors' Promotion Committee has been authorised to interview and approve candidates for promotion.
Various other provisions regarding the performance appraisal of candidates etc. have also been made.
11.
Another provision which deserves notice is regarding the submission of an appeal.
An officer who feels that his case has not been properly considered can file an appeal.
In respect of promotion to Scale V and above, it has been provided that "there shall be no appeal against the decision of the Committee of Directors.
However, an officer aggrieved with the decisions of the Committee may make a representation to the said Committee within a period of 3 months from the date on which the decision was announced.
The Committee shall consider the said representations as soon as they are received and in any case, not later than 6 months from the receipt of the representation and review or modify its earlier decision if considered necessary.
The decision of the Committee shall be recorded in writing.
The decisions of the Committee have to be placed before the Board of Directors for rectification before implementation."
12.
A perusal of the above mentioned policy shows that the officers are selected for promotion from Grade IV to Grade V on the basis of their performance and interview.
The assessment of the performance has to be made "after evaluation of performance for the preceding 2 years."
If on evaluation of the relevant data an officer's performance during a year is rated as Very Good he gets 30 marks.
If it is found to be Good, he gets 22 marks and if his performance is adjudged as Satisfactory, he gets only 15 marks.
In other words, if the performance of an officer during the 2 years preceding the date of selection is assessed as Very Good, he will get 60 marks out of 60 and so on.
Marks are also allotted for performance in the interview.
Final selection is made on the basis of the 'evaluation of performance' and the 'interview'.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Promotion Committee is entitled to represent and seek a review.
13.
A perusal of the record produced by Mr. Sibal shows that the petitioner's performance for the years 1989-90 and 1990-91 had been assessed as Satisfactory by the Assessing and Reviewing authorities.
On that basis, the petitioner was awarded 15 marks for each of two years, thus making a total of 30 marks.
It was also mentioned that the petitioner was awarded 25 marks out of 40 in the interview.
He was, thus, awarded a total of 55 marks.
14.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the Directors' Promotion Committee had mechanically awarded marks to the petitioner for the two reports on the basis of the rating awarded by the Assessing and Reviewing authorities.
According to the learned counsel, the duty to make the assessment of performance was of the Committee.
The rating given by the Assessing and Reviewing authorities could not be mechanically adopted by the Committee.
On the other hand, Mr. Sibal submitted that the rating given by the Reviewing authority was final and the marks had to be awarded on that basis.
It is so ?
15.
A perusal of the promotion policy shows that while dealing with the process of selection, it has been specifically provided that "the assessment of the performance shall be made after evaluation of performance for the preceding 2 years and the rating of marks shall be" as prescribed.
It has been further provided that the interview shall be held "to assess job and general knowledge, personal characteristics and potential for shouldering higher responsibilities."
On a perusal of this provision, it appears to be clear that the Selection Committee is not only required to assess the suitability and the potential of the officer for the job at the time of interview, but it has also to make an "assessment of performance -------after evaluation of performance for the preceding 2 years."
The provision does not lay down that the marks for performance shall be awarded on the basis of the rating given by the Assessing or Reviewing authorities.
On the contrary, the assessment has to be made by the Committee constituted to interview the candidates and approve them for promotion.
16.
There is a clear rationale behind this Rule.
The officers in Scale IV are already in the Senior Management Grade.
They have to be considered for promotion to a higher post in the same grade.
The officers in Scale IV are working all over the country.
Their performance has to be adjudged by different 'assessing' and 'reviewing' authorities.
They have not been adjudged by one authority.
If marks were to be mechanically awarded on the prescribed scale, the job could have been performed by any functionary of the Bank.
However, this would not have been fair.
It would not have ensured 'equality' in selection.
The Directors' Promotion Committee would have been merely interviewing the candidates.
It would not have been 'selecting' and 'approving' the candidates for promotion by following a uniform standard.
It is to obviate such a situation that a provision has been made by which the duty to 'assess' and 'evaluate' the 'performance for the preceding two years' and to interview the candidates has been placed on the Directors' Promotion Committee.
This ensures assessment of all the candidates by a single and uniform standard.
It effectuates the guarantee of 'equality of opportunity' as enshrined in the Constitution.
17.
What is the position in the present case ?
It is the admitted position that the performance was not assessed by the Directors' Promotion Committee.
In reply to the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner, the respondents on May 13, 1995, it has been specifically stated in paragraph 6 that "the role of Directors Promotion Committee is only confined to awarding of marks to the officer concerned for this performance in the interview and the Directors' Promotion Committee is required to assess the suitability of the officer concerned in the interview on the parameters mentioned in clause IV of the Promotion Policy reproduced hereinabove i.e. to assess the job profile, general knowledge, personal characteristic and potential for shouldering higher responsibilities.
It is also stated that the performance already assessed and reviewed by the assessing authority and reviewing authority designated in terms of circular issued by the Bank in this regard from time to time for the relevant period is given appropriate marks as provided in clause IV of the Promotion Policy referred to hereinabove and thereafter a merit list of the officers who were considered for promotion and the officers who are higher enough in the merit list according to the number of vacancies are offered promotion."
(Emphasis supplied) Still further, in paragraph 8, it has been stated inter-alia, that "the officer concerned is required to submit his Annual Performance Report to the reporting authority on the prescribed format and thereafter his performance is assessed and reviewed by the authority concerned on yearly basis and the performance so assessed of the officer concerned is awarded marks in terms of the Promotion Policy.
It is submitted that the argument sought to be raised by the petitioner that the performance of preceding two years has to be re-assessed by the Directors' Promotion Committee, even if the same has been assessed and reviewed by the competent authority in terms of circulars issued by the Bank from time to time, is neither supported by any provision of Promotion Policy nor any such argument is otherwise acceptable in the facts and circumstances of the case."
18.
In view of this clear statement in the affidavit, it is established that the Promotion Committee did not assess or evaluate the performance of the candidates.
It merely awarded marks for the assessment made by the Assessing/Reviewing authorities.
This was not in conformity with the provisions of the Promotion Policy.
It was contrary to the plain language of the relevant clause in the Promotion Policy.
The assessment made by another person or authority was not required to be mechanically accepted or followed by the Selecting Authority.
The reason is obvious.
As already observed, it is the admitted position that candidates from all over the country working in different Regions and Zones have to be considered.
They work under different Assessing and Reviewing authorities.
Some authorities can be very strict.
Even though the officer has shown a 100 per cent increase in deposits, in giving of loans and in making the recovery, yet his performance may be assessed as only satisfactory.
Another authority may be slightly liberal and may assess another officer with the same kind of performance as Good.
Yet another authority may take the view that a 100 per cent increase in all the fields entitles the officer to be rated as Very Good.
The result would be that for the same performance there would be three different assessments.
If the Directors' Promotion Committee was to mechanically award marks, the result would be wholly unjust and unfair.
It is with this object that the duty to assess and evaluate has been placed on the Selecting Authority.
In the present case, the authority has failed to perform the duty in accordance with the provision in the Promotion Policy.
19.
The petitioner in his additional affidavit dated April 29, 1995 has given various instances and mentioned facts to indicate that the Assessing and Reviewing authorities had been giving their rating in violation of the guidelines laid down by the Bank.
He has given various instances.
He mentions the case of Mr. BL Verma.
It has been pointed out that certain columns were left blank in the report submitted by the officer.
Yet, he had been given a rating of 'A' (Very Good) by the Assessing and Reviewing authorities.
With regard to his own case, the petitioner has pointed out that the Reviewing Authority had given the assessment after the initiation of the selection process and during the currency of the interviews.
The petitioner points out that Mr. Verma had been given a higher rating although his recovery in case of loan was lower than that of the petitioner.
However, in view of the findings regading the functions of the Directors' Promotion Committee in the context of the provision in the Policy, it is not necessary to examine this matter in detail.
20.
In view of the above, it is held that the action of the Directors' Promotion Committee in awarding marks to the petitioner on the basis of the rating given to him by the Assessing/Reviewing authorities without making an assessment and evaluation itself is contrary to the provision in the promotion policy.
It has resulted in denial of an equal and fair opportunity.
His rejection by the Committee is, thus, vitiated.
21.
It was then contended by the learned counsel that even the order rejecting his representation by the Review Committee is illegal and untenable.
In view of the conclusion that the consideration of the petitioner's claim was not in conformity with the provisions of the promotion policy, the second contention has become merely academic.
However, it may be briefly considered.
22.
It is the admitted position that the interviews had commenced on December 21, 1991.
The petitioner had been interviewed on December 24, 1991.
On December 28, 1991, he had come to know of his rejection.
Consequently he had submitted the representation on December 29, 1991.
In this representation the petitioner had pointed out that he had worked during the last 42 months at Amritsar when terrorism prevailed in the State of Punjab.
None else had "faced such trying situation".
He further pointed out that he was at No. 17 in the seniority-list and had been superseded by persons who were at serial Nos. 30, 31, 44, 50 and 52 in spite of the fact that these persons had no field experience.
He further submitted that 8 minutes' interview cannot "wipe out the performance of 8 years".
He alleged that "performance has been ignored all together."
This representation was placed before the Review Committee which met on April 18, 1992.
It found no reason for modification of its earlier finding.
Consequently, it ordered its rejection.
The resolution in this behalf was recorded on May 8, 1992.
It has been produced as Annexure R-2 with the written statement filed by the respondents.
This decision was put up for ratification of the Board of Directors as item No. 11 on July 3, 1992.
The minutes which were recorded on that date have been reproduced in paragraph 64 of the written statement.
These are as under :-  "Item No. 11.
Decision of the Directors' Promotion Committee on the representation of the Officers against their non-approval for promotion to SMG Scale V-General Manager (VPT) note dated 961992.
Ratified.
Shri Salamat Ullah, Director, however, dissented and expressed the view that since records pertaining to Interviewees selected for promotion by Departmental Promotion Committee have not been made available, as such, it is not possible for him to consider the Item."
It appears that the above minutes were placed for confirmation before the Board of Directors on July 25, 1992.
On that date, the following resolution was passed :  "Item 11: Decision of the Directors' Promotion Committee on the representation of the Officers against their non-approval for promotion to SMG Scale V Shri Salamat Ullah, Director, pointed out that there had been a discussion on the Item, but at no stage did he express his dissent on the decision of the Directors' Promotion Committee.
As such, the following may be substituted in place of the recorded Minutes.
"Ratified".
The petitioner alleges that the decision regarding rejection of his representation had been conveyed to him vide letter dated July 16, 1992.
A copy of this communication is at Annexure P-12 with the writ petition.
The suggestion of the counsel at the time of arguments was that having conveyed the rejection, the Board had ratified the proceedings and substituted the original resolution in order to avoid embarrassment.
In any event, it was contended that there could have been no review by the Directors' Promotion Committee or proper consideration by Board of Directors unless the record was produced.
The objection raised by Mr. Salamat Ullah shows that the record had not been placed before the Board of Directors.
23.
Without going into the controversy in detail, it appears to be clear that the relevant record had not been placed before the Board before it ratified the proceedings of the Promotion Committee.
Surely, the proceedings of the Committee are not placed before the Board of Directors for its mechanical approval.
Since the officers working at a senior level are involved, it is reasonable to assume that the Board has to properly consider the facts and take a final view in the matter.
For this purpose, it is essential that the records are placed before it.
In the circumstances of the present case, the proceedings recorded on July 3, 1992 clearly establish that the record had not been placed before the Board of Directors.
Accordingly, even the decision to reject the petitioner's representation cannot be said to have been taken after proper consideration of the matter.
The order Annexure P-12 had, in fact, been issued to the petitioner before the minutes of the meeting had been approved by the Board of Directors.
24.
Lastly, it was also submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the entire selection was arbitrary.
However, in view of my conclusion on the two points noticed above, as also the fact that the various selected candidates are not parties in the writ petition, it is not necessary for me to go into this question or the point regarding the participation of the members of the Promotion Committee in the meeting of the Board of Directors.
In view of the above, it is held that :-  (1) The Directors' Promotion Committee had to itself assess and evaluate the performance of the candidates.
It could not have mechanically adopted or followed the rating given by the Assessing and Reviewing officers.
It acted illegally in adopting the ratings given by the various officers to different candidates and in selecting candidates on that basis.
(2) The records relating to the selection of candidates should have been placed before the Board of Directors so as to ensure a proper consideration of the petitioner's representation and review of the proceedings of the Directors' Promotion Committee.
The failure to do so vitiates the order rejecting the petitioner's representation.
(3) Keeping in view the fact that the selected candidates have not been impleaded as parties their selection cannot be interfered with.
However, in view of the conclusion at No. (1) it is directed that the Directors' Promotion Committee shall now assess and evaluate the performance of all the candidates who had been interviewed by the Committee in December, 1991.
It shall assess and evaluate the performance and award marks to the candidates in respect of their performance for the preceding two years, de novo.
It shall then prepare an aggregate of the marks awarded by the Committee on the basis of the assessment of the performance and the marks which had been awarded to the candidates at the time of their interview in the year 1991.
On that basis, a final merit list shall be prepared.
If it is found that a person with lesser score than that of the petitioner had been promoted, the petitioner's case for appointment with effect from the same date shall be considered.
The order rejecting the petitioner's representation, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-12 with the writ petition is quashed.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition allowed.