Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the orders of termination passed on December 7, 1981.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was selected for appointment to the post of Plate Grainer in the Printing and Stationery Department of State of Haryana.
Vide letter dated August 8, 1978, the petitioner was informed by the Secretary of the Subordinate Services Selection Board that his name had been recommended to the Controller Printing and Stationery, Haryana for appointment as a Plate Grainer.
He was placed at No. 1 in the order of merit.
In pursuance to the recommendation of the Board, the petitioner was given a letter of appointment on September 13, 1978.
In this letter, it was inter alia mentioned that the petitioner shall be on probation for a period of 2 years.
It was also provided that in case he wanted to resign, he will have to give one month's notice or one's months' pay in lieu thereof.
It was further pointed out that the Govt. will also give him a similar notice or one month's pay in lieu thereof.
While the petitioner was working as such a charge-sheet was issued to him vide letter dated September 29, 1980.
It was alleged that he had cheated the Govt. "by producing bogus/false experience certificate in order to get employment."
On the basis of the allegation, action was proposed to be taken against the petitioner under rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
However, before the proceedings could culminate, the petitioner's services were terminated vide order dated December 7, 1981.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
It was observed that "his services are no longer required to (sic) this department.
Hence his services are terminated with immediate effect."
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The order has been challenged on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been urged that the order of termination is vitiated as one month's notice was not served on him before taking the impugned action.
Secondly, it is alleged that the impugned order has been passed without giving any show-cause notice or concluding the enquiry proceedings.
On these grounds, it is urged that the impugned order be quashed and the petitioner be ordered to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been stated that the conditions of service governing the petitioner are laid down in the rules called the Punjab Printing and Stationery Department Service Rules, 1964.
Under rule 9, a person appointed by direct appointment is initially placed on probation for a period of 2 years.
This period can, however, be extended.
The total period of probation including the extension, if any, cannot exceed 3 years.
It has been further pointed out that vide letter dated December 15, 1991 instructions had been issued by the Chief Secretary providing that the decision regarding the continuance of an employee in service can be taken within three months from the date of expiry of the period of probation.
On this basis, it has been stated that the petitioner's services have been terminated in accordance with the provisions of the Rules.
The allegation regarding the issue of charge-sheet has been admitted.
It has been stated that the enquiry proceedings were dropped by the appointing authority.
It has also been categorically averred that "the services of the petitioner have not been terminated in lieu or in consequence of the findings of the enquiry proceedings."
The allegation that one month's notice was not given to the petitioner has been controverted and it has been stated that no notice was required to be served.
On this basis, it is claimed that the writ petition has no merit and should be dismissed.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The two questions that require consideration are:-  (1) Is the order of termination vitiated on account of the fact that one month's notice was not given to the petitioner ?
and (2) Has the petitioner been punished for the alleged misconduct ?
Reg.
(1):  5.
A copy of the letter of appointment has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It has undoubtedly been provided that the petitioner could resign by giving one month's notice or paying salary in lieu thereof.
A similar right was reserved by the employer.
It has also been provided that in case notice of less than one month's is given, the employee shall have to deposit the pay and allowance for the period by which the notice is short of one month.
On a perusal of the terms of appointment, it does not appear that the giving of a month's notice was condition precedent to the termination of services.
The failure to give notice only made the employer liable to pay the salary for the prescribed period of one month.
Consequently, the contention that the order of termination is vitiated on the ground that one month's notice had not been given to the petitioner cannot be accepted.
The first question is accordingly answered against the petitioner.
Reg.
(2):  6.
It is no doubt true that the petitioner's services were terminated on the ground that these were no longer required by the department.
However, it is the admitted position that even when the employer passes an innocuous order, the court can pierce the veil and examine the attendant circumstances.
If on examination of the facts it appears that the petitioner has in fact been punished, then the mere cloak of an innocuous order will not be conclusive.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that vide letter dated September 29, 1980, the petitioner was informed that it was proposed to take action against him under rule 7 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
It was alleged that the had cheated the Govt. by producing a bogus/false experience certificate in order to get employment.
On a perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it appears that the enquiry proceedings had been conducted.
In the written statement it has been categorically stated that the services of the petitioner have not been terminated "in consequence of the findings of the Enquiry Officer."
However, the exact finding as recorded by the Enquiry Officer with regard to the charge levelled against the petitioner has not been disclosed.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that a serious allegation had been levelled against the petitioner.
If this allegation was correct, the competent authority may have been entitled to pass an order of punishment.
Still further, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was on probation, it may have been perfectly legitimate for the competent authority to terminate his services if it was found that his work was not satisfactory.
However, in the present case, it has not been suggested that the petitioner's work was not found to be satisfactory or that he was not able to carry out the duties of the post as assigned to him.
There is not even a suggestion that in any of the annual confidential reports, which may have been recorded during the period of more than 3 years during which the petitioner was in service that any adverse comment regarding the performance of his duties had been made.
If during the period of probation, the petitioner's performance was found to be satisfactory, there could be no other reason for the termination of his services, except the supposed misconduct which was the subject of the enquiry.
Undoubtedly, the respondent has stated in the written statement, that the enquiry proceedings have been dropped.
That being so, nothing has been referred to which may indicate that the petitioner's services were terminated on account of his failure to perform the duties satisfactorily.
7.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the inevitable conclusion is that the petitioner's services had been terminated on account of the alleged misconduct.
However, since the enquiry proceedings had not been taken to the logical end, the authority acted unfairly in adopting a short-cut and passing the order of termination without giving him opportunity to show cause against the findings that may have been recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
The second question is, accordingly answered in favour of the petitioner.
8.
In view of the above conclusion regarding the second question, the impugned order of termination cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly set aside.
However, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had served the department only for period of 3 years, it does not appear to be reasonable to pay him back wages for the period of 15 years.
It has been stated by Mr. Bhandari that since the year 1985, the petitioner is working in a private press.
In views of this situation, it is directed that the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment if only 20% of the arrears of salary.
The petition is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.