VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing respondent No. 1 to treat the petitioner eligible under Rule 7(1) of the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 (as applicable to Haryana) (hereinafter referred to as 1930 Rules) for selection of candidates for Register A-1 and further treat him fully eligible for appointment to Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) against the vacancies of the year 1989 to be filled in from Register A-1 by counting continuous Govt. service of the petitioner w.e.f.
1851983, i.e. the date of his entry into government service and accordingly to include the name of the petitioner in the list of Tehsildars/Naib Tehsildars, to be submitted before the committee headed by Chief Secretary, Haryana in pursuance of circular dated 16111993.
2.
As per the case set up by the petitioner, Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board vide advertisement No. 8/1981 advertised some posts of Naib Tehsildars for Hisar and Ambala Divisions.
Petitioner applied, competed and was selected for the post.
Vide order dated 18.5.1993, the Commissioner, Hisar Division, Hisar accepted the petitioner and other selected candidates as A- Class Naib Tehsildar candidates and posted him for training in Hisar district.
On successful completion of his training period, the Director Land Records, Haryana issued the requisite Efficiency Certificate to the petitioner on 2061984 and as a consequence thereof, the Appointing Authority, i.e. the Commissioner, Hisar Division, Hisar vide order dated 25.7.1984 posted the petitioner as Naib Tehsildar (Accounts) at Jind.
Petitioner also successfully completed his probation period of two years on 3171986.
It has been averred that before completion of his probation period, petitioner also passed the Naib Tehsildari examination on 1481984.
Petitioner appeared for the Tehsildar examination held on 2051985 and successfully passed the same on 2141986 and thus became senior-most eligible Naib Tehsildar in Hisar Division.
Petitioner has alleged that he was promoted as Tehsildar on 631992, even though he was entitled to be promoted as such w.e.f.
4.5.1988 and his claim to this effect is pending consideration before respondent No. 1 in pursuance of directions issued by this Court in a previous writ petition filed by the petitioner.
For filling up four posts of HCS (Executive Branch) in the year 1989 from Register A-I, respondent No. 1 issued circular dated 16111993 vide which the names of eligible Tehsildars/Naib Tehsildars/District Revenue Officers along with their service-books and ACR filed were called for.
The Deputy Commissioner, Hisar on receipt of this circular marked it to all the District Revenue Officers/Tehsildars so that they could fill up the prescribed format and send the same within time.
According to the petitioner, when the circular was brought to his notice, he sent his application along with the prescribed proforma vide his memo.
No. 2260-TRA dated 3.12.1993.
After inviting applications of eligible Tehsildars/Naib Tehsildars etc. throughout the State, the same were scrutinised somewhere in June/July, 1994.
It is the case of the petitioner that his name is not being considered due to an objection raised by the office of respondent No. 1 to the effect that the petitioner does not possess five years' government service as on 111989, i.e. the cut-off date.
The objection so raised is on the ground that service rendered by the petitioner from 19.5.1983 to 3171984, i.e. the training period cannot be counted towards the requirement of continuous government service under Rule 7(1)(a)(i) of the 1930 Rules Petitioner has alleged that on coming to know the aforesaid objection, he represented to respondent No. 1 through proper channel and requested for treating him fully eligible for the four posts of HCS (Executive Branch) of the year 1989.
Petitioner has further alleged that his representation was rejected, but the formal order of rejection has not been conveyed to him, He, thus, in the petition has submitted that the action of respondent No. 1 in not treating him eligible for appointment to HSC (Executive Branch) against the vacancies of the year 1989 to be filled in from Register A-1 by counting the continuous government service is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India for the reason that he possessed five years' continuous government service as on 1-7-1989 in terms of 1930 Rules.
3.
In answer to the allegations made in the writ' petition, respondent No. 1 in its written statement has stated that upon his acceptance as A-Class Naib Tehsildar candidate by the Commissioner, Hisar Division, Hisar, the petitioner was put to one year's revenue training to work as Patwari/Kanungo and on completion of this one year's training he was issued the efficiency certificate by the Director, Land Records, Haryana on 20-6-1984.
It has been averred that an accepted candidate does not become the member of service unless he has undergone training for one year and has passed the departmental examination of Naib Tehsildar.
The petitioner was accepted as A-Class Naib Tehsildar candidate on 18-5-1983 and was put under training for one year.
He was allowed first increment in the scale of Rs. 700-1250 on 1-8-1985 after undergoing training and passing the departmental examination.
It has further been averred that since the petitioner did not complete five years' service as on 1-1-1989, he was not entitled to be recommended for consideration to H.C.S.
Thus, according to the respondents, the training period of the petitioner as Patwari/Kanungo i.e. from 19-5-1983 to 25-7-1984 is not be taken into consideration for the eligibility to the post of HCS (Executive Branch) for the year 1989 as he was not a member of the service at that time.
4.
It is the common case of the parties that recruitment to HCS (Executive Branch) is made in accordance with the 1930 Rules as amended upto 31-8-1981 and applicable to Haryana.
Rule 5 says that members of the service shall be appointed from amongst the accepted candidates whose names have been duly entered in accordance with these rules in one or the other of the Registers of accepted candidates to be maintained under these Rules.
Rule 6 provides the different Registers for accepted candidates which are to be maintained by the Chief Secretary.
Register A-I is of Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars whereas Register A-II, Register B and Register C relate to other sources of recruitment.
Rule 7 provides the eligibility conditions for selection of candidates for Register A-I and one of the conditions is that name of a person shall not be submitted who has not completed five years' continuous service.
According to the counsel for the petitioner, the service rendered by Tehsildar/Naib Tehsildar during training period is to be counted under rule 7(1)(a)(i) of the 1930 Rules whereas according to the counsel for the State, an accepted candidate does not become the member of service unless he has undergone training for one year and has passed the departmental examination.
Counsel submitted that the training period of petitioner as Patwari/Kanungo w.e.f.
19-5-1983 to 25-7-1984 cannot be taken into consideration.
Counsel has placed reliance upon a judgment in Jaipal, Tehsildar v. The State of Haryana and another, 1982(2) S.L.R.
293.
On the other hand, counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the judgment relied upon by State Counsel cannot be taken as precedent as the point in issue was decided on the basis of concession.
5.
The question, thus, remains to be determined is whether the period of training is to be counted as government service or not, and in case the period of training is counted as government service, then the petitioner is eligible to be considered for appointment to HCS (Executive Branch) from Register A-I meant for Naib Tehsildars.
6.
On the recommendations of the Haryana Subordinate services Selection Board, the petitioner along with three others was accepted as A-Class Naib Tehsildar candidate and the terms and conditions of his service, training, passing of departmental examination, probation etc. were to be governed by the Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932, the Financial Commissioner's Standing Order No. 12 and the Punjab Civil Service Rules as amended from time to time.
During the period of his training, he was to draw pay at the rate of the minimum of time scale of the post of Naib Tehsildar viz. 700-30-850-900-40-1100-EB-50-1250.
His seniority was to be determined afterwards according to the Board's merit at the time of acceptance of other candidates.
A copy of the letter of acceptance was forwarded to the Deputy Commissioner concerned with a request to arrange training of the candidates in accordance with paragraphs 25 and 26 of the Financial Commissioner's Standing Order No. 12.
The appointment to the posts of Tehsildar and Naib Tehsildar in the State of Haryana is governed by Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1932.
The rules relevant in this case are rules 5 and  6 which read as follows :-  "5.
Educational and other qualifications of persons appointed to the service : (1) No person shall be directly appointed to the service unless in the case of appointment to the post of - a) Tehsildar, he is graduate of a recognised university;  b) Naib Tehsildar, he has passed the first examination of a recognised university in Arts or Science, or the Diploma examination of the Altohison College Lahore, or the Senior Oxford or Senior Cambridge Local examination.
(2) No person shall be appointed directly or by transfer to the service or promoted from the post of Naib Tehsildar to that of Tehsildar unless he shall have become qualified by passing the examination or undergoing the training prescribed from time to time in the standing orders of the Financial Commissioners.
(3) No person shall be appointed directly or by transfer to the service unless he has been accepted as a candidate in the case of naib- tehsildar by the Commissioner, under the conditions prescribed from time to time in the standing orders of the Financial Commissioner; Provided that in the case of Tehsildar the Local Government and in the case of Naib-Tehsildar, the Financial Commissioners may, in special circumstances to be recorded in writing, waive any of the provisions of this rule."
6.
Method of recruitment: Posts in the service shall be filled - a) in the case of tehsildar i) by promotion of naib-tehsildar ; ii) by direct appointment;  iii) by transfer from among officials employed as Superintendents of Deputy Commissioner's offices or head vernacular clerks of a Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioner's office or district Kanungos of not less than five years' standing.
b) in the case of naib-tehsildars -  i) by transfer from among officials employed in the revenue, irrigation, excise or police establishment of the division; ii) by direct appointment."
It is, thus, apparent from reading of rules 5 and 6 of 1932 Rules that in the case of Tehsildar, posts in the service are required to be filled in accordance with rule 6 by promotion of Naib Tehsildar or by direct recruitment and by transfer from among officials employed as Superintendents of Deputy Commissioner's offices or Head Vernacular Clerks of a Commissioner's or Deputy Commission's office or district Kanungos of not less than five years' standing and in the case of Naib Tehsildar, by transfer from among officials employed in the revenue, irrigation, excise or police establishment of the division, by direct recruitment.
7.
Part 'A' of Standing Order No. 12 of the Financial Commissioner provides that there will be two classes of Tehsildar candidates; Class 'A' and Class 'B'.
Class 'A' is meant for direct candidates, whereas Class 'B' is meant for candidates appointment on transfer.
This Court in Jaipal's case (supra) in reference to paragraph 4 of the Standing has held that "'A' class Tehsildar candidates are required to be instructed in accordance with paragraph 4(iv)(a) instructions Appendix B While serving as Naib Tehsildars paragraph 4(i)(b) they have to observe instructions contained in Appendix C Amongst others, such a Tehsildar candidate during this period can be invested with power of a Magistrate 3rd Class, and Assistant Collector 2nd Grade, and can be given simple criminal and revenue judicial cases to introduce him the procedure in trying cases but under the general supervision of a Tehsildar and Naib Tahsildar.
Mutation work disposed of by him is required to be examined by the Tahsildar.
His progress, while in such service, is required to be inspected by Deputy Commissioner of the Revenue Assistant from time to time.
Paragraph 4(iii) provides: "To enable class 'A' candidates to fulfil the requirement of two years' service under paragraph 4(i)(b) every such candidate who has undergone revenue training for one year under paragraph 4 (i)(a) should be given preference over a Naib Tahsildar candidate for appointment as a Naib Tahsildar: he may also at his option be employed as an honorary Naib-Tehsildar for the necessary period".
Thus, it is optional for an 'A' class candidate to work as an honorary Naib Tehsildar or to work in an officiating capacity and get paid in the minimum of the time scale qua from time of time."
After a candidate has been trained and has passed the examination prescribed in accordance with paragraph 4, he is declared to be a qualified candidate for the post of Tehsildar by the Financial Commissioner as provided in paragraph 6.
Paragraph 7 provides that the name of a Tehsildar candidate in Class A or Class B can be removed by the Financial Commissioner from the list; (a) if he has failed to qualify within the period laid down in paragraph 4; (b) if he has not while officiating as Naib Tehsildar given indication that he is likely to make a good Tehsildar; (c) if, though qualified, he has no prospect of obtaining an appointment within a reasonable time; (d) for any other sufficient cause.
8.
In Jaipal's cases (supra), the training period of the petitioner therein was not taken into consideration and the time spent by him from the date of his appointment as Naib Tehsildar was taken as one spent in government service.
It was held:  "Pointed attention was drawn to Annexure P2 to contend that the petitioner was appointed as a Naib Tehsildar (Revenue) at Nahar, vide order dated Dec 18, 1973 and continued as such till he was given the substantive appointment as a Tehsildar.
During this while, undisputably, the petitioner was required to perform the functions of a Naib Tehsildar, an Assistant Collector of the requisite grade, sanctioning mutations, as also the powers of the sub-registrar under the India Registration Act.
No one can deny that the petitioner, if guilty of accepting bribe during that while, could have been prosecuted under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
If the view point of the status was to be accepted, the petitioner, while performing the job of a Revenue Officer, sanctioning mutations, was to be immune for the purposes.
Some of the orders of the petitioner as Revenue Officer passed by him in a quasi-judicial capacity could well have been tested on the same scales.
The petitioner was selected by the Govt. which had the right to control the method of his work, as is plain from Appendix C to the Standing Order partly referred to in an earlier part of the judgment is also otherwise.
Since undisputably, Government had the Authority to control the method of doing of the work of the petitioner as also the power of superintendence and control over his work as a Naib Tehsildar, this to my mind, prima facie, established the relationship of master and servant in accordance with the rule held by the Supreme Court in Audh Narain Singh's case (supra).
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxxx Thus, I am of the considered view that the time spent by the petitioner from the date of his appointment as a Naib Tehsildar with effect from December 18, 1973 was spent in Government service and thus, on the undisputed facts continuously.
I hold it accordingly.
Equally, the case of the petitioner is required to be considered by the Financial Commissioner while preparing the list under Rule ibid for the petitioner has such right to be considered and the denial of it would bring in protection of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India."
In this case, too, petitioner while in training was considered as a candidate under training and was posted as Naib Tehsildar only after he had undergone revenue training and obtained Kanungo certificate from the Director of Land Records.
Petitioner while in training did not perform the functions of a Revenue Officer; rather as prescribed in paragraph 7 his name could be removed from the list by the Financial Commissioner in case he had failed to qualify within the period laid down in paragraph 4 and if though qualified, had no prospect of obtaining an appointment within a reasonable time or for any other sufficient cause.
The relationship of master and servant, thus, came to be established only when vide order dated 2471984 the petitioner was posted as Naib Tehsildar (Accounts).
The period of training was rightly not counted towards the requirement of continuous government service under Rule 7(1)(a)(i) of the 1930 Rules as the petitioner on the cut-off date was not eligible for appointment to H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) against vacancies of the year, 1989.
Consequently, there being no merit in the writ petition, the same shall stand dismissed.
No costs.