GS Singhvi, J - This case was taken up in the past on more than one occasion but none had appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
To-day also no one has appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
However, that is no ground to adjourn the hearing of the case, which has already remained pending for last more than nine years.
Whether by abstaining from the proceedings of the court, the learned counsel has discharged moral and ethical obligation towards his client is a matter for the learned counsel to decide.
However, the constitutional duty imposed on the Court has to be discharged by it irrespective of the appearance/non-appearance of the learned counsel and the litigant cannot be made to suffer due to neglect of his case by the learned counsel.
The petitioner, who retired from service some 12 years and 10 months ago after rendering 31 years of service, was not paid his pension, gratuity and other retirement dues compelling him to seek intervention of this Court for issue of a mandamus to the respondents to sanction full pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity and also allow him commutation of pension.
He also prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to pay interest on the market rate, i.e. 18 per cent per annum.
2.
In their reply, the respondents have stated that full pension has been released to the petitioner by the Accountant General, Haryana vide Memo No. Pen-III/L-19/83-84/6141-44 dated 14111986.
It has also been stated by the respondent that fifty per cent of the death-cum-retirement gratuity payable to the petitioner has also been released by the Accountant General vide Memo No. Pen-II/L-19/83-84/52898/6326-29 dated 19111996.
The reason given for withholding of the remaining amount of the gratuity is the pending departmental inquiry which, according to the respondents, had been initiated against the petitioner under Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, read with Rule 111 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-II.
Respondents have also referred to the initiation of an inquiry against the petitioner in respect of alleged delinquency committed by him while working on deputation with the Haryana State Co-operative Marketing and Supplying Federation Ltd.  3.
In his replication, the petitioner has stated that the inquiry initiated in respect of the alleged delinquency committed by the petitioner during his working with respondent No. 3 has been dropped.
Regarding the inquiry initiated by the respondent No. 1, the petitioner has stated that no charge- sheet was served upon him but a notice has been published in the daily Tribune dated 22121986 indicating that the proceedings have been initiated against him under Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume-II and this inquiry related to the alleged irregularities committed by the petitioner during his working in the Construction Sub-Division-II, Rohtak (August, 1982 to January, 1983).
The petitioner has stated that although he submitted an application in writing on 29121986 for supply of copy of the charge-sheet but the respondents have not made available copy of the charge-sheet to him.
4.
Gratuity due to an employee is payable to him on the date of retirement.
Payment of the gratuity can be deferred in a case where the employee is under cloud at the time of his retirement, namely, in a case where he is facing departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings.
If no inquiry or judicial proceeding is pending on the date of retirement of the employee, the Government/employer does not have any authority to withhold the payment of gratuity.
Similarly, full pension payable to an employee can be withheld during the pending of the departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings.
The Government is also possessed with the power to withhold the pension or a part thereof or recover any pecuniary loss caused to the Government from the pension payable to an employee in case such Government servant is found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence in the discharge of his duties during the course of service.
Deduction from the pension can be made even on the basis of an inquiry which may be initiated against the employee after his retirement but subject to the fulfilment of the conditions enumerated in proviso to Rule 2.2(b).
However, proceedings initiated against an employee under proviso to Rule 2.2(b) cannot be made a ground for withholding of death-cum-retirement gratuity or the pension payable to an employee on the date of his retirement.
In the case in hand, no inquiry was pending against the petitioner on the date of his retirement.
The proceedings have been initiated against him after over three years and nine months of his retirement from service.
That may ultimately lead to the withholding of the pension or part thereof or recovery therefrom in terms of Rule 2.2(b) but there does not appear to be any legal justification for withholding of death-cum-retirement gratuity payable to the petitioner on the ground that inquiry has been initiated against him under Rule 2.2(b) with the issue of notice dated 26.12.1986.
5.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the remaining amount of gratuity of the petitioner with further direction that on the amount of gratuity, the petitioner shall get interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date the gratuity was payable to him, i.e 121983.
On the 50% of the amount of gratuity the interest shall be payable upto 19121986.
On the remaining amount, interest shall be payable till the date of actual payment.
The respondents are directed to make payment in the manner aforesaid within a period of three monhths of the submission of the certified copy of this order to the Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Hayrana, Public Works Department (B&R).
Costs made easy.