THB Chalapathi, J (Oral) - This writ petition is filed to issue a writ of mandamus directing the Panjab University, Chandigarh, to confer on the petitioner, M.E (Electronics) degree which he has successfully completed.
2.
The petitioner passed his B.Sc.
Degree from Panjabi University, Patiala in the year 1974 and joined Department of Telephone.
Thereafter the petitioner did a correspondence course and obtained IETE Degree awarded by the Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi.
On the basis of his qualification of IETE, the petitioner sought admission in Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana affiliated to Panjab University into Post-Graduate Course in Electronics Engineering during the year 1988-89.
The petitioner was admitted to the said Post-Graduate Course in the year 1988 and he completed the course and appeared in all the five semesters.
In the meanwhile the University found that the petitioner obtained IETE Degree without having passed the Diploma examination and, therefore, he was not eligible for admission into Post-Graduate Course in Electronics.
On that basis, the University withheld the result of the petitioner compelling the petitioner to approach this Court.
This Court vide its order dated 9.10.1991 directed the University to declare the result of the petitioner provisionally without any prejudice to the defence of the respondents in the writ petition.
Accordingly, the result of the petitioner was declared and it was found that the petitioner secured first division in MD (Electronics) Course.
3.
Now the learned Counsel for the Panjab University contended that though the petitioner successfully completed the Course, he did not fulfil the qualifications as required for admission into Post Graduate Course at the time of admission.
According to him, Regulation 33 for admission into Master of Engineering Course provides as follows:-  "33.
A candidate who has passed A & B sections of Institution of Engineers (India), Calcutta examination or IETE Graduate examination (conducted by the Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi) with at least 50% marks after having passed the Diploma Examination and has at least 5 years' research or professional experience may be admitted to Master of Engineering by the Head of the Department concerned."
Thus according to the learned Counsel for the University, the petitioner obtained the IETE Degree without having passed the Diploma Examination prior to doing IETE Course.
Therefore, the admission of the petitioner on that basis into Post-Graduate Course in Master of Engineering is contrary to the said Regulation.
But it is to be seen that the petitioner acquired B.Sc.
(Electronics) Degree before doing his IETE Graduate Examination.
A Degree in Bachelor of Science is admittedly higher than the Diploma Course.
There appears no condition that for obtaining IETE Degree, one must pass Diploma Examination.
Having secured IETE Degree, the petitioner sought admission into Master of Engineering (Electronics) in the year 1988.
At the time of granting admission to the petitioner, neither the University nor the College has taken any objection as to the qualifications possessed by the petitioner.
He was admitted by the authorities concerned and he has successfully completed his course.
It was only in the middle of 1989 the University has pointed out that the petitioner did not possess the Diploma, but even then the admission of the petitioner was not cancelled and he was allowed to continue his studies.
It is not a case where the petitioner suppressed any fact or made any misrepresentation to the authorities to secure admission in Post-Graduate Course.
For the mistake of the authorities of the College or the University, the petitioner, who has successfully completed Master of Engineering Course, cannot be penalised at this stage.
As already observed, by an interim order of this Court, the result of the petitioner was declared and it is evident that the petitioner got through the examination in Master of Engineering successfully in first division.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that it is a fit case where a direction can be given to the University to award a Degree in Master of Engineering (Electronics) to the petitioner on the basis of the result of the examination conducted by the Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The Writ petition is, accordingly, allowed and the Panjab University, Chandigarh, is directed to award the Degree to the petitioner on the basis of the result declared by it.
There will be no order as to costs.