NC Jain, J - The facts of the case lie in a very narrow compass.
The husband of the petitioner Sube Singh died on March 4, 1981 after serving the Transport Department as a Conductor for less than a year.
The dependents including the petitioner who is widow were not granted family pension compelling them to file Civil Writ Petition No. 4705 of 1991 which was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on July 22, 1991.
The order reads as under :-  "This writ petition is disposed of with the direction to the State Transport Controller, Haryana, to decide the representation of the petitioners, Annexures P/2 and P/3 within three months from today after affording an opportunity to the petitioners of being heard and by passing a speaking order.
If the petitioners are entitled to pension, that pension shall be payable to them within three months of the representation being decided alongwith interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
Sd/- SS Sodhi Judge 2271991.
Sd/K.P.
Bandari" 2.
In pursuance of the aforementioned order, the State Transport Commissioner passed the impugned order, Annexure R1, refusing to grant family pension on the ground that the employee rendered service for less than one year.
According to the State Transport Commissioner, the dependants were not entitled to the grant of family pension on account of non-completion of a minimum period of one year of continuous service by the husband of the petitioner.
The unfortunate lady, that is, the petitioner having lost all hopes for getting family pension has again knocked at the door of this Court by way of present petition.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that it was not at all necessary for the deceased to complete one year of continuous service for the grant of family pension.
He has further argued that the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 clearly lays down that if an employee was medically fit at the time of entry into Government Service and dies within less than one year, his dependants would be entitled to the grant of family pension.
4.
In order to appreciate the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is necessary at this stage to advert to the relevant provisions as contained in Note-1 to para 4(i) of Appendix 1 to The Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II (as applicable to Haryana State), relating to Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
The said para is reproduced hereinbelow :  "4.
This scheme is administered as below : (i) The family pensions is admissible in case of death while in service or after retirement on or after the Ist July, 1964, if at the time of death, the retired officer was in receipt of a compensation, invalid, retiring or superannuation pension.
The Family Pension will not be admissible in case of death after retirement if the retired employee at the time of death was in receipt of gratuity only.
In case of death while in Service a Government employee should have completed a minimum period of one year of continuous service without break.
Note 1 : The term one year continuous service used in para 4(i) above is inclusive of permanent/temporary service in a pensionable establishment but does not include period of extraordinary leaves, boy service and suspension period unless that is regularised by the competent authority or before completion of one year continuous service provided the deceased Government employee concerned immediately prior to his recruitment to the service or post was examined by the appropriate Medical Authority and declared fit by that authority for Government service."
3.
The mandate of the aforementioned provision appears to be that in case the Government Servant at the time of entry into service produces a Medical Certificate of Fitness, the family would be entitled to Family Pension even if he dies within less than one year.
Concededly, the husband of the petitioner did submit the Medical Certificate of Fitness, Copy Annexure P1.
4.
The only interpretation which can be placed upon the Scheme as reproduced above is that even if the deceased Government employee does not complete one year of continuous service, his dependents would nevertheless be entitled to the grant of family pension provided the deceased was medically examined and found fit and a Medical Certificate of Fitness is produced before entry into Government Service from a competent Medical Officer.
The completion of one year continuous service is, therefore, wholly irrelevant in view of the phraseology of the Family Pension Scheme.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, the Writ Petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to grant family pension to the petitioner who is dependant of the deceased Sube Singh, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of the order of this Court which be given a dasti on payment of copying charges.