GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - After having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that order Annexure P-2 as also the order Annexure P-6 by which the Government has declined to make reference of the dispute raised by the petitioner in relation to the termination of his services, deserves to be quashed.
2.
From the facts which have come on record it is revealed that the petitioner has served the employer for a period of almost 11 years before his services were brought to an end.
While the petitioner contended that his services had been terminated without any inquiry and, therefore, the action of the employer was arbitrary, contrary to the principles of natural justice and amounted to unfair labour practice, the employer pleaded that the petitioner absented from duty and, therefore, he cannot claim reinstatement or any other relief.
3.
Instead of making reference of the dispute which arose between the parties the Government passed order Annexure P-2 and refused the reference on the ground that on the enquiry made by the Government it has been observed that he himself left the service by absenting himself from duty.
4.
Further representation made by the petitioner in the form of appeal met with the same fate when the Government declined to review its earlier order declining the reference and rejected the appeal filed by the petitioner vide Annexure P-6 dated 7th July, 1994.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner is right in contending that while exercising its power under Section 12(5) read with section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Government does not have power to make adjudication on the merits of an industrial dispute.
This proposition finds support from a recent decision of this Court dated August 8, 1994 rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 7827 of 1994, Annpurana Aggarwal v. State of Haryana and another As detailed reasons have been given in the order dated August 8, 1994 by which Civil Writ Petition No. 7827 of 1994 was decided, we do not consider it necessary to re-examine the issue at length.
In our opinion the impugned orders are clearly contrary to the well settled principles of law and therefore, deserves to be set aside.
6.
Consequently the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent-Government is directed to reconsider the question of making reference to the Labour Court in the light of the principles laid down by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 7827 of 1994 Annapurana Aggarwal v. State of Haryana and pass necessary order within six weeks from the receipt of certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition Allowed.