VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - Counsel have agreed that the writ petition may be disposed of along with the Civil Misc.
Application.
Accordingly, the writ petition is taken on Board.
2-3.
In this writ petition, challenge is to the promotion of respondent No. 4 who presently is working as Assistant Municipal Engineer, Municipal Committee, Kapurthala.
Respondent No. 4 was appointed as Sectional Officer on 31.10.1967.
It is the admitted case of the parties that at the time of entry into service, respondent No. 4 had neither described himself belonging to Backward Class nor he had shown that he fulfilled the income criteria as per instructions dated 2041963 under which it was essential that in addition to person belonging to Backward class the family income should be less than Rs. 1,000/- per annum.
Vide Order dated 10121992, seven Sectional Officers (Civil) working in the Municipal Committees in the State of Punjab were promoted to the post of Assistant Municipal Engineer (Civil), out of which persons mentioned at Sr. Nos. 3, 5 and 6 were junior to respondent No. 4 as is apparent from seniority-list Annexure P-3, attached to the writ petition.
In the seniority-list, respondent No. 4 figures at Sr. No. 7, whereas these persons figure at Sr. Nos. 8, 9 and 10 respectively.
Respondent No. 4 was ignored because disciplinary proceedings were pending against him.
Later, two other Sectional Officers, junior to respondent No. 4, were promoted as Assistant Municipal Engineers.
Vide order dated 2091994 (Annexure P-12), respondent No. 4 too was promoted as Assistant Municipal Engineer against Backward Classes reserved point No.15.
His promotion was made subject to disciplinary proceedings pending against him.
Petitioner who admittedly belongs to the category of Backward Class and fulfils the income criteria, has challenged the promotion of respondent No. 4 in this writ petition on the ground that respondent No. 4 could not have been promoted against reserved point belonging to Backward Classes because at the time of initial entry into service, he had neither described himself belonging to backward class nor had be shown that he fulfilled the income criteria.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition, Civil Misc.
Application No. 11078 of 1995 has been filed by the petitioner to bring on record the additional facts.
In this application, petitioner has averred that since persons lower in seniority to respondent No. 4 were promoted in the year 1992 therefore, respondent No. 4 as per judgment of the Apex Court in RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 351 had a right to be promoted on his own turn and seniority.
It has further been averred that if in 1994 respondent No. 4 has found suitable for promotion as Assistant Municipal Engineer and has been promoted as such subject to decision of disciplinary proceedings pending against him, then there was no impediment for his promoted on his own seniority because the situation has not changed since his juniors were promoted and the order promoting him came to be passed in 1994.
In reply to this application, the State has submitted that reservation in promotion is made available only to the persons belonging to Backward Class category, who were recorded against vacancies falling to Backward Classes and who fulfilled income criteria at the time of initial entry into service.
It has further been averred that instructions dated 241981 override instructions issued on 2041963 and 471963.
Thus, the case of the State is that the instructions which came into existence in 1981 cannot be made applicable to the case of employees who were recorded against the category of Backward Class in the year 1967, meaning thereby that according to the State's own showing, under the instructions respondent No. 4 could not have been promoted against reserved point.
In view of the stand taken by the State and the judgment of the Apex Court in RK Sabharwal's case (supra), respondent No. 4 was entitled to be considered for promotion when his juniors were promoted because in 1994 if he had been found suitable for promotion against reserved point No. 15 despite pendency of disciplinary proceedings, there seems to be no justification why he could not have been promoted when his juniors were promoted.
No change in circumstances between the period when his juniors were promoted and he came to be promoted, has been pointed out.
5.
The relevant observations of the Apex Court in regard to promotion of reserved category of candidates against non-reserved posts are in para 5 of the judgment which reads as under :-  "5.
When a percentage of reservation is fixed in respect of a particular cadre and the roster indicates the reserve points, it has to be taken that the posts shown at the reserve points are to be filled from amongst the members of reserve Categories and the candidates belonging to the General Category are not entitled to be considered for the reserve posts.
On the other hand the reserve category candidates can compete for the non-reserve posts and in the event of their appointment to the said posts their number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out the percentage of reservation.
(Emphasis mine) Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India permits the State Government to make any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizen which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the Services under the State.
It is, therefore, incumbent on the State Government to reach a conclusion that the Backward Class/Classes for which the reservation is made is not adequately represented in the State Services.
While doing so the State Government may take the total population of a particular backward class and its representation in the State Services.
When the State Government after doing the necessary exercise makes the reservation and provides the extent of percentage of posts to be reserved for the said backward class then the percentage has to be followed strictly.
The prescribed percentage cannot be varied or changed simply because some of the members of the backward class have already been appointed/promoted against the general seats.
As mentioned above the roster point which is reserved for a backward class has to be filled by way of appointment/promotion of the member of the said class.
No general category candidates can be appointed against a slot in the roster which is reserved for the backward class.
The fact that considerable number of members of a backward class have been appointed/promoted against general seats in the State Services may be a relevant factor for the State Government to review the question of continuing reservation for the said class but so long as the instructions/Rules providing certain percentage of reservations for the backward classes are operative the same have to be followed.
Despite any number of appointees/promotees belonging to the backward classes against the general category posts the given percentage has to be provided in addition.
We, therefore, see no force in the first contention raised by the learned counsel and reject the same."
It is, thus, clear that respondent No. 4 had a right to be promoted at his own turn and seniority and could not have occupied the post reserved for backward classes.
The promotion of respondent No. 4 against reserved point No. 15 has to be quashed.
6.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed and order, Annexure P-12, is quashed.
However, as a consequence of quashing of order, Annexure P-1, respondent No. 4 would not be reverted but shall be deemed to have been promoted on his own seniority from the date his immediate junior was promoted and the petitioner who belongs to backward class and fulfils the income criteria has to be considered for promotion against reserved point No. 15.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion against reserved point No. 15 and his promotion would relate back to the date when respondent No. 4 was promoted against reserved point 15.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.