GS Singhvi, J - The petitioners who were appointed as Agricultural Sub Inspectors in the years 1968 and 1970, and who became employees of the Department of Horticulture in the year 1982, have sought a mandamus directing the respondents to consider their cases for promotion as Horticulture Inspectors (redesignated as Horticulture Development Officers) and to promote them as such.
Prayer has also been made to quash the order (Annexure P-9) in so far as it prescribes qualification of B.Sc.
(Agriculture/Horticulture) for promotion to the post of Horticulture Development Officer.
2.
According to the petitioners, the posts of Agriculture Sub Inspectors, on which they were initially appointed were subsequently treated as Horticulture Sub Inspectors on the creation of the Department of Horticulture in the year 1979, are lower than that of the Horticulture Inspectors (Horticulture Development Officers) and as per the policy decision of the Government dated 19.1.1983, they have a right to be considered for promotion to the posts of Horticulture Development Officers.
They have pleaded that prior to the issue of Annexure P-9 whereby qualification of graduation has been made necessary for recruitment to the post of Horticulture Development Officer, a person holding of the post of Horticulture Sub Inspector was eligible to be promoted as Horticulture Inspector (Horticulture Development Officer) and, therefore, the vacancies which were available prior to the issue of Annexure P-9 should be filled by promoting the petitioners.
3.
The respondents have pleaded that the petitioners were initially appointed as Agriculture Sub Inspectors by promotion and they became employees of the Department of Horticulture in the year 1982.
The respondents' case is that they do not have any right to be promoted without fulfilling the qualifications laid down in the order Annexure P-9 dated 1891992.
The respondents have pleaded that the Government's decision contained in order (Annexure P-2) dated 19.1.1983 is applicable only to the employees of the Agriculture Department and the petitioners who are employees of the Horticulture Department do not have any right to be promoted as Horticulture Development Officer.
4.
The fact that the petitioners had been appointed as Agriculture Sub Inspectors in the year 1968 and 1970, respectively, is not in dispute.
There is also no controversy that the Development of Horticulture was created in the year 1979 and a number of employees, including the petitioners, who were working in the Horticulture Wing of the Agriculture Department, were transferred to the new department.
Recruitment to the various subordinate posts in the Agriculture Department used to be regulated by the Punjab Subordinate Agricultural Service Rules, 1933 (for short 'the Rules of 1933').
Rule 7 of these rules contains method of recruitment.
In the schedule appended to these rules various types of posts have been encadred.
The highest post is that of the Agricultural Assistant 'A' and Demonstrators.
Below these posts are the posts of Agricultural Assistants, 'B' Class and Insectory Keeper, and then Mukaddams and Draftsman etc. On 27.4.1951 the Government issued Memo.
No. 4457-Agri.
81/2198 for change of designations 'Agricultural Assistant 'and 'Mukaddam'.
The Agricultural Assistants came to be designated as 'Agricultural Inspectors' and Mukaddams were designated as 'Agricultural Sub Inspectors'.
However no provision for promotion from the post of Agricultural Sub Inspector to that of Agricultural Inspector was made.
For the first time the Government of Punjab issued circular dated 19.1.1983 to provide for promotion to the post of Agricultural Inspectors from amongst the Agricultural Sub Inspectors.
In respect of the new Department of Horticulture, the Government issued notification (Annexure P-4) dated 29.4.1988 and directed that conditions of service of the employees of Department, which were being regulated by the provisions of the Rules 1933 immediately before 16.4.1979 shall continue to be regulated by the provisions mutatis mutandis of the Rules of 1933 till the enactment of separate service rules.
5.
Argument of Shri Brar is that the order of the Government dated 19.1.1983 should be read as part and parcel of the notification dated 29.4.1988 and, therefore, the petitioners have a right to be considered for promotion to the post of Horticulture Inspector (Horticulture Development Officer) on the basis of the qualifications laid down in Annexure P-2 dated 19.1.1983.
Another argument of Shri Brar is that prescription of qualification of Graduation for promotion to the post of Horticulture Development Officer is arbitrary and irrational, and the same would result in depriving the petitioners of their right of promotion throughout their service career and such a provision deserves to be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
6.
On they other hand, Mrs. Tuli argued that the order dated 19.1.1983 is confined to the employees of the Agriculture Department and in the absence of any express order of the Government making it applicable for Horticulture Department, the employees working in the Horticulture Department cannot take advantage of the said order.
Mrs. Tuli argued that the order dated 19.1.1983 cannot be treated as a part of the notification dated 29.4.1988 by implication.
Another argument of Mrs. Tuli is that the Government is fully empowered to prescribe different qualifications for different categories of persons and there is nothing inherently arbitrary in the prescription of qualification of Graduation for promotion to the post of Horticulture Development Officer.
She placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, 1993(2) SCT 416(SC) : JT 1993(2) SC 115.
7.
Annexure P-4 is the notification issued by the President of India under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
This notification reads as under :-  "GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB  DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FORESTS Notification The 29th April, 1988.
No. S.O.
No. 34/Const.
Part.
309/88 - In continuation of Punjab Government, Agriculture Department, Notification No. 16(24) Agri.
(1) 79/6247, dated the 16th April, 1979, and in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and all other powers enabling him in this behalf, the President of India is pleased to direct that the recruitment, and conditions of service of the employees of the Department of Horticulture as was being regulated by the provisions of the Punjab Subordinate Agricultural Services Rules, 1933 immediately before the 16th day of April, 1979, shall continue to be so regulated by the provisions mutatis mutandis of the aforesaid rules till separate rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of these employees are framed and is further pleased to confer on the Director of Horticulture, Punjab, all the powers exercisable by the Director of Agriculture, Punjab under the aforesaid rules.
2.
This notification shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 16th day of April, 1979.
Sd/- M.S.
Gill Additional Chief Secretary and Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Agriculture & Forests."
Order (Annexure P-2) dated 19.1.1983 has been issued by the Government of Punjab.
The same reads as under :-  "GOVT. OF PUNJAB DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE  AGRICULTURE-I BRANCH.
To  The Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Chandigarh.
Memo.
No. 10(81) 81-Agri.
I(II) 1213 Chandigarh Dated 19.1.1983.
Sub : Promotion of Agriculture Sub Inspectors to the post of Agriculture Inspector.
Ref : Your Memo.
No. 17925/- 1991/RI (2) dated 81282.
It has been decided by Govt. that the promotion of Agriculture Sub Inspectors to the post of Agricultural Inspectors be made on the following terms and conditions :-  (a) 2% posts in the cadre of Agricultural Inspectors may be filled in from amongst the compost inspectors.
(b) Compost Inspector with B.Sc.
Agriculture qualifications should be considered for promotion first irrespective of seniority.
(c) Compost Inspectors with Matric pass qualifications and having passed Agricultural Sub Inspectors Training Course from any recognised institution with 20 years service may be considered for promotion against 2% reservation quota.
(d) 18% posts in the cadre of Agricultural Inspectors may first be filled in from amongst those Agriculture Sub Inspectors who have acquired the qualification of B.Sc.
Agriculture irrespective of the seniority.
(e) The remaining posts out of 18% reservation quota may be filled up with those Sub Infectors who are Matric, have passed the Agriculture Sub Inspectors Training Course of any recognised institution with 20 years service on seniority-cum-merit basis.
2.
On the basis of this decision proposal for the amendment of relevant rules may also be furnished to Govt. at the earliest.
Sd/- BD Thakar
Under Secretary to Govt. Pb.
Development (Agri.)
Department."
A cumulative reading of Annexures P4 and P2 shows that even though independent Department of Horticulture had come into existence with effect from 16.4.1979, the rule making authority did not frame statutory rules to regulate the recruitment as well as conditions of service of the employees of the Horticulture Department.
Even administrative orders were not issued by the Government.
It was only by notification (Annexure P4) that the Rules of 1933 were made applicable to the employees of the Horticulture Department.
The Director Horticulture was also empowered to exercise all those powers which could be exercised by the Director Agriculture.
By virtue of Annexure P2 the Government took a policy decision to introduce an avenue of promotion for Agricultural Sub Inspectors, who fulfilled the conditions and qualifications specified in that order.
Though this order does not in express terms make a reference to the posts in Horticulture Department, with the issue of notification dated 29.4.1988, the order dated 19.1.1983 would be deemed to have been made applicable to the employees of the Horticulture Department by implication with the change of word 'Horticulture' in place of the word 'Agriculture'.
There is no dispute that the post of Agricultural Sub Inspector continued to be equivalent to the post of Horticulture Sub Inspector, and, therefore, if the Agricultural Sub Inspector could be promoted as Agricultural Inspector, there could be no reason for not applying the order dated 19.1.1983 to the employees of the Horticulture Department.
Letter Annexure P-7 written by the Deputy Director Horticulture (Potatoes), Jalandhar, also supports this conclusion and in my opinion, the petitioners were entitled to be considered for promotion against the posts of Horticulture Inspectors, which fell vacant prior to 1891992, the date on which the order (Annexure P-9) was issued prescribing the qualification of Graduation for promotion to the post of Horticulture Development Officer.
In respect of the vacancies which were available prior to the issue of order dated 1891992, the unamended qualifications will have to be taken into consideration.
8.
The decision of the Supreme Court, on which Mrs. Charu Tuli has placed reliance, has no bearing to the controversy involved in this writ petition.
That was a case in which the dispute related to the competence of the Government to prescribe particular qualifications for promotion which directly resulted in depriving a particular class of employees from getting promotion.
The Supreme Court upheld the power of the Government to prescribe the qualifications.
9.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for promotion on the posts of Horticulture Inspectors/Horticulture Development Officers against the vacancies which became available prior to the issue of the order dated 1891992.
If the petitioners or anyone of them are/is found eligible and suitable for promotion on the basis of the then existing qualifications, such person(s) should be promoted as Horticulture Inspectors (Horticulture Development Officers) and be given all consequential benefits.
This exercise should be undertaken by the respondents within four months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.