GS Singhvi, J - Two fold reliefs have been claimed by the petitioner in this petition.
First claim is for grant of pensionary benefits in terms of the provisions contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-II and the second claim is for payment of gratuity in terms of the provisions contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules instead of the provisions contained in Payment in Gratuity Act, 1972.
2.
From the facts which have come on record, it is clear that the petitioner had joined service as a Welder on 20.6.1959 in the erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board.
He became an employee of the State of Haryana and then of the Haryana State Electricity Board after the creation of the State of Haryana with effect from 1111966.
The petitioner received his due promotions during the service period and the he retired as Foreman Grade-I (Special Foreman) with effect from 3111993, on attaining the age of superannuation.
Less than, a week before his retirement, the petitioner submitted an application dated 2711993 for being allowed to opt for pensionary benefits instead of the Employee's Provident Fund Scheme to which he was a contributory from 1966 to the date of his retirement.
Request made by the petitioner was turned down by the competent authority and that decision was conveyed to the petitioner vide Annexure P/3 dated 1541993.
3.
The petitioner has asserted that he had submitted an application as early as in the year 1984 for exercise of his option for pensionary benefits but the respondents arbitrarily turned down his request on 29111984 to switching over from Employee Provident Fund Scheme to Pension Scheme.
According to the petitioner, after he started getting pay of Rs. 3500/- with effect from 1511986, it was legally not permissible for the respondents to deduct his contribution towards Employee Provident Fund Scheme but the respondents continued to make deduction and this action of the respondents was wholly without jurisdiction.
The petitioner has further pleaded that even after his retirement, option has been given to the employee to switch over from Employee Provident Fund Scheme to the Pension Scheme vide Board's circular dated 681983 but that benefit has been denied to the petitioner on the specious plea that he stood retired from 3111993.
4.
Respondents have controverted the claim made by the petitioner that he had exercised his option for pension scheme.
According to them all the employees working in the Thermal Plant, Faridabad, including the petitioner were given option to opt for pension scheme or Employee's Provident Fund Scheme.
The petitioner did not opt for pension scheme and, therefore, amount of his contribution was deducted from his salary towards EPF Scheme and equal contribution was made by the employer.
The respondents have pleaded that the application filed by the petitioner just four days before his retirement could not have been entertained for allowing the petitioner to switch over to the pension scheme.
Respondents have pleaded that after having made contribution to the Employee's Provident Fund Scheme for a period of 27 years, the petitioner could not legitimately make a claim for being allowed the pensionary benefits.
Regarding the policy decision taken by the board to give option to the employees to switch over from EPF Scheme to Pension Scheme vide instructions dated 681983, the respondents have pleaded that the option was given to those work-charged employees who were brought to the regular establishment and since the petitioner did not belong to that category of employees, no discrimination has been practised by the respondents qua the petitioner.
On the issue of gratuity the respondents have submitted that the matter is under consideration of the Government but in order to avoid hardship to the petitioner, a sum of Rs. 50,000/- has already been paid to him.
Re : Pension  5.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties at sufficient length, we find no merit in the claim of the petitioner for being allowed the benefit of pension scheme as also in his claim that the respondents have discriminated him qua other employees who have given options to switch over to the pension scheme as late as in the month of November, 1993.
The respondents have made a categorical statement that the petitioner did not opt for pension scheme in the year 1966.
They have also been categorical in stating that from 1966 to the date of retirement, the petitioner continued to be a member of EPF Scheme.
Contribution from his pay was deducted towards EPF Scheme and a corresponding contribution was made by the employer.
Though the petitioner has pleaded that he had exercised his option to switch over to the pension scheme but no material has been placed on record by the petitioner to substantiate his assertion that he had in fact opted for the pension scheme.
The burden to prove that he has exercised to opt for pension scheme and the employer had arbitrarily rejected his option lay upon the petitioner.
His failure to discharge this burden clearly disentitles him from making a grievance that he has been denied pensionary benefits.
The very fact that the petitioner remained a member of the Employee's Provident Fund Scheme for a continuous period of 27 years i.e. till his retirement on 3111993 without any protest of any kind is sufficient to justify an inference that the petitioner's claim to the effect that he had opted for pension scheme is unfounded.
6.
In regard to the claim of the petitioner that he has been discriminated, it need only be mentioned that the petitioner has not chosen to place on record that policy decision of the respondent-Board by which an opportunity was given to the employees in the year 1993 to switch over from PF Scheme to the pension scheme.
A look at Annexure P/6 on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his argument that the petitioner has been discriminated shows that the respondent-Board had adopted a policy decision of the Haryana Government to regularise workcharged employees and in order to give one opportunity to such employees to opt for pensionary benefits, the Board issued circular dated 981994.
The petitioner is not a person belonging to the category of those to whom opportunity to opt for pension scheme was given.
Moreover, he stood retired much before the date on which the Board adopted Government instructions/Policy decision.
He was not an existing employee on 681993 or on 981994 and, therefore, he cannot complain of discrimination.
Judgment of the Supreme Court in DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130, on which reliance has been placed by learned counsel is not applicable to the petitioner's case.
In State of Rajasthan v. Rajasthan Pensioner Samaj, 1991 SC 1743; Indian Ex-Services League v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 1182 : 1991(1) SCT 468 (SC); State of West Bengal v. Ratan Behari Dey, 1993(4) SLR 786 : 1994(1) SCT 96 (SC) and Union of India v. PN Menon, 1994 (3) JT 26 SC : 1994(4) SCT 91 (SC), the Supreme Court has held that the employer has a right to classify the employees with reference to a particular date for grant of pensionary benefits and/or Provident Fund Scheme.
Therefore, in the absence of a specific challenge and also in view of the pronouncements of the Supreme Court, we do not find any merit in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has been subjected to discriminatory treatment.
Re : Gratuity  7.
It is not in dispute that the service conditions of the petitioner are governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, and in terms of these rules petitioner has a right to get gratuity.
Therefore, it is just and proper to direct the respondents to make payment of gratuity to the petitioner in accordance with Punjab Civil Services Rules.
8.
In the result the writ petition is dismissed in so far as the claim of the petitioner for grant of pensionary benefits is concerned.
However, it is allowed for relief of gratuity.
The respondents are directed to make payment of remaining amount of gratuity to the petitioner in accordance with the relevant rules within one month.
In case the payment is not made within the stipulated period, the respondents shall have to pay interest at the rate of 15% with effect from 121993 on the remaining amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner.
Petition partly allowed.