NK Sodhi, J - Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1588-C of 1995 filed under Order 41 Rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure for staying the execution proceedings came up for hearing on 22.5.1995 and on the request of counsel for the parties, arguments were heard in the main appeal and orders reserved.
2.
Plaintiff-respondent joined as a Clerk in the Irrigation Department of the State of Punjab on 16121961.
The Department retrenched the surplus staff including the plaintiff and he was served with a notice for termination of his services on 3011966.
He was relieved on 641966.
In the meantime, the Subordinate Service Selection Board recommended the name of the plaintiff for appointment as a Clerk in the Forest Department and in pursuance of this recommendation he was given a fresh appointment in this Department where he joined on 7.4.1966.
It will be seen that there was no break in service of the plaintiff.
A seniority list of Clerks was circulated by the Department on 141981 in which the plaintiff was shown at serial number 33.
He was shown below Vidya Rattan, Devi Parshad and Hem Raj who were placed at serial numbers 30, 31 and 32 on the seniority list respectively.
Thereafter, the plaintiff after passing the Assistant Grade Examination in June, 1985 was promoted as an Assistant on 26.11.1985.
The aforesaid three persons who were senior to the plaintiff as Clerks were promoted as Assistants on 361987, 2121987 and 871987 respectively.
Though they had been promoted long after the plaintiff, their seniority in the cadre of Clerks was maintained because all these officials had passed the Assistant Grade Examination within the first five chances available to them.
It may be mentioned that according to Rule 10(2) of the Punjab State Assistant Grade Examination Rules, 1984 if a person holding the post of a Clerk qualifies the test for promotion to the post of an Assistant within the first five chances available to him after his appointment, he shall on his promotion to the post of Assistant be assigned seniority in the cadre of Assistants in accordance with his seniority in the appointment from which he had been promoted to the post of Assistant.
The Department then circulated on 28.2.1988 the seniority list of Assistants as on 30111987.
In this seniority list, the plaintiff was shown junior to the aforesaid 3 officials but his primary grievance was that in terms of the Government instructions issued on 591955, he had not been given the benefit of his past service in the Irrigation Department.
He filed a representation on 1561988 which was rejected by the competent authority on 2891989.
It was then that the plaintiff filed a suit out of which the present appeal has arisen seeking a declaration that he was entitled to the benefit of his service which he had rendered in the Irrigation Department.
The suit was contested by the State of Punjab and it was pleaded that the order rejecting the representation was legal and valid and the plaintiff was not entitled to get the benefit of his service in the Irrigation Department.
It was further pleaded that the suit was barred by time since the first seniority list of Clerks was circulated on 141981 and the plaintiff filed the present suit in April, 1991.
Pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues :-  1.
Whether the order dated 2891989 is null and void ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get his seniority fixed properly by getting the benefit of past service ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is within time ?
OPP 4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 5.
Whether the suit is not maintainable ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
On a consideration of the oral and documentary evidence led by the parties, the Courts below decided all the issues in favour of the plaintiff and against the State and consequently the suit was decreed.
The State of Punjab has come up in second appeal.
4.
Mr. AS Grewal, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab appearing on behalf of the appellant contended that the plaintiff was not entitled to get the benefit of his service rendered in the Irrigation Department before joining the Forest Department as his case did not fall within the ambit of the Government instructions relied upon by him.
I find no merit in this contention.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the State of Punjab had issued instructions on 591995 to all Heads of Departments regarding Government servants retrenched from Punjab Government offices and selected for appointment in another office of the State Government.
The relevant part of clause (iv) of the instructions which is relevant for our case is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "When the retrenched Government servant is re-employed and the break in his service, if any, is condoned his past service (but not the break itself) will count for seniority in the new office, under the normal rules or orders issued by Government from time to time."
The plaintiff was retrenched from the Irrigation Department and he was relieved on 641966 and on the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, he was given a fresh appointment in the Forest Department where he joined on 7.4.1966.
There was thus no break in his service.
His case squarely falls within the aforesaid clause of the instructions and the Courts below were right in holding that the service rendered by him in the Irrigation Department would count for seniority in the new office i.e. Forest Department.
5.
The learned State counsel then argued that the suit was barred by time and it should have been dismissed on that ground alone.
He referred to the seniority list of Clerks circulated on 141981 and submitted that the plaintiff knew that his past service had not been counted in the Forest Department and, therefore, he should have approached the Court within 3 years of the circulation of that seniority list.
Here, again the contention is devoid of any merit.
It is true that a seniority list of Clerks was circulated on 141981 but thereafter the plaintiff was promoted as an Assistant and a fresh seniority list of Assistants was circulated in February, 1988.
He filed a representation claiming the benefit of service rendered by him in the Irrigation Department which was rejected on 2891989.
After the rejection of his claim he filed the present suit on 3041991 and, therefore, the suit having been filed within three years of the rejection of his representation is within time.
6.
Lastly, it was contended that the necessary consequences of the plaintiff being given the benefit of his service rendered in the Irrigation Department would be that he will have to be made senior to the aforesaid three persons, namely, Vidya Rattan, Devi Parshad and Hem Raj who would be adversely affected and since these persons have not been impleaded as defendants in the suit, the suit was liable to be dismissed on account of non-joinder of necessary parties.
He has relied on two judgments of this Court in SK Dev.
v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(2) R.S.J.
523, and Manjit Singh Sub Inspector v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) R.S.J.
608.
This contention too has to be rejected being without any merit.
What the plaintiff has claimed in the suit is the benefit of his past service in terms of the State Government instructions referred to above.
He has not claimed seniority over any particular official.
If by giving him that benefit, he becomes senior to some officials then those officials may have to be given an opportunity of being heard as they are likely to be adversely affected but that cannot be a ground for rejecting the claim of the plaintiff.
The State Government must give him the benefit when he has been found entitled to the same under the Government instructions.
I have gone through the judgments relied upon by the learned State counsel and find that they do not advance the case of the appellant State as the facts therein were quite different.
No other point was raised.
In the result, there is no merit in the appeal and the same stands dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.