THB Chalapathi, J - The Punjab State Electricity Board filed this writ petition challenging the award passed by the presiding officer, Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, dated 2411990, published in the Gazette on 16.3.1990.
2.
The workmen of the Punjab State Electricity Board working in TMR Division meant for repairing the damaged transformers at Patiala and Amritsar raised a dispute in regard to the stoppage of incentive bonus to them on the ground that the scheme which was published by the Board in November, 1983, is applicable only to the workers directly connected with the repairs of transformers and the same was not applicable to the workmen working in ministerial and drawing establishment sections.
According to the Electricity Board, the workers of ministerial and drawing sections are not directly involved in the work of repairs of damaged transformers, therefore they are not entitled to the benefit of incentive bonus as per the scheme in office order No. 151/GM-161 dated 22121984.
Accordingly, a dispute was raised by the workmen and the same was referred to the tribunal for adjudication under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The question referred to the tribunal is :  Whether action of the management to stop the incentive bonus is justified, if not, to what relief/exact compensation the workmen are entitled ?
By the impugned order, the industrial tribunal came to the conclusion that the workmen employed in the ministerial and drawing sections are also entitled to the benefit of the scheme introduced in December, 1984 as modified on 6.11.1986 and therefore, the workmen working in the ministerial and drawing sections are also entitled to the modified and enhanced incentive scheme.
3.
According to the writ-petitioner namely the Punjab State Electricity Board the scheme dated December 22, 1984 is only applicable to the employees who are directly connected with the repairs of the transformers.
The workmen before the Industrial Tribunal are not directly connected with the repairs of the transformers as they belong only to the ministerial/drawing section of TMR sub division and therefore the orders of the tribunal are liable to be set aside.
4.
It is on the other hand contended by the learned counsel for the workmen that the evidence of the departmental witness itself shows that without the help of the employees of the ministerial and drawing sections the transformers could not be repaired and therefore it cannot be said that these workmen are not directly connected with the repairs of the transformers and therefore, the order of the tribunal extending the benefit of the scheme dated 22121984, as modified in the year 1986, is valid in law and does not require any interference by this Court.
5.
The only question that is to be considered in this writ petition is whether the workmen are directly involved in the repairs of the transformers.
The Executive Engineer of the Electricity Board has been examined as Management witness No. 1.
In his evidence he categorically stated that the TRW division is meant for repairing the damaged transformers and that all the employees of the said TRW division are directly involved in the repairs of the transformers as all the employees have to do the job as a team.
Therefore, no employee can be singled out as sole person for repairs of the damaged transformers.
Further, the Superintending Engineer of the Punjab State Electricity Board also informed the Board in his letter dated 2031987 which is exhibited as Ext.
W1 that the staff of the ministerial and drawing divisions are also equally involved in the work of repairs of transformers and the benefit of the scheme is also applicable to them.
The Executive Engineer of the Board also has written a letter dated 13111983 which is marked as A.3, expressing the same view.
Again the Executive Engineer in his letter dated 8111988 also supported the claim of the workmen as he was of the opinion that the nature of work and the duties performed by the Ministerial/Drawing staff are part and parcel of the entire work carried out by other employees as a unit.
In fact under an earlier scheme the employees of the Ministerial and Drawing Divisions of TRW sub division have been getting the same incentive bonus.
By interpreting the scheme of 22121984, the Punjab State Electricity Board denied the benefit to the workers working in the Ministerial and Drawing Divisions on the ground that they are not directly involved in the repairs of the transformers.
There cannot be any doubt that without the help of the Ministerial and Drawing staff the damaged transformers cannot be repaired.
Their active involvement is required for getting the damaged transformers repaired.
Without their active assistance, co-operation and work no damaged transformer can be repaired by any other workman.
The entire unit itself as evidenced from the record is established for the purpose of repairing the damaged transformers.
Thus, in my opinion, all the employees working in the TRW division which is intended for repairs of the damaged transformers are directly involved in the repairing of the transformers, therefore, the terms of the scheme dated 22121984 as modified on 6.11.1986 are applicable to the employee of TRW sub division meant for repairs of the damaged transformers and no employees of the TRW sub division can be denied the benefit of the scheme dated 22121984.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the order of the Industrial Tribunal does not suffer from any infirmity.
Apart from that when the employees are getting the incentive earlier to 1984 and the scheme restricts its applicability to a part of its employees, the benefit of the scheme can also be extended to the other employee who are also indirectly connected with the work of repairs of the damaged transformers.
This view has been taken by the Supreme Court in M/s Burn & Company Ltd Howrah Iron Works, Howrah v Their Employees and Anr., AIR 1960 SC 896.
It has been held as follows :-  "The main contention of the company before us is that as the clerical staff and the subordinate staff have no part in actual production they should not be given any incentive bonus, particularly as their work does not increase at all because of the increased production.
It is, however, difficult to accept that there will be no increase in the work of the clerical staff in particular and also of the subordinate staff because of higher production, though it may be accepted that the increase may not be in proportion to the increase of production.
It is also true that the clerical staff and the subordinate staff do not directly produce goods like manual workers and that may be a reason for treating them somewhat differently in the matter of incentive bonus and that is what the tribunal seems to have done, for it has directed the company to extend the scheme of incentive bonus to the clerical and subordinate staff and to lay down the rates and conditions of the same and has not said that exactly the same rates and conditions should apply to the clerical and subordinate staff as apply to the manual workers.
But there can be no doubt that economically speaking the clerical staff and subordinate staff also take part in the production and there is no reason therefore for excluding them altogether from the scheme of incentive bonus.
Besides as the tribunal has pointed out, in other comparable concerns incentive bonus is being paid to the clerical and subordinate staff.
The fact that dearness allowance was paid to the clerical staff at a higher scale is also, in our opinion, no reason for depriving them altogether of the benefit of the incentive bonus scheme."
I am, therefore, of the opinion that on either of the two grounds the workmen are entitled to the benefit of the scheme dated 22121984.
Further, in the year 1980, i.e. before filing of the writ petition, the Punjab State Electricity Board implemented the award and extended the benefits of the scheme to all the employees working in Ministerial and Drawing establishment of TWR circle, P.S.E.B.
Amritsar by its office order No. 42/TME-165 dated 1161990.
As per the said office order, the workmen in the Ministerial and Drawing establishment have been included in the scope of the scheme.
6.
It is brought to my notice that the arrears of pay had been withheld by the petitioner in view of the stay granted by this court.
The stay is hereby vacated and petitioners are directed to pay the arrears within three months.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed and the award dated 2411990 (Ann.
P-5) is confirmed.
No costs.