VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to order dated 23.5.1989, Annexure P-1, whereby the petitioner has been dismissed from service with immediate effect by the President of India in pursuance of provisions of sub- clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner has prayed that his dismissal from service be declared illegal and respondents be directed to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner who joined Police department as Constable on 1571955, was promoted as Head Constable on 191958, promoted as Assistant Sub-Inspector on 16.2.1974 and then on being promoted as Sub Inspector was confirmed as Sub- Inspector on 21.6.1988 and thereafter was promoted as Inspector on 30.6.1988.
It is the case of the petitioner that during his entire career of service petitioner was never subjected to any departmental enquiry nor any major or minor punishment was awarded to him.
Only one Annual Confidential Report for the period 141987 to 13.7.1987 was conveyed to the petitioner against which he made representation but before the same could be decided, his services were terminated.
Petitioner has also averred that another Annual Confidential Report for the period 281988 to 3131989 was shown as adverse in which honesty of the petitioner was doubted and both these reports have been taken into consideration while terminating the services of the petitioner by applying Article 311(2) (c) of the Constitution of India but without deciding the representations of petitioner filed against the adverse Annual Confidential reports.
He has further averred that during his career he had also earned Class I and Class II Commendation Certificates with cash rewards.
Petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that while the petitioner was posted as SHO Patti from 2441988 to 27121988, respondent No. 5 i.e. Sh. Sanjiv Gupta, SSP was over jealous and over enthusiastic to show to the higher authorities the encounters and stern action taken by him by fair and foul means through his subordinates.
He was interested to show false encounters of suspects who were arrested by the petitioner, but the petitioner refused to toe his line, with the result that he started harassing the petitioner and adopted every means to spoil the career of the petitioner.
Petitioner has further averred that respondent No. 5 got a false case, i.e. FIR No. 183 dated 27121988 under Section 5(2)/47 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, registered against the petitioner at the instance of one Kashmira Singh, Sarpanch, and on the basis of this case the petitioner was suspended.
In the FIR it was alleged that Mohan Singh and his nephew were brought to PS Patti by respondent No. 5 through SP (Operations) due to their illegally sheltering the extremists but they were got released by Lakha Singh and Bakhshish Singh by paying Rs. 10,000/- and Rs. 6600/- respectively to DSP Patti in connivance with the petitioner.
It has also been averred that in order to link the petitioner with terrorists, a diary is said to have recovered from the possession of Lakhwinder Singh in which it is mentioned that on 6.1.1988 Rs. 16,600/- were given to police for releasing Mohan Singh and his nephew.
It has thus been averred that the story of the FIR has been linked with the murder of Lakhwinder Singh by respondent No. 5 who got prepared Kashmira Singh for this extraneous purpose with mala fide intention.
Petitioner has further averred that there is no evidence that petitioner had any links with terrorists or that he has been helping the dreaded terrorists and leaking out information regarding police raids on the terrorists.
3.
Respondents 1 to 5 in their written statement have made reference to the adverse reports which were conveyed to the petitioner.
It has also been averred that the petitioner was dismissed from service due to his own acts when he was posted as Inspector, Patti and the decision taken against him is final because of provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Respondents have denied that respondent No. 5 was ever inimical towards the petitioner or that the impugned order was passed at his instance.
4.
Petitioner has also filed an additional affidavit in which he has submitted that he has come to know that on 27121988, respondent No. 5 intimated to the then Inspector General of Police (Border), Amritsar that a case has been registered against the petitioner along with Harbans Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Thereafter, respondent No. 5 came to Chandigarh and met the Director General of Police and held a meeting with him in which it was decided to prepare a case for dismissal of petitioner from service.
In this regard, a DO letter was written to respondent No. 5 for sending a note as discussed in the meeting.
In January, 1989, Deputy Inspector General of Police (Administration) Punjab again wrote a DO letter to respondent No. 5 stating that his note has been examined and he was asked to send information with regard to association of the petitioner with terrorists.
The Inspector General of Police again requested respondent No. 5 vide letter dated 1311939 to send the report on the points raised by the DIG of Police (Admn.).
It has also been averred that comments were supplied by respondent No. 5 but the DGP's office was not satisfied for making out a case for dismissal by invoking Article 311 (2) (c) of the Constitution and respondent No. 5 was informed that his report is not according to the information demanded by the Authorities and Inspector General of Police (Border) Amritsar was again requested to examine the case at his own level and send report as per decision taken in the meeting held with Director General of Police.
On the basis of information asked by DGP's office, the Inspector General of Police (Border) again asked respondent No. 5 to supply concrete information regarding petitioner's links with terrorists or leakage of information by him.
On the basis of information supplied, the impugned order has been passed.
According to the petitioner, the order has been passed against him at the instance of respondent No. 5 though there was no material linking him with terrorists.
5.
It stands settled by the Apex Court in AK Kaul and another v. Union of India and another, 1995(3) SCT 15(SC) : JT 1995(4) SC 1, that satisfaction of the President or the Governor under clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) is not immune from judicial review and is justiciable.
The Apex Court has held that the President or the Governor while exercising the power under Article 311(2) has to bear in mind the distinction between situations which affect the security of the State and the situations which affect public order or law and order and for the purpose of passing an order under Article 311(2)(c) the President or the Governor can take into consideration only those circumstances which have a bearing on the interests of the security of the State and not those situations having a bearing on law and order or public order.
The satisfaction of the President or the Governor would be vitiated if it is based on circumstances having no bearing on the security of the State.
6.
In the context of judgment in AK Kaul's case (supra), the impugned order needs to be viewed.
The order of dismissal against the petitioner has been passed on the ground that petitioner while posted at Patti was found guilty of helping dreaded terrorists/extremists and leaked out information regarding police raids on terrorists, and also accepted illegal gratification from the members of families of terrorists for releasing them and hobnobing with anti-social and anti-national elements who were posing threat to the security of the State.
The case of the petitioner is that there is no material with the respondents in regard to acts attributed to him.
In order to ascertain the correctness of the allegations made against the petitioner, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce the record.
The file which has been produced contains only an order which has been passed against the petitioner under Article 311(2) (c) of the Constitution.
No other record has been produced though the case was adjourned twice to enable the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab to produce the same.
Rather the learned State counsel has stated at the Bar that no other record, except the one which has been produced, is available.
In absence of record, it has thus become difficult to examine whether the satisfaction of the President of India is vitiated by mala fide or is based on wholly extraneous or irrelevant grounds.
Only the record would have shown the nature of activities in which the petitioner is said to have indulged.
Petitioner has also brought on record order dated 131994 of the Special Judge, Amritsar acquitting the petitioner and also Harbans Singh who were sent to face trial under Section 13(2) read with Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
In his case, the Special Judge found no direct or circumstantial evidence against the petitioner.
The story given in the FIR that petitioner and DSP Harbans Singh were paid Rs. 16,600/- with a motive to release Mohan Singh and Sarbjit Singh, has not been believed by the Special Judge.
Accordingly, this Court has no option but to quash the order of dismissal.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed, order of dismissal passed against the petitioner in exercise of powers under Article 311(2) (c) of the Constitution is quashed.
Petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
It is, however, made clear that it would be open to the respondents to initiate departmental proceedings, if they intend to hold one, in accordance with law.
The disciplinary Authority can exercise all powers conferred on it under the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
There shall be no order as to costs.