GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to give the benefit of gratuity to the petitioner on the basis of length of service rendered by him.
2.
Petitioner's case is that he had served as a municipal employee in the West Pakistan from 20101940 to 7.10.1947.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Octroi Superintendent in the Municipal Committee, Kaithal with effect from 17101947.
He served there upto March 13,1968.
The petitioner was retired from service on the basis of resolution passed by the Municipal Committee.
The Municipal Committee adopted the scheme of gratuity as was applicable to the government employees.
He applied for grant of gratuity but vide letter dated 3051970 he was informed that the gratuity scheme has been withdrawn.
3.
By placing reliance on various decisions of this Court, the petitioner has pleaded that he has a right to be paid gratuity and there is no legal justification for denial of the payment of gratuity by the Municipal Committee.
3.
In reply, the respondents have raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that gratuity scheme came into force only with effect from 1691972 and as the petitioner stood retired from services prior to that date he was not entitled to the grant of gratuity.
The respondents have sought to distinguish the case of the petitioner from the other cases on the ground that the petitioner had retired from service much before coming into force the Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982 and, therefore, he was not entitled to gratuity.
According to them, the decision of this Court dated 2451983 in Udham Singh Chauhan v. Municipal Committee, Ambala, C.W.P.
No. 2173-CII (Misc.) of 1983, is not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
4.
After having gone through the record, I am of the opinion that the petitioner's case deserves to be decided in the light of the decision of this Court dated 2451983 passed in Udhan Singh Chauhan v. Municipal Committee, Ambala, CWP No. 2173-CII(Misc.) of 1983.
5.
Consequently, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction that the respondents should consider the case of the petitioner for grant of gratuity in terms of Udhan Singh Chauhan's case (supra) and make payment of gratuity to the petitioner in accordance with the existing rules by taking into consideration his total length of service.