Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners challenge the selection and appointments to the posts of Assistant Lineman made by the Haryana State Electricity Board.
They have filed 23 writ petitions with the basic prayer that selection be quashed and that the respondents be directed to appoint them.
A few facts as appearing from the record of Civil Writ Petition No. 7382 of 1993 may be briefly noticed.
2.
On March, 2, 1992, the Board advertised 791 posts of Assistant Linemen.
Out of the these, 408 posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes, 135 for Ex- servicemen and 24 for physically handicapped of Haryana domicile.
The Board also advertised 250 posts of Shift Attendants out of which 90 were reserved for Scheduled Castes/Tribes, 16 for Backward class, 43 for Ex-servicemen and 7 for physically handicapped persons.
Both categories of posts were in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
The following qualifications were prescribed :-  (i) Matric with two years ITI course in Electrician, Electronics/Wireman Trade.
(ii) Hindi upto Matric standard.
3.
Conditions regarding age limit and relaxation thereof were also prescribed.
The petitioners claim that they fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
They even possessed experience.
They consequently applied for these posts.
They were called for interview for both the posts.
The interviews were conducted by the Selection Committees appointed for different circles.
They were interviewed by the Committee at Jind.
The selection was made on March 4, 1993 on the basis of interview alone and the selection list pertaining to Jind circle was issued.
According to the petitioners, the Board had selected and appointed candidates far in excess of the posts advertised by it.
In the cadre of Linemen, no posts were reserved for the members of Backward Class to which the petitioners, in this case, belong.
Persons who did not fulfil qualifications have been selected and appointed.
They challenge the selection on the ground that the interview was a farce and the selection made on the basis thereof cannot be sustained.
Candidates who were either not eligible or possessed lower qualifications than the petitioners have been selected.
Persons like the petitioners who had completed apprenticeship training and for whom 50% of the vacancies were to be reserved in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of India, vide its letter dated May 24, 1983 were not appointed.
Selection has been made on a districtwise basis which was illegal.
The petitioners filed C.M.
No. 2186 of 1994.
They submitted that on account of lack of particulars, it is not possible to implead all the selected candidates and respondents No. 3 to 19 be treated as representing the interests of all the selected candidates.
4.
This application was placed before the Motion Bench on November 23, 1994.
It was not pressed because of the enormous amount involved in public advertisement of the notice.
The learned counsel for the Board gave an undertaking that he would furnish a copy of list of selected candidates to the counsel for the petitioners so as to implead them as parties.
The case was adjourned for further proceedings to December 19, 1994.
On that date, the learned counsel for the Board agreed "to have a circular issued to all the selected candidates and make available two groups of such selected candidates copies of the writ petition so that in case they can come and enter appearance in these proceedings."
The Bench further ordered that "in view of the large number of persons to be arrayed as respondents, petitioners' prayer to implead the said respondents in the representative capacity to be represented by the present private respondents 6 to 19 is allowed."
The Bench further directed that "compliance of the previsions of Order 1 Rule 8 be made by publication of a notice in a newspaper."
The notice was accordingly published in The Tribune dated February 1, 1995.
This notice was in respect of 14 petitions.
5.
The claim made by the petitioners has been contested by the Board as well as the private respondents.
6.
In the written statement filed by the Board, it has been stated that "circlewise selection Committees were formed and Superintending Engineers were the Chairmen of the Selection Committees with one Assistant Engineer as the member."
This was done for the convenience of the candidates hailing from the Haryana State and from outside the State of Haryana.
The stand of petitioners with regard to reservation of posts has been admitted.
With regard to instructions issued by the Central Government, vide its letter dated May 24, 1983, it has been submitted that these are only guidelines and, as such, are not binding on the Board.
According to the respondent, the Selection Committee had made the selection on March 22, 1993 and not on March 4, 1993.
It had taken into consideration qualifications, experience and viva voce.
119 persons were selected for the posts of Assistant Linemen by this Committee.
It has been admitted that respondent No. 19 did not fulfil the qualification as is prescribed in the advertisement but he has passed two years course in Electronics from ITI and action for deciding his case under the Rules is being taken separately."
It has been further stated that a total of 25 marks have been fixed by the Selection Committee.
Out of these, five marks were meant for experience and another five for extra curricular activities.
The remaining 15 marks were for over-all assessment of candidates.
Proper interviews were held.
Candidates who were higher in the order of merit were selected.
On these premises, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
7.
Separate written statement has been filed on behalf of 9 out of 17 private respondents.
A preliminary objection has been raised.
It has been pointed out that since the necessary parties have not been impleaded, the entire selection cannot be quashed.
The respondents aver that all of them fulfilled the prescribed qualifications and have been rightly selected.
With regard to respondent No. 19, it has been stated that two years Diploma in Electronics qualified by him is equivalent to the two years ITI Certificate in Electrical/Wireman Trade.
According to the respondents, proper Selection Committee had been constituted and the selection was made after adjudging the merits of the candidates on the basis of interviews etc.
The averments of the petitioners with regard to propriety of the interviews conducted by the Selection Committee have been controverted.
These are the pleadings which also represent the claim made in the other petitions.
8.
On behalf of the petitioners, Mr. Yash Pal Malik has made the following submissions :-  (i) That the entire selection is based on interviews.
While 5 marks have been allotted for experience and 5 for extra-curricular activities, as many as 15 marks viz. 60% had been allotted for interview.
This was far in excess of the permissible limit of 12-1/2% fixed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Yadav's case.
(ii) That the Board had selected 1676 persons for appointment as Assistant Linemen even though only 791 posts had been advertised.
Similarly, appointments made in case of shift Attendants were far in excess of the number of posts which had been actually advertised.
Accordingly, the selection and appointment of persons in excess of advertised posts is bad in law.
(iii) The persons who had qualified apprenticeship training were given no credit either towards experience or preference in the matter of appointment.
According to the petitioners, this was wholly illegal.
9.
Mr. Sood, appearing for petitioner in CWP No. 11405 of 1993 contended that the selection was made on the basis of residence of candidates.
Those who were residing in district Jind were interviewed by the Selection Committee in that district and were selected in spite of the fact that their total score was less than that of the candidates interviewed by the Committees in other places.
This, according to the learned counsel, was violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
10.
Mr. PK Mutneja, learned counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 13792 of 1994 submitted that the candidates had not been given a chance to produce their certificates regarding the extra curricular activities.
Neither in the advertisement not in the interview letter sent to them, the candidates were informed that credit shall be given for the distinctions in extra curricular activities and that they had to produce the certificates.
Certain other ancillary submissions were also made by the counsel in other cases.
11.
Mr. HL Sibal, learned counsel appearing for the Board conceded that the appointments had been made in excess of advertised posts.
He also conceded that the Selection Committees constituted for separate circles had not adopted a uniform criterion in judging the inter se merit of the candidates.
In some circles, marks had been allotted for academic qualifications while in others, it was not so.
It was further submitted that the Board had made the reservation in excess of 50% only on account of the fact that there was a back-log of vacancies.
Mr. Setia, who also appeared on behalf of the Board, submitted that the petitioners having appeared in the interview were estopped from challenging the criterion adopted or the constitution of the Selection Committees for different circles.
12.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the selected candidates submitted that the petitioners have no cause for grievance.
They were duly considered.
Having been rejected, they cannot claim that the Board had erred in selecting or appointing persons in excess to the posts which had been advertised.
He further submitted that the petitioners having taken a chance cannot be permitted to impugn the selection.
According to the counsel, the allocation of marks, in the circumstances of case, was just and reasonable.
He also pointed out that the petitioners were not entitled to any preference on account of their having got training as apprentices.
13.
On these pleas, the respondents maintain that the writ petitions have no merit and should be dismissed.
14.
The questions that arise for consideration are : (i) was the selection in conformity with the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution and the Rules ?
(ii) Is the action of the Board in appointing persons in excess of the advertised post legal and valid ?
and (iii) Were the Apprentices entitled to any weightage for the training that they had undergone?
Regarding No.1  15.
Admittedly, the Board had advertised posts for selecting and appointing Assistant Linemen and Shift Attendants throughout the State of Haryana.
It is also the admitted position that there are different circles in the State and separate Selection Committees were constituted for these circles.
It was conceded by Mr. Sibal that no instructions have been issued by the Board indicating the broad criterion that have to be followed by the respective Selection Committees.
It was also not disputed that in some of the circles, marks were allotted for the qualifying examination while in others, no credit was given therefor.
Still further, it has also been conceded that circlewise merit lists have been drawn up.
The Board had not drawn up a common merit list for the entire State.
It was also admitted that the Board had not laid down or circulated any criterion to the different Selection Committees.
16.
Article 16 of the Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity to all the citizens in the matter of appointment to any office in the State.
Clause (ii) prohibits the State from discriminating on the basis of religion or place of residence etc.
It is, thus, implicit that all eligible persons are treated equally and judged on the basis of a uniform criterion.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that candidates with lower score in one circle were selected while others with a higher score in another circle were rejected.
Still further, they were not judged on the basis of a common criteria.
This was clearly violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
17.
Mr. Sibal submitted that the Board can now frame a common merit list.
Such a course of action would have been acceptable but for the fact that the respondents had not followed a uniform criterion for selection.
The candidates having not been judged on the basis of a unform standard, it cannot be said that they were treated equally.
18.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It is the admitted position that a total of 25 marks had been prescribed by each of the Selection Committees.
Five of these were allotted for experience and five for extra curricular activities.
The remaining 15 marks were for overall assessment.
Admittedly, the candidates had not been informed of the cirterion.
They were not told to bring certificates etc. indicating their participation in extra-curricular activities.
Still further, even the allocation of 15 marks which, in this case, amounts to 60% for overall assessment gave all the discretion to the members of the Selection committee.
In certain cases, the academic qualifications were taken into consideration.
In some circles, no credit was given therefor.
It is also not clear as to what facts were kept in view by the members of the Selection committee while making an overall assessment of the candidates.
Undisputedly a large number of candidates were interviewed every day.
The Selection Committees could not have interviewed each of the candidates for more than a couple of minutes.
In the circumstances of the case, allocation of marks for interview without even laying down a definite criterion regarding the factors to be taken into consideration appears to be totally vague and the resultant selection cannot be said to be just and fair.
19.
It is true that no written test was held.
In the absence of a written test, the authority may be compelled to judge the merit of the respective candidates on the basis of interview alone.
Even in such a situation, it would be incumbent upon the Selection Committee to follow a definite and uniform criterion.
This was not done.
20.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration it has to be held that the selection was not just and fair.
It was violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
It is consequently vitiated.
Regarding No. 2  21.
The next contention raised on behalf of the petitioners was that the Board having advertised only 791 posts of Assistant Linemen and 250 in case of Shift Attendants, it was not justified in recruiting persons in excess thereof.
It was particularly pointed out that 1676 persons were appointed as Assistant Linemen.
Even in the case of Shift Attendants, the number of candidates was in excess of the posts which had been advertised.
Such a course of action is not legal.
22.
This matter has been consdered by a Full Bench of this Court in Bijender Singh etc. v. State of Haryana etc., 1994(4) SCT 382 (P&H)(FB) : 1995(1) Recent Services Judgment 620.
The Bench in view of observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Hoshiar Singh v. State of Haryana, 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC) : JT 1993(5) SC 63 and State of Bihar v. Madan Mohan Singh, 1994(1) SCT 530(SC) : 1993(5) SLR 601 held as under :-  "Accordingly, we answer the first question in the negative and hold that the selecting agency cannot select candidates far in excess of the posts available on the date of the advertisement.
Of course, a small percentage of candidates or as may be desired by the Government can be kept on the waiting list so that in the event of some candidates not joining the posts or being found unsuitable on verification of their antecedents or on physical examination, the next in order of merit may be made available.
However, a wholesale departure from the number of posts advertised by the Board is not at all permissible."
In view of the above decision of the Full Bench, it has to be held that the action of respondents in selecting and appointing candidates in excess of the posts which had been advertised was not legal and valid.
23.
The second question is accordingly answered in the affirmative and it is held that the respondents had acted illegally in making appointments to the posts which had been advertised.
Regarding No. 3  24.
The learned counsel for the petitioners contended that according to the instructions issued by the Union of India, 50% of the posts had to be filled up from amongst the Apprentices.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that the respondent-Board has not adopted the instructions issued by the Government of India.
Even in the advertisement, no reservation had been made for the Apprentices.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the Board had acted illegally in not making any reservation of posts for the Apprentices.
25.
This does not, however, mean that the Apprentices were not entitled to any benefit of the training undergone by them.
It is the admitted position that on appointment, the Assistant Linemen and the Shift Attendants are given training.
In case of Assistant Linemen, the training was said to be of one year's duration .
It is also the admitted position that in view of the provisions of Apprentices Act, 1961, the employer is under an obligation to make suitable arrangements in workshop for imparting a course of practical training to every Apprentice engaged by it.
The training is imparted with the object of familiarising Apprentices with the job requirements.
On completion of training, the Apprentices acquire a working knowledge about the duties to be performed by them.
In this situation, some credit has to be given to them for the training that the Apprentices undergo.
It is true that in view of the provisions of Section 22 of the Act, it is not obligatory on the part of the employer to offer any employment to an Apprentice.
However, this does not mean that the experience gained by the Apprentice during the period of training is of no consequence.
This, however, is a matter on which a policy decision has to be taken by the employer.
If an experience of some duration brings credit to a candidate, the training undergone by him as an Apprentice cannot be totally ignored.
The third question is answered accordingly.
26.
It was also contended that the Board had made excessive reservations for members of Scheduled Caste, Ex-servicemen and handicapped persons.
On the other hand, it was stated that reservations have been made to clear the backlog.
The factual position in this behalf is not clear on the record.
The Board shall have to examine this issue in the light of facts as established on its record.
27.
It was contended on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners having participated in the selection process, are now estopped from challenging the legality thereof.
28.
Normally if a person is aware of the facts and yet he participates in any proceedings, it may be possible to urge that he is estopped from challenging the resultant decision.
This is so because a person cannot be allowed to sit on the fence and take his chance.
However, in the present case, there is nothing to show that the petitioners were aware of the criterion to be followed by the Board or the fact that the Selection Committees constituted for different circles would prepare separate merit lists.
The rule of estoppel cannot be attracted in such a case.
If such a course of action is permitted, it would result in extreme hardship to the candidates.
They would be debarred from challenging the selection which was not in conformity with law.
29.
In view of the above, it is held that the selection conducted by the respondents was not legal and valid.
The consequential appointments to the posts of Assistant Linemen and Shift Attendants cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to make fresh selections after making fresh advertisements.
The petitioners and other candidates who had applied in response to the advertisement dated March 2, 1992 shall be considered on the basis of applications already submitted by them.
The entire process of selection shall be completed within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Lest the work of the Board should suffer on account of non-availability of the staff and inconvenience be caused to the public, the persons already appointed shall be allowed to continue till then.
However, no credit towards experience shall be given to them during the course of selection on this account.
The petitions are allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.