Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners who are seeking admission to B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
courses in the Panjab University, Chandigarh, have challenged the action of the respondents requiring these petitioner-students to take Punjabi as compulsory subject in their graduation in furthernance of the resolution passed by the Academic Council dated 29.5.1995.
At the out- set it will be relevant to refer to Annexure P/2 annexed to the petiton, which is a letter dated 2461995 and contains the decision of the Syndcate of the University dated 161995 and the decision of the Academic Council dated 29.5.1995 :  "I am to inform you that the Syndicate of this University at its meeting held on 161995 noted the following decison taken by the Academic Council at its meeting held on 2951995 :-  "For BA/BSc/BCom., History and Culture of Punjab be allowed as an option inlieu of Punjabi (Compulsory) in the following individual hardship cases :-  (i) Students who have been out of Punjab for the last 10 years.
(ii) Students who are not domicile of Punjab and have not studied Punjabi up to Class 10th i.e. Matric.
(iii) Wards of/and Defence Personnel and Central Government employees.
(iv) Foreigners.
The Syndicate clarified that'students who have been out of Punjab for the last 10 years' would mean "Students, who are domicile of Punjab and have been living outside Punjab and Chandigarh for the last 10 years."
Based on this letter the contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners have studied in the schools situated in Union Territory of Chandigarh from 1st Class to 12th Class and they are domiciles/residents of Union Territory, Chandigarh.
They had not taken up Punjabi as a subject from Ist to 12th standard.
They have taken admission in DAV College, Sector 10, Chandigarh.
It is submitted that most of the students like the petitioners who are studying in the schools run by the Education Department at Chandigarh did not opt Punjabi as a subject after 10th Class and, therefore, did not study this subject in depth and with the purpose to take up the same subject at the graduation level.
According to the petitioners the stsudents who were placed like the petitioners were given exemption by the University and they were not required to take up Punjabi as a compulsory subject.
2.
On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the University has relied up the letter dated 2461995 Annexure P/2 to contend that the petitioners are not covered under clause (ii) and they are also hit by the explanation contained in the letter.
According to him clause (ii) has two pre-conditions that the students are not domiciles of Punjab and have not studied Punjabi upto Class 10th i.e. Matric and they cannot be given the benefit of the exceptions provided in this letter.
3.
We have heard the counsel at some length.
The letter dated 2461995 which refers to the decision of the Syndicate of the University and Academic Council has added an explanation which was not contained in letter dated 1741995.
That letter provided that the students who have not studied Punjabi upto Plus-2 level could opt alternative subjects in lieu of Punjabi complulsory as a subject in the first year of their respective course in Graduation level.
4.
It is conceded before us by both the counsel for the parties that all the petitioners are covered under clause (ii) of the said resolution/decision of the Academic Council referred supra.
Clause (ii) is attracted where students are not domicile of Punjab and have not studied Punjabi upto 10th Class.
The expression "upto Class 10th" cannot be read and construed to mean any Class upto 10th Class.
This expression in this rule is intended to convey that a student should be quite familiar and should have well read the subject which he intends to take up in the higher class and more particularly at Graduation level.
This interpretaion would be in consonance with the common understanding and would also help in achieving the object which is sought to be achieved by this rule.
In the present day of competition where the students have to strive their hard to get higher merit, they choose career oriented subjects and which would fetch them higher percentage.
The intention of this rule could not be that if a student is just familiar with his subject in his schoolilng till 10th Class he is fit and must be forced to take the same subject at the Graduation level.
This would certainly be not a reasonale nexus between the legislative intent in framing this rule and the object sought to be attained by this rule.
Thus, to say that if a student had studied Punjabi in any one class till completing his schooling till 10th, the purpose of the rule is to make for that student taking Punjabi as a compulsory subject would be an interpretation which to our mind would frustrate the very purpose of the rule rather than carrying the purpose further.
The counsel for the petitioners has rightly further argued that the students do not take the Punjabi as the subject in their 11th and 12th and that is the stage when they are likely to select their academic careers.
These petitioners have not admittedly studied Punjabi till 10th standard but may have studied Punjabi in some classes till 10th .
They have not studied Punjabi continously till 10th standard and this would be one of the ingredients of his rule which they satisfy for entitling them to the benefit of exemption under the rule.
5.
Coming to the other contention, this has not been disputed before us that the petitioners would be treated to be not domiciles of Punjab.
Domicile is a concept which has been given a much wider meaning and coverage in the present day in our jurisprudence.
This term denotes the concept of permanency of residence and is a legal concept for the purposes of determining the applicability of law to the individual.
This position is brought out clearly and emphatically in paragraph 442 of Halsbury's Laws of England (Fourth Edition) Volume 8 where it is stated : "Even person who has, or whom the law deems to have, his permanent home within the territorial limit of a single system of law is domiciled in the country over which the system extends, and he is domiciled in the whole of that country even though his home may be fixed at a particular spot within it."
6.
The Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Pardeep Jain etc. etc. v Union of India AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1420, while dealing with the question of admissions to MBBS, MD, MDS.
and B.D.S.
courses held as under :-  "The Constitution recognises only one domicile namely, domicile in India.
It must be remembered that India is not a federal State in the traditional sense of that term. "
-----------------.
It would be absurd to suggest that the legal system varies from State to State or that the legal system of a State is different from the legal system of the Union of India, merely because with respect to the subjects within their legislative competence, the States have power to make laws.
The concept of 'domicile' has No relevance to the applicability of municipal laws, whether made by the Union of India or by the States.
It would not, therefore, be right to say that a citizen of India is domiciled in one State or another forming part of the Union of India."
It is not disputed before us that these students have completed their schooling from the schools at Chandigarh and Mr. Gupta, learned counsel for the University, has also not seriously contested the status of these petitioners as not domiciles of Punjab and consequential exemption under the rules.
7.
The petitioners have specifically stated that they have done their entire schooling from the schools in Chandigarh and after Matric they were given an option to choose their subjects and Punjabi was not treated as compulsory subject.
In order to pick up the subjects which are more career oriented and as such they did not study Punjabi.
The students who had taken admission at the Graduation level in the previous academic years were given the similar advantage and exemption from taking Punjabi as a compulsory subject at the Graduation level.
8.
The clarification as contained in the letter dated 2461995 primarily applies only to the students covered under clause (i) and is not attracted with regard to clause (ii).
Each category of students covered under each clause has to be a clause in itself and cannot be inter mingled with each other.
It still remains open for decision as to whether the explanation is otherwise reasonable and whether it can stand the test of law.
9.
As we are not concerned with clause (i) and consequently its clarification as contained in the letter, we find that the case of the petitioners is covered under clause (ii) and as such they are entitled to the relief claimed in the writ petition.
10.
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to permit the petitioners to continue their Graduation courses to which they have already been admitted while granting them exemption under clause (ii) of the letter dated 2461995 and not imposing upon them Punjabi as a compulsory subject.