Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Officers' Association of the New India Assurance Company is the petitioner.
It prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent-Company to consider the claim of the members of the Association for promotion to the posts of Assistant Managers and for quashing the action of the authority "in declaring 70 vacancies for the financial year 1993-94 for promotion to the posts of Assistant Managers .." The petitioner's case is that the number of posts has not been determined in accordance with the criteria postulated in the order dated November 27, 1992 which provided that the "vacancies will be calculated based on the premium target for the financial year 1993-94 and the retirements during that period."
2.
The respondents resist the petitioner's claim primarily on the ground that the number of promotional vacancies have to be determined on the basis of "the norms/guidelines adopted for calculating the cadre strength by the Company/GIC..." In the very nature of things, the number of vacancies is dependent upon various factors "such as replacement for retirement, promotion to higher cadre, projected contingencies for death, resignation and other exits, office contingency, restructuring of offices etc..." By giving a comparative chart, it has been pointed out that even when the premium target has risen, the number of vacancies has been sometimes comparatively lesser.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
Mr. Jagdish Singh Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contended that according to the circular of November 27, 1992, the vacancies had to be calculated on the basis of the premium target.
Consequently, the action of the authority in fixing the number at 7 (as disclosed in the written statement) was wholly illegal.
Learned counsel pointed out that in the year 1992-93 when the premium target was Rs. 1337 crores, the vacancies in the cadre of Assistant Managers was 125 and when the premium target for the year 1993-94 had risen to Rs. 1605 crores, the number of vacancies has been arbitrarily reduced to 77.
This, according to the learned counsel, was wholly illegal and cannot be sustained.
On behalf of the respondents, Mr. Ravi Kapoor has controverted the petitioner's claim and submitted that the number of vacancies has been determined in accordance with the norms and guidelines adopted by the Company.
This, according to the counsel, is in strict conformity with the promotion policy laid down by the Company.
5.
It is the admitted position that the promotion in the Respondent-Company is regulated by a policy framed by the General Insurance Corporation of India-Respondent No. 2.
An extract from this policy in so far as it relates to the promotion from the post of Administrative Officer to Assistant Manager, has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
In this policy, it has been categorically provided that the promotional vacancies "for every financial year shall be determined on the basis of the norms/guidelines adopted for calculating the cadre strength by the Company/GIC from time to time".
It has not been shown that the determination of vacancies is not in conformity with norms/guidelines laid down by the Company in this behalf.
6.
The petitioner's grievance is that the number of vacancies has not been calculated in accordance with the letter dated November 27,1992.
It deserves notice that on November 6, 1992, the Board of Directors of the General Insurance Corporation had taken a decision to switch over the promotion exercise for Class I Officers from 'Calendar year' to 'financial year'.
As a result, the 'performance appraisal' of the officers was to be done on consideration of the relevant data for the financial year as distinguished from the calendar year.
To meet the situation, it was decided to conduct "a Transitional Promotion Exercise in January/February 1993".
For the purposes of this exercise, it was indicated that the vacancies will be calculated on the basis of the premium target for the financial year 1993-1994 and the retirements during that period.
This, however, did not imply that the criterion that had been prescribed by the Company and the General Insurance Corporation was repealed.
The only implication was that while determining the number of vacancies, the Company had to keep in view the position in respect of the period from April 1, 1993 to March 31, 1994.
In all other respects, the critarion adopted under the promotion policy had to be followed.
Accordingly, it cannot be said that the Company had acted illegally or arbitrarily.
7.
Even otherwise, it is the employer's right to determine the number of costs or vacancies in every cadre.
Such decisions are dependent upon a variety of factors like availability of resources, suitable personel and considerations of efficiency in the service.
If on perusal of the various relevant factors, an employer decides that even though the vacanies are available, yet on account of economic constraints or otherwise, these should not be filled-up, the courts cannot normally compel theemployer to make promotions.
It is only when the decision of the employer or an authority is shown to be apparently arbitrary or unfair that thewrit court can intervene to undo an apparent injustice.
So long as the administrative decision is reasonable and fair, courts are normally reluctant to interfere.
Judicial review has to be judicious.
8.
In the present case, it has not been shown that the respondents had acted arbitrarily in fixing the number of vacancies.
The mere fact that the premium target had risen, was not by itself enough to compel the respondents to correspondingly increase the number of promotional vacancies.
The decision is purely administrative, there is no apparent injustice.
It calls for no interference.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.