Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner complains that the action of the Haryana Agricultural University in appointing respondent No. 2 as a District Extension Specialist (Animal Science) in spite of the fact that he was below him in order of merit, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He, therefore, prays that the appointment of respondent No. 2 be quashed and the respondent-University be directed to appoint him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The University advertised two posts of District and Extension Specialists (Animal Science) on January 1, 1989.
The petitioner as well as respondent No. 2 were the candidates for these posts.
The Selection Committee met on September 7, 1989.
It prepared a merit list of 12 candidates.
According to this merit list, the petitioner was placed at Serial No. 9 and respondent No. 2 was placed at Serial No. 10.
Vide its order dated November 14, 1989, the respondent-University appointed the first three persons out of the candidates recommended by the Selection Committee.
Thereafter, vide order dated February 27, 1990, five more candidates, including respondent No. 2, were appointed.
The petitioner's grievance is that he, having been placed higher than respondent No. 2 in order of merit, had a better right to be appointed and the action of the University in ignoring him was wholly illegal and violative of the provision of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The petitioner served a notice.
No action was taken.
He was thus approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed by respondent No. 1 only.
It has been admitted that the Selection Committee had recommended the names of 12 candidates.
It is also admitted that the petitioner was placed at Serial No. 9 as he had been awarded 29 marks while respondent No. 2, who had secured 27 marks, was placed at Serial No. 10.
It has been further stated that the Selection Committee "committed some mistakes".
According to the University, the Selection Committee had wrongly allowed one mark to Rajbir Singh for experience.
It is further pointed out that the Selection Committee had committed an error in not allowing any marks to respondent No. 2 for the paper which had been published by him.
The University goes on to state that the performance of respondent No. 2 at the time of interview was apparently very good, as the Selection Committee had given him 14 marks out of 15 whereas the petitioner had been awarded only 9 marks.
On these premises, it has been submitted that the writ petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
He has pointed out that, on the basis of his qualification etc., he had secured 20 marks out of 25 while respondent No. 2 had been awarded only 13 marks.
He, thus, points out that he had a better claim than respondent No. 2.
It has also been emphasized by him that he had done research work, as a result of which he had been rightly given credit by the Selection Committee towards experience.
As for the claim of the University that the second respondent was entitled to the award of one mark on account of the paper published by him, he has produced a certificate dated November 28, 1990, from the Indian Poultry Science Association, Izatnagar (U.P.
), certifying that :  "... the June, 1989 issue (Vol. 24, No. 2) of Indian Journal of Poultry Science was released on 5th November, 1989, by this office for circulation among its members."
On this basis, the petitioner states that the second respondent had no publication to his credit on September 8, 1989, when the interviews had actually taken place.
Consequently, the claim of the University that he was entitled to the award of a mark for a publication cannot be accepted.
5.
These are the pleadings of the parties.
6.
The counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Yash Paul Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that the action of the University in ignoring him for appointment in spite of his position in the merit list, was wholly illegal and violative of the guarantee as enshrined in Article 16 of the Constitution.
Secondly, the learned counsel has submitted that the University could not tinker with the recommendations of the Selection Committee, especially when it involved the examination of disputed questions of fact.
In any event, the learned counsel states that no opportunity whatsoever having been granted by the University to the petitioner to show cause against the change in marks, the action cannot be sustained.
The claim has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta, learned counsel for the respondent-University, has produced the original file before me, dealing with the appointments to the posts of District Extension Specialists (Animal Science).
7.
I have examined the file produced by Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta.
A perusal of the file shows that, after the receipt of the recommendations of the Selection Committee, the matter was examined by the office of the University.
From page 10 to page 14 is a note put up by the office.
In this note, it has been pointed out that the Selection Committee had wrongly allowed marks for academic qualifications to M/s. Suraj Bhan, PK Bhardwaj and a few other candidates.
It has been further pointed out that even the petitioner had secured a first class in the BSc examination and he had been actually awarded 8 marks.
He was wrongly treated to have secured a second division.
On this basis, the merit list was redrawn.
As a result, the second respondent was brought at Serial No. 7 while the petitioner was placed at Serial No. 8.
Accordingly, the letters of appointment, as noticed above, were issued.
On coming to know of the appointment of the second respondent, the petitioner had sent a legal notice through his counsel on 1331990.
This notice was considered.
At page 39 of the aforesaid file, it has been pointed out that :-  "Rajbir Singh was allowed 16 marks for qualification by the Selection Committee as he was having 1st Class in BSc and MSc.
In the proforma he mentioned maximum marks as 1850 and marks obtained as 2800 for BSc He is having 2nd Class in intermediate.
Inadvertently, the office took 2nd Class in BSc instead of Intermediate and recommended him five marks instead (of) 8 marks.
In fact, 8 marks were admissible to him and he comes at Serial No. 7 and Bharat Singh at Serial No. 9.
I am sorry for this mistake.
Actually, appointment orders of Rajbir Singh instead of Bharat Singh were required to be issued.
Appointment orders of Shri Bharat Singh are up to 31.3.1990.
If agreed, service of Shri Bharat Singh may be terminated and appointment of Shri Rajbir Singh may by made."
8.
The Assistant Registrar (R) endorsed the recommendations made by the office and forwarded the file to the Registrar.
The matter remained under consideration.
The file was repeatedly sent back by the Registrar to the office in spite of the fact that it was pointed out that the appointment of respondent No. 2 was to expire on 31.3.1990 and decision should be taken before that date.
However, none was taken.
On May 5, 1990, a note was put up proposing that :-  "We may either allow Bharat Singh to continue for another year and await further communication from the Advocate or make simultaneous appointment of Rajbir Singh for which vacancy is required."
9.
On May 27, 1990, the Registrar asked the Assistant Registrar to request the Director, Extension Education (D.E.E.)
to intimate one more vacancy.
He further added that :-  "Meanwhile, Shri Bharat Singh may be allowed to continue till further orders, so that his salary beyond 31.3.1990 is drawn."
The file was sent to the Vice-Chancellor who asked the Registrar to discuss the matter with him.
On June 1, 1990, it was observed that :-  "The mistake was on the part of Rajbir Singh himself.
Hence, we shall contest the case if he goes to Court.
However, office will be asked to exercise greater care in future."
The Vice-Chancellor approved this note.
10.
On a perusal of the file, it is clear that the petitioner was higher than the second respondent in the merit list.
The mistake had come to the notice of the University.
It was even acknowledged in the office notes, Still the respondent persisted in perpetuating the error and took no steps to rectify it.
No wonder, the petitioner was forced to approach this Court.
After the receipt of notice of the writ petition, while giving comments on the averments in the writ petition, it was again sought to be justified, inter alia, on the ground that the petitioner had been wrongly allotted an extra mark while respondent No. 2 had been wrongly denied the credit of one mark of which he was entitled to on account of the paper published by him.
However, even in this behalf, no decision had been taken by the competent authority.
The Vice-Chancellor never decided that the petitioner was not entitled to the "allotment of a mark" on account of the research work done by him prior of the submission of his PhD thesis or that the second respondent was entitled to the allotment of one mark on the ground that he had published a research paper.
It is thus clear that the order of merit, as prepared by the Selection Committee, was not adhered to.
It was in fact wrongly ignored.
The action of the respondent-University in doing so was wholly arbitrary and unjustified.
11.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the University entertained a doubt with regard to the petitioner's entitlement to one mark for experience for research work, it was incumbent on it to give him some opportunity to show that he actually possessed some experience.
None was granted.
In this situation, the action of the University in ignoring the petitioner for the purposes of appointment cannot be said to be legal, just and fair.
Equally, the action of the University in appointing respondent No. 2 inspite of the fact that he was lower than the petitioner in order of merit, suffered from a legal infirmity.
It cannot thus be sustained.
The file leaves an impression that an effort was being made to appoint the second respondent by going out of the way.
Even when the mistake had been pointedly noticed, the University persisted in perpetuating the wrong.
12.
In view of the above, the appointment of respondent No. 2 cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly quashed.
13.
The next question that arises for consideration is :-  "Should a writ of mandamus be issued, directing the University to appoint the petitioner."
14.
Admittedly, the University had advertised only two posts.
It is not understood as to how the University decided to appoint eight persons.
Even if it is assumed that vacancies had become available, nothing stopped the University from issuing a fresh advertisement.
Its action in filling up the posts without a fresh advertisement deprived the other candidates, who could have applied for the posts, from competing.
It denied the University the benefit of having possibly better candidates.
Its action was totally illegal.
However, since those appointments have not been challenged before me in the present case, it would suffice to observe that the petitioner's appointment, if ordered, would be beyond the advertised posts.
It would not be legal or fair to direct the University to consider him for appointment.
The post should be readvertised.
It should be open to the petitioner, the second respondent as also the other candidates to compete and whosoever is found suitable should be appointed.
The University is directed to do so immediately.
The second respondent is directed to vacant the office forthwith.
15.
Mr. Ram Kumar Malik, Advocate, counsel for respondent No. 2, submitted that the respondent-University had admitted respondent No. 2 to PhD Course against one of the seats reserved for the members of the faculty.
His admission has not been challenged in this writ petition.
If the University has permitted the second respondent to join the PhD Course, it may allow him to continue.
However, he will not be allowed to work as a District Extension Specialist (Animal Science) any further.
16.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly