Gurusharan Sharma, J - The present writ application has been filed by the petitioner seeking a mandamus against the respondents for regularising his service on the post of cook (Rasoiya) in the regular cadre in Government Harijan Welfare Hostel, Munger, where he has been made to work since May, 1966 subject to intermittent break in his employment.
A prayer has also been made for a direction to the respondents for payment of his salary in the same pay scale which is being paid to other similarly situated persons in the Government employment.
2.
As stated by the petitioner in the writ application and in the rejoinder, he was appointed on a regular post of the cook-cum-servant by the Superintendent of the school in 1966 in place of one Harnath.
In support of this fact he has filed payment receipts dated 2141966 and 671966, which are Annexures 1 and 1/A to the rejoinder.
It has further been stated that the then District Welfare Officer had approved the appointment of the petitioner on temporary basis on 2141966 and since then the petitioner has been discharging his duties regularly on the said post.
Under an order contained in letter No. 835 dated 861990 (Annexure 5), the respondent District Welfare Officer, Munger, transferred the petitioner in the deaf and dumb school.
Munger, where he is admittedly working at present.
The petitioner has filed a copy of letter dated 2821992 written by the respondent District Welfare Officer to the Deputy Director Welfare, Bhagalpur Division, (Annex-2 to the rejoinder), wherein pursuant to some earlier query it has been communicated that the petitioner is working on the post of cook since May, 1968, and he has been regularly paid his salary by the District Welfare Officer.
The petitioner has also placed on the record various other documents to substantiate the fact that he has been working as a cook in the hostel of the aforesaid school since 1966, which need not be referred to in detail since none of those facts have been disputed by the respondents.
3.
Curiously a counter affidavit has been filed by the Assistant Director in the Department of Welfare agitating the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the Superintendent of Government Harijan Welfare Hostel has no competence to appoint the petitioner on the post of cook and that during some intermittent period i.e. March, 1968 to February, 1974, and 11121982 to 19.4.1983 he was not paid his wages.
It has also been stated that the petitioner is not possessed with any regular appointment letter in his favour and, therefore, it will be contrary to the Government policy to grant him the benefit of regularisation.
4.
We have considered the rival contentions and the materials placed on the record.
Neither the Superintendent of the hostel concerned nor the District Welfare Officer has come forward to controvert the foundational facts pleaded by the petitioner on affidavit.
Therefore, it has to be admitted that the petitioner has been working as a cook in the hostel of the Government Harijan Welfare School since 1966.
It will be too harsh and unjust to deprive the petitioner of his due claim of regularisation after taking service from him for a long period of 23 years on a given impression that he was taken into job by a competent authority.
Admittedly the petitioner has been paid his wages from the Government account and because of his long continuous service and particularly in view of the fact that the petitioner has been serving on a class IV post of cook.
on weighing equitable considerations : in our view, the petitioner is entitled to issuance of a writ of mandamus as claimed.
5.
In the case of State of Haryana v. Piara Singh reported in 1992(4) S.C.C.
118 : 1992(3) SCT 201(SC).
(at Para 49, it has been held by the Supreme Court that:  "If for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the State."
6.
It cannot be disputed that the normal rule is to make regular appointments through prescribed agency by following prescribed rules of recruitment.
But as held by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Piara Singh (supra) dealing on the subject with all its implications and implifications the case of the petitioner falls within the exception carved by the Supreme Court as above for the purpose of regularisation.
Accordingly, we direct the respondents to regularise the service of the petitioner on the sanctioned post of a cook in the hostel within one month from today.
7.
The writ application is allowed to the above extent but without cost.
Application allowed.