Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was an applicant for the 14 posts of Fisheries Officers advertised by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana on July 7, 1988.
Out of these 14 posts, 7 were to be filled up on the basis of merit while the remaining seven were reserved for different categories of persons.
The petitioner competed and was placed at Sr. No. 7 in order of merit.
In spite of selection, the petitioner was not appointed.
Consequently, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer that a writin the nature of mandamus be issued to the respondents to appoint him as a Fisheries Officer.
2.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that a number of persons who had been recruited on purely ad hoc basis, had filed various writ petitions in this Court and obtained interim orders of stay.
As a result, only 13 candidates selected by the Board could be appointed.
The remaining persons including the petitioner were not appointed.
It has been further pointed out on behalf of the respondents that in fact, the services of a number of persons who had been appointed on ad hoc basis have been regularised in pursuance to the directions of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) : 1992(4) SLR 770.
As a result, the petitioner though one of the first seven in order of merit has not been appointed.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner made a categorical submission that in fact, posts were lying vacant with the respondents.
Mr. Jaswant Singh was granted time to obtain instructions.
He states that vacancies are available.
4.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was duly selected.
In spite of this, he was not appointed, while those who were working on purely ad hoc basis and may have even been rejected at the time of regular selection, were allowed to continue.
The services of some of them have been regularised.
This appears to be apparently unjust and unfair.
A person who has proved his merit in an open competition, has been denied appointment while another who was either rejected or did not compete, has been allowed to continue.
In this situation, the only way to undo the injustice, is to direct the respondents to consider the petitioner's claim for appointment against one of the available vacancies.
In case, it is found that a vacancy is actually not available, the respondents shall be entitled to terminate the services of an ad hoc employee who may either be the junior-most or may not have been found suitable for regularisation.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
The needful shall be done by the respondents within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.