Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The two petitioners are Head Constables.
They pray for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to depute them for the Intermediate School Course.
A few facts as relevant for decision of this case may be noted:-  2.
The petitioners were recruited as Constables on June 28, 1975 and May 30, 1975 respectively.
They were promoted as Head Constables on December 1, 1988 and September 14, 1988.
Both of them were confirmed as Head Constables with effect from August 31, 1991.
As against this, respondents Nos. 5 and 6 were recruited as Constables on March 25, 1976 and August 11, 1976 respectively.
They were promoted as Head Constables on December 1, 1988 and September 6, 1988 respectively in District Sirsa.
They were confirmed as Head Constables with effect from January 31, 1991 by the orders of the Superintendent of Police, Jind.
The petitioners claim that their case for confirmation as Head Constables were purposely delayed.
As a result, the respondents became senior to them as Head Constables.
As a result, respondent No. 3 was deputed for the Intermediate School Course in preference to the claim of the petitioners on June 15, 1994.
The petitioners represented against it.
Their claim having been declined, vide order dated August 26, 1994 they have approached this Court through the present petition.
3.
The petitioners claim that the inter se seniority of Head Constables is to be fixed on the basis of the date of passing the Lower School Course in accordance with the provisions of Rule 13.8(2) of he Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
They further claim that under Rule 1318, every Head Constable is entitled to be confirmed on the expiry of two years.
As a result, they should be deemed to have been confirmed with effect from December 1, 1990 and September 14, 1990 respectively.
If this is done, they would rank senior to the respondents.
4.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioners were confirmed on the availability of substantive vacancies in district Bhiwani and that they cannot be deemed to have been confirmed on the expiry of period of two years.
According to the respondents, their action in deputing respondent No. 5 for the Intermediate School Course prior to the petitioner is in conformity with the Rules.
5.
Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that in view of the provisions of Rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, Volume II, the petitioners should be deemed to have been confirmed on the expiry of two years with effect from December 1, 1990 and September 14, 1990 respectively.
If this is so done, the petitioners would rank senior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6.
It has been further submitted that the inter se seniority of the Head Constables has to be fixed in the order of their passing the Lower School Course.
Since the petitioners have qualified the said course in the year 1982, they rank senior to respondent Nos. 5 and 6 who have passed it later in the years 1984 and 1983 respectively.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on certain decisions, to which reference shall be presently made.
Miss Ritu Bahri, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the respondents, has controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioners.
6.
Rule 1318 inter alia provides that all police officials promoted in rank shall be on probation for two years.
It also permits the Appointing Authority to count the period of officiating service towards the period of probation.
The Rule debars the Authority from extending the period of probation beyond two years and makes it mandatory for it to come to a definite decision regarding the suitability or otherwise of the person concerned within a reasonable time after the expiry of the period of probation.
What is the position in the present case?
7.
The petitioners were promoted as Head Constables in the year 1988.
They were confirmed with effect from August 31, 1991.
According to the respondents, the order of confirmation was not (sic) as substantive vacancies were not available.
It has not been shown by the petitioners that, in fact, substantive vacancies were available prior to December 31, 1991 against which they could be considered for confirmation.
In such a situation the claim of the petitioners that they should be deemed to have been confirmed on the expiry of a period of two years cannot be sustained.
8.
The matter can also be looked at from a different angle.
Even if it is assumed that the petitioners are right in their contention, the result would still be the same.
Petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 5 were promoted to officiate as Head Constables on December 1, 1988 in their respective districts.
Respondent No. 6 was promoted to officiate as Head Constable on September 6, 1988 while petitioner No. 2 was similarly promoted on September 14, 1988.
Even if it is assumed that a Head Constable shall be deemed to have been confirmed on the expiry of the period of two years, then petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 5 shall be deemed to be confirmed on the same date.
Furthermore, respondent No. 6 completed the period of probation prior to petitioner No. 2.
Even in this situation, it cannot be said that the respondents are junior to the petitioners.
9.
Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Risal Singh v. State of Haryana, 1993(2) SCT 493(DB)(P&H) : 1994(2) RSJ 403, to contend that there is no provision for appointment on ad hoc or temporary bais under the Punjab Police Rules.
Their Lordships were considering the case of a sportsman for promotion under the provision of Rule 13.8(2) of the Punjab Police Rules.
He had been (sic) within the ten per cent quota prescribed under Rule 1318(2) as a Head Constable from amongst the sportsmen and it was held by their Lordships that the promotion was on regular basis.
No such controversy, however, arises in the present case.
The learned counsel has also referred to the decisions in Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 199(P&H) : [1994(8) SLR 603 (P&H)], and Hardev Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 289(P&H) : [1994(8) SLR 634 (P&H)].
In both these cases, the petitioners were found to have held the promoted posts for long periods and were thus declared to have been confirmed.
In the case of Jagat Singh, his promotion was made on October 1, 1982 and inspite of the fact that he had continue to work as Head Constable for a period of more than ten years' he had not been confirmed.
It was held by the Court that he would be deemed to have been confirmed on the completion of two year's probation.
There is no quarrel with the proposition of law enunciated in these cases but the factual position being different in the present case, the petitioners can derive no assistance therefrom.
10.
Reference may also be made to the provisions of Rule 13.8(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners, contended that in accordance with these provisions, the inter se seniority of those persons who have been promoted on the same date as Head Constables has to be determined in the order of merit in which the examinations have been passed.
Accordingly, the learned counsel has contended that the petitioners, having qualified the Lower School Course prior to respondents Nos. 5 and 6, are to be treated as senior to them.
11.
After hearing the learned counsel, I am unable to accept this contention.
A perusal of Rule 13.8(1) of the Punjab Police Rules shows that List `C' has to be maintained in each district.
Clause(2) regulates the promotion of person within the district.
The petitioners and the respondents in the present case were not working in one district.
Admittedly, they were in different districts.
In such a situation, the provisions in clause (2) cannot be invoked to contend that inter se seniority has to be determined in the order of the date of passing the Lower School Course.
12.
No other point has been raised.
13.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioners have no cause for grievance which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to Costs.
Petition dismissed.