Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a member of the HOMS Class II, was admitted to the Post Graduate Course leading to the degree of M.D.
(Paediatrics) at the Medical College, Rohtak.
The petitioner had admittedly appeared in the entrance test and competed for admission to the course.
He was selected.
He joined the course in the year 1992.
On November 12, 1993, the Director, Medical College, Rohtak passed an order by which the petitioner was debarred from attending the course of studies on the ground that he had mis-behaved during the Diwali function held on November 11, 1993.
On November 17, 1993, the Government passed an order redcalling the petitioner from the Medical College, Rohtak.
He was placed under suspension.
It was further ordered that during suspension, his Headquarters would be in the office of the Director General, Health Services, Haryana, Chandigarh.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in redcalling the petitioner from the Medical College, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The impugned action has been challenged as being violative of the principles of natural justice arbitrary and illegal.
It has been alleged that the action had been taken on the ground that respondent No. 3 was not happy with the former Director of the Institute, Dr. JP Singh who was related to the petitioner.
Accordingly, it has been prayed that the order dated November 17, 1993, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, be quashed.
At the hearing, it has been clarified that the challenge is only to the extent the petitioner was ordered to be re-called from the Medical College, Rohtak.
2.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
It has been alleged that the petitioner had misbehaved during Diwali function and was recalled from the college on account of the grave nature of the charges levelled against him.
It has been consequently prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
3.
The Motion Bench vide its order dated May 2, 1994 allowed the petitioner to complete his course of study and to appear in the M.D.
(Paediatrics) Examination.
Certain other interim directions were also given.
In pursuance to the interim directions given by this Court, the petitioner had appeared in the examination held in March 1995.
However, his result was not declared.
The petitioner, consequently filed CWP No. 5876 of 1995 with a prayer that the respondents be directed to declare his result.
Vide order dated June 1, 1995, the respondents were directed to declare the petitioner's result provisionally.
In pursuance to this direction, the respondents have actually declared the petitioners' result.
A copy of the notification dated June 9, 1995 issued by the University has been produced by Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
According to this notification, the petitioner has passed the M.D.
(Paediatrics) examination.
4.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the action of the respondents in recalling the petitioner from the college was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
This order was passed without giving the petitioner any opportunity whatsoever.
It was violative of the principles of natural justice.
Mr. Jaswant Singh on the other hand submits that the order was passed in view of the petitioner's misconduct.
5.
While it is the employer's prerogative to suspend an employee during the pendency of an enquiry or otherwise, the action in recalling the petitioner without even giving him an opportunity to explain his position as passed by the Government was not in the circumstances of this case, fair and proper.
Interruption of studies would have resulted in a permanent loss to the petitioner.
He would have been prejudicially affected and that too without the grant of any opportunity whatsoever.
In other words, the punishment would have preceded even a prima facie finding of guilt.
In the circumstances of this case, the action in recalling the petitioner could not have been sustained.
However, by the interim directions given by the court, the damage has been avoided.
The petitioner continued his studies and has appeared in the examination.
He has passed.
The result has already been declared provisionally by the University.
In view of the finding that the order of recall was not fair, the result should be treated as final and not provisional.
However, this would not debar the respondents from proceeding against the petitioner with the disciplinary proceedings which may have been initiated against him in accordance with the law and the rules.
6.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.