SP Kurdukar, CJ.
(Oral) - This letters patent appeal is filed by the appellants-State of Punjab and another challenging the legality and correctness of judgment and order dated November 29, 1990 passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 6337/1988.
2.
The respondent-petitioner had challenged in the writ petition his order of dismissal from service dated March 18, 1984 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
It was alleged that the petitioner was dismissed from service on the allegations of dereliction of duties in not arresting the alleged accused who resorted to firing.
Alongwith him, one more employee connected with the same incident was also dismissed from service on March 18, 1984.
It appears that the Disciplinary Authority instead of holding departmental enquiry, invoked the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India and dismissed the respondent-writ petitioner from service vide order dated 1831984.
3.
It is not necessary to set out the pleadings of the parties in detail, since the main issue in this letters patent appeal centres around the compliance of the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution  4.
The learned Single Judge after perusing the pleadings of parties held that the appellants have failed to prove the compliance of the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution In addition to this finding, learned Single Judge also recorded several other findings arising out of the pleadings of the parties.
It is not necessary to advert to all the issues raised and findings recorded thereon.
5.
The main contention raised before the learned Single Judge on behalf of the respondent-petitioner was that the appellants have failed to prove that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry.
It was also contended that the reasons for not holding regular enquiry were not recorded in writing by the Disciplinary Authority as required under Sub Clause (b) of Clause 2 of Article 311 of the Constitution.
After referring to the pleadings of the parties, the learned Single Judge held that the appellants have failed to produce any evidence to show the compliance of the provisions of Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution.
It is consistent with this finding that the learned Single Judge held that the order of dismissal dated March 18, 1984 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police is violative of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution  6.
The order of the learned Single Judge is dated November 29, 1990 which is the subject matter of this letters patent appeal.
7.
Mr. AK Walia, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, urged that the Disciplinary Authority did record the reasons for not holding the enquiry and reasons were even communicated to the respondent-writ petitioner.
He urged that the burden of proof was on the writ petitioner to produce the said documents and having not done so, the respondent-writ petitioner cannot take advantage of this fact.
Mr. Walia, therefore, urged that this is a case of total compliance of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution  8.
We are not inclined to accept this argument because the appellants were very much interested to support the order of dismissal dated 1831984 yet they did not bring on record the relevant document showing reasons for dispensing with the enquiry.
They ought to have placed before the Court the order recorded by the Disciplinary Authority as regards dispensing with the disciplinary enquiry.
Having not done so, in our opinion, the appellants cannot now be heard to say that the burden lay upon the respondent-writ petitioner to produce such documents.
The appellants had an opportunity which they failed to avail of at the appropriate time.
Even today also, no record was produced before us to support the said contention.
9.
Lastly, it may be stated that the respondent-writ petitioner was dismissed on 1831984 and was superannuated on 31.1.1988 vide order dated May 27, 1992.
This order appears to have been issued after the order passed by the Supreme Court on February 10, 1992 in Special Leave Petition.
In view of above finding of Hon'ble Single Judge, in our opinion, no case for interference in the impugned order is made out.
Letters patent appeal is dismissed.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.