RS Mongia & SC Datta, JJ.
- After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that it would be in the interest of justice if a fresh selection is held for the ad hoc appointment of lecturer in Mathematics in respondent No. 1-College i.e.
Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra by interviewing the candidates by an independent Selection Committee of which the Director, Technical Education, Haryana, be the Chairman and the other two members be an Expert in the subject of Mathematics from Kurukshetra University, and the Principal of the respondent No. 1 - College.
The two members of the Committee shall constitute quorum.
The Committee thus formed would interview the six candidates who were interviewed earlier by the earlier Selection Committee, whose names and addresses would be provided by respondent No. 1 - College to Mr. Setia as also the application forms including the bio- data, if any, for onward transmission to the Chairman, Selection Committee.
The information to the candidates for interview be sent on the addresses provided by the college by registered post.
Interview be conducted within a fortnight from today.
In the letter inviting, the persons for the interview, it may be mentioned that they may bring their certificates showing their academic qualifications and other testimonials along with them at the time of interview.
The Committee shall forward the recommendation to the College in order of merit.
On the basis of the recommendation, the College will be at liberty to give appointment in order of merit.
It is further clarified that this ad hoc appointment shall last till regular appointment is made for the post of Professor (Mathematics) in the College, for which the process has already been undertaken by the College.
In view of the above, the selection of respondent No. 3 made on February 3,1995, is hereby quashed.
To come up for further directions, if any, on March 20, 1995.
Copy of this order, attested by the Court Secretary, be handed over to Mr. RC Setia, learned Addl.
A.G., Haryana, as well as to Mr. AS Virk, Advocate, for respondent No. 1 - College.
ORDER RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This order may be read in continuation of our order dated March 2, 1995.
In pursuance of our order dated 23,1995, a Selection Committee consisting of Director, Technical Education, Haryana, Director-Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (Dr. ON Kaul), and Professor Naranjan Singh, Department of Mathematics, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, was constituted by the Director, Technical Education, Haryana, for selecting a Lecturer in Mathematics in Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra on ad hoc basis.
The Director, Technical Education, Haryana has 'placed on record the recommendations made by the Committee, which have been sent to the Director-Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
Copy of the recommendations along with covering letter is placed on record.
In the merit-list, there are five candidates.
The petitioner has been placed at Serial No. 1.
The Director-Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, is directed to make appointment in accordance with the recommendation made by the Selection Committee forthwith.
This petition is disposed of in the aforesaid manner.
Our appreciation be placed on record for the Director, Technical Education, Haryana, for conducting the interview for the post of Lecturer as ordered by this Court on March 2, 1995.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that the petitioner had made a representation claiming pay for the period of vacation when he had earlier worked with the college.
That representation has been rejected during the pendency of the writ petition and communication to that effect has been sent to the petitioner.
The petitioner may, if so advised, take appropriate steps to challenge that order before an appropriate forum.
Copy of this order, attested by the Court Secretary, be given to the learned counsel for the parties for compliance.
Petition allowed.