Satya Brata Sinha, J - The petitioner in this writ application has questioned an order of suspension dated 11111994 as contained in annexure `A' to the writ application.
2.
Mr. Kashi Kanta Maitra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that a bare perusal of the impugned order of suspension demonstrates that it has been held herein that the petitioner is guilty of gross-misconduct and dereliction of duty.
It is further submitted that on 11111994 on the date on which the said order was issued, no charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner.
The learned counsel in support of his contention has relied upon a decision of Chittatosh Mookerjee, J (as His Lordship then was) in the case of Dhirendra Kumar Saha v. State of West Bengal, reported in 1976 (2) Cal LJ 497.
3.
Mr. Pulka Ranjan Mondal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has produced before me a copy of the charge-sheet which appears to be dated 17111994.
4.
Mr. Mondal, learned counsel, further submits that the petitioner had been avoiding to receive the copy of the said charge-sheet.
The petitioner merely has been placed under suspension.
In the order it has been stated that the petitioner is placed under suspension for his gross misconduct and dereliction of duty as per article of charges and statement of allegation of the departmental enquiry which has been ordered against him as continuance in service will be prejudicial to the interest of public service.
Evidently a departmental proceedings has been initiated against the petitioner as far back as on 17111994.
5.
The words ``gross misconduct and dereliction of duty'' must be along with the words ``as per article of charge and statement of allegation of the departmental enquiry'' and thus in my opinion it cannot be said the respondent, Superintendent of Police, Burdwan, has proceeded with a closed mind and bias.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the departmental proceeding will be conducted in terms of the relevant provisions of the Police Regulations of Bengal, 1943 wherein the petitioner would be given all opportunities of defending himself.
6.
Having considered the matter I am of the view that the petitioner is not seriously prejudiced only because, it has been stated in the impugned order that said order is passed for gross misconduct and dereliction of duty.
The petitioner now has been served with the charge-sheet.
The petitioner may therefore file his written statement.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the view that the disciplinary proceedings should be concluded at an early date and preferably within a month from the date of communication of this order.
It however goes without saying that the aforementioned direction would be subject to co-operation made by the petitioner in the smooth conduct of the departmental proceedings.
7.
In the case of Dhirendra Kumar Saha (supra) the learned Judge held in the said judgment that the respondent did not produce any material before the Court to show that on the date the petitioner was placed under suspension, there was either a disciplinary proceeding was pending against him or the same was contemplated.
In the instant case the impugned order itself shows that article of charge was ready which however unfortunately was not served upon the petitioner along with the order of suspension.
8.
In Dhirendra Nath Saha's case however the Court came to the conclusion that the petitioner thereof had been placed under suspension with effect from 1st April, 1975 for his misconduct and negligent acts of investigation of a criminal case and also for not starting any criminal case.
In that situation the learned Judge held that the order of suspension was issued by way of punishment.
In the opinion of the Superintendent of Police the petitioner was to be placed under suspension for gross misconduct and dereliction of duty as per article of charge and statement of allegation of the departmental enquiry which shows that the order of suspension is an interim one pending departmental enquiry and/or in contemplation thereof and had not been issued by way of or in lieu of punishment.
9.
In this view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion, that the petitioner has not been suspended by way of punishment and the impugned order is merely an order or suspension pending disciplinary proceeding.
Dhirendra Nath Saha's case, thereof has no application to the fact of the present case.
10.
The writ application is disposed of with the aforesaid observations.
It will be open to the petitioner to move this Court again for revocation of the order of suspension in the event the departmental proceeding is not concluded within the aforementioned period.
11.
The petitioner shall co-operate with the Enquiry Officer for smooth conduct of the departmental proceedings.
12.
The writ application is disposed of, as above.
Order accordingly.