Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral).
- The petitioner, a beldar in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch), prays for the issue of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents not to remove him from service.
He avers that he had joined service on June 1, 1990 on temporary basis and had been continuously in employment till the filing of the petition on October 22, 1993.
By virtue of the interim order passed by the Motion Bench on November 1, 1993, the department was restrained from terminating his services.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim on the ground that he had been engaged as a casual labourer on temporary Muster Roll according to the requirements and the availability of work.
It has been categorically averred that the petitioner had not continuously worked as Beldar nor was he presently working in the department.
Furthermore, a Civil Misc.
Application No. 12408 of 1994 was filed by the department for the vacation of the stay order, wherein it has been suggested that the petitioner had not completed 240 days of service in any calendar year and that his continuance in service was an avoidable burden on the State Exchequer.
Along with this application, details of the number of days for which the petitioner had worked from June 30, 1990 onwards have also been furnished.
A perusal of this document shows that the petitioner was not employed with the respondents from August 1, 1991 to February 29, 1992 and for the months of December, 1992 and January, 1993.
On a number of occasions, he had worked only for a few days during a month.
It further appears that he was not working with the respondents after July, 1993.
3.
The petitioner has not filed any affidavit to controvert the factual position as disclosed in the written statement to the writ petition or in the aforesaid Misc. application.
4.
Mr. KS Brar, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that the petitioner has already put in more than 3 years of service and is, as such, entitled to be treated as a regular employee.
Learned Counsel has further relied upon the order dated January 18, 1995 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab, thereunder a policy for the regularisation of the employees holding Class-III and IV posts has been notified.
On the basis of these instructions, learned counsel has contended that the petitioner is entitled to be treated as a regular employee.
On the other hand, Mr. BS Dhillon, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has submitted that the petitioner had made deliberately false averments in the writ petition and obtained an ex parte stay order without disclosing the correct facts.
He submits that the writ petition should not only be dismissed, but the petitioner should also be prosecuted for having made false averments before this court.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner was engaged as a beldar in daily wages and he had worked for different intervals of time.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties further shows that the petitioner was not in service in October, 1993 when he filed the writ petition and had made a false averment that he was continuing to work as a beldar at the time of the filing of the petition.
In this situation, the petitioner is not entitled to invoke the equitable jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
Even otherwise, on merits, the petitioner's claim cannot be sustained.
The instructions issued by the Government on January 18, 1995 contemplate the regularisation of an ad hoc or temporary employee only when he has ``completed a minimum period of 240 days service as on 31121994 and is in service on 31121994."
According to the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the petitioner was not in service since August, 1993.
The fact that the petitioner had obtained an ex parte stay order by making wrong averments and the department in obedience to the directions of this courts had taken the petitioner back in service would not entitle him to claim that was eligible for regularisation.
7.
No other point has been urged.
8.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, no ground for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
Though the petitioner has made wrong averments, yet in view of the fact that he was working as a Beldar only, I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.