G S Singhvi, J - Petitioner has challenged the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 as Head of Department, Bio-Chemistry and has prayed that while quashing the selection of respondent No. 4 the respondent-University be directed to consider the petitioner for appointment as Head of Department, Bio-Chemistry.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined Punjab Agricultural University (for short, `the University') as Assistant Professor in 1970.
He was appointed as Associate Professor in the year 1981.
He was conferred the award of National Fellow by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (for short, `the ICAR').
He continued as National Fellow upto January, 1988.
Thereafter, he joined as Professor of Bio-Chemistry in February, 1988.
The petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 were candidates before the selection committee for appointment on the post of Head of Department, Bio-Chemistry, which recommended the name of respondent No. 4 for appointment as Head of Department, Bio-Chemistry.
The Board of Management of the respondent- University approved the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Head of the Department of Bio-Chemistry, in its 146th meeting held on 18.3.1993.
3.
In challenging the selection of respondent No. 4 as Head of the Department of Bio-Chemistry, the petitioner has pleaded that he was holding a Professorial Chair as a National Fellow and that in that capacity he was holding an office equivalent to that of Professor.
He was paid salary in the scale of Professor and was given the benefit of revision of the University Grants Commission pay scale w.e.f.
111986.
According to the petitioner, he was senior to respondent No. 4 in the cadre of Professor but ignoring his better seniority and merit, the selection committee made recommendation in favour of respondent No. 4.
The petitioner has also questioned the eligibility of respondent No. 4 to be considered for the post of Head of the Department of Bio-Chemistry by asserting that respondent No. 4 belongs to the Department of Vegetable Crops, Land-Scaping and Floriculture, and was working as Senior Bio-Chemistry at the time of consideration of his case for appointment as Head of Department under Statute 4(2) of Chapter IV of the Punjab Agricultural University Act and Statutes, 1982.
Another plea raised by the petitioner is that the very composition of the selection committee was contrary to Statute 4(2)(iv), inasmuch as no representative of the ICAR was invited to participate in the proceedings of the selection committee.
The petitioner has stated that one Dr. N C Ganguli, who was merely an Officer on Special Duty in the ICAR and who had even retired from service, was treated as an expert representing the ICAR without his nomination by the Council.
4.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3, the statement of the petitioner that he is the only Professor in the Department of Bio- Chemistry, who had applied for the post of the Head of the Department, has been denied.
It has been alleged that Dr. A S Narang, who was working as Senior Bio-Chemist in the Department of Bio-Chemistry, Dr. R K Raheja, Senior Chemist (oilseeds) working in the Department of Plant Breeding and respondent No. 4 had also applied for the Headship.
The candidature of all the four candidates was considered by the Selection Committee.
At the relevant time, respondent No. 4 was working in the Discipline of Bio-Chemistry as Senior Bio-Chemist in the Department of Vegetable Crops, Land-Scaping and Floriculture.
This post is equivalent to the post of Professor and his name was included in the seniority list of the teachers of the Department of Bio- Chemistry.
The respondents have pleaded that the post of Professor and other equivalent posts the discipline are inter-transferable.
All the Professors and those holding equivalent posts on teaching, research and extension side in various departments/offices of the University in the same discipline are included in one seniority list and as the discipline of respondent No. 4 is Bio-Chemistry, his name was included in the seniority list of the Department of Bio-Chemistry along with those of others.
These respondents have disputed the claim of the petitioner that he had been holding the post of Professor in Bio-Chemistry since 2461985.
According to them the award of National Fellowship to him by the ICAR did not confer the status of Professor on the petitioner.
It has also been pleaded that even the respondent No. 4 was incharge of the Schemes financed by the ICAR and he had worked as Principal Investigator of two ad hoc Schemes financed by the ICAR.
Further plea of the respondents is that while respondent No. 4 was promoted as Senior Bio- Chemist in 1987, a post equivalent to that of Professor, the petitioner has joined as Professor, Bio-Chemistry, only on 2221988 and, therefore, he was treated as junior to respondent No. 4.
In regard to Dr. N C Ganguli, the respondents have pleaded that he was nominated as Chairman of the Selection Committee and he attended its meeting held on 331993.
Lastly, the respondents have pleaded that the selection made by the Selection Committee leading to the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Head of Department, Bio- Chemistry, does not suffer from any legal error so as to warrant interference by this Court.
5.
In his replication, the petitioner has disputed the claim made by the respondents that there was a practice of maintaining a common seniority of the teachers belonging to a particular discipline on the basis of their PhD degrees.
The petitioner has pleaded that at least five teachers, whose discipline is Bio-Chemistry, do not figure in the seniority list of the Department of Bio-Chemistry.
He has named Dr. Kashmira Singh, Professor of Food Science and Technology, Dr. Gajinder Singh, Senior Animal Nutritionist, Dr. Jasbir Singh Chawla, Senior Poultry Nutritionist, Dr. B K Gupta, Senior Animal Nutritionist, and Dr. B L Kwatra, Professor Food and Nutrition.
This, according to the petitioner, shows that no uniform pattern is being followed by the respondent-University for determining seniority of the teachers.
He has repeated his allegation of ineligibility qua respondent No. 4 and has pleaded that five doctors, named in the replication, were not called for consideration for selection on the post of the Head of the Department.
He has once again reiterated that Dr. Ganguli was not a representative of the ICAR and the Vice-Chancellor of the University had arbitrarily called Dr. Ganguli as a representative of the ICAR.
6.
First contention of Shri Bains is that the respondent-University has committed an illegality by treating the petitioner to be a Professor of Bio- Chemistry only with effect from 2421988.
Shri Bains argued that in terms of the note under Statute 4(2) which was added as per decision of the Board of Management taken in 80th meeting held on 2971982, the word `Professor' includes person conducting work of research or extension and having status and pay scale equivalent to that of `Professor'.
Learned counsel argued that the petitioner was awarded National Fellowship by the Council, which was equivalent to the post of Professor and the work which was performed by the petitioner was in the field of research.
Learned counsel vehemently submitted that instead of awarding the petitioner for his contribution to the nation and the respondent-University, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have deprived him of the benefit of seniority.
Shri Khehar, learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 3 argued that mere award of Fellowship does not entitle the petitioner to claim that he stood appointed as Professor of Bio-Chemistry in the year 1985.
Shri Khehar argued that Statute 4(2) is not relevant for the purpose of determination of seniority and, therefore, the mere fact that the petitioner had carried on research work while enjoying the Professorial Chair as a National Fellow does not entitle him to be treated as a Professor w.e.f.
2461985.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions.
A look at Annexure P-2 along with Annexure P-3, the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the ICAR and the respondent-University, shows that the scheme initiated by the Council was for creation of Professorial Chairs - (A) Professors of eminence and (B) National Fellows.
It is, therefore, evident that even the ICAR had made a distinction between a Professor of eminence and a National Fellow.
Therefore, the mere fact that the petitioner received pay in the grade of Professor while working as National Fellow does not by itself entitle him to claim that he stood appointed as Professor in the service of the University, Department of Bio-Chemistry.
Likewise, the fact that the petitioner had worked in the field of extension and had done good work in that field does not entitle him to claim implied appointment on the post of Professor.
It is important to note that the petitioner has not challenged the seniority-list of teachers issued by the University.
Learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 3 placed before me a copy of the seniority-list issued in June, 1988, in which name of the petitioner was placed at serial No. 5 and that of respondent No. 4 at serial No. 4.
Names of Dr. Kashmira Singh, Dr. Gajinder Singh, Dr. A S Narang etc. were also included in the seniority-list.
The petitioner had received that seniority list in the year 1983 itself but he did not challenge the same.
Therefore, he is not entitled to claim that he was wrongly placed below respondent No. 4 in the seniority-list or that his service as National Fellow was not recognised for the purpose of assigning seniority in the cadre of Professors.
8.
Apart from the above conclusion, I am of the opinion that the controversy regarding seniority among the teachers of the Bio-Chemistry is wholly irrelevant in the context of the dispute relating to selection for appointment as Head of the department.
Though the petitioner has made reference to Statute 4(2)(v) to give an impression that selection for appointment as Head of the Department is required to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have made a categoric statement in para 3 of the reply that Statute 4(2)(v) was amended by the Board of Management at its 89th meeting held on 16.9.1983 and as per the amended Statute selection for appointment as Head of the department could be made only on the basis of merit.
Therefore, the Selection Committee was not required to take into consideration the relative seniority of the candidates, who had applied for appointment as Head of the Department.
It was required to consider the cases of applicants according to the criteria of merit and it is not even the case of the petitioner that his merit was adjudged as equal to that of respondent No. 4 and on that account the question of seniority acquired relevance.
It must, therefore, be held that the petitioner's plea regarding non-counting of his service as National Fellow for the purpose of seniority among Professors in the Department of Bio-Chemistry deserves to be rejected.
9.
Second contention of Shri Bains relates to the eligibility of respondent No. 4 to be treated as teacher in the Department of Bio-Chemistry.
Argument of learned counsel is that respondent No. 4 was working in the Department of Vegetable Crops and, therefore, his name could not have been included in the list pertaining to the Department of Bio-Chemistry.
This contention of the learned counsel, in my opinion, cannot be accepted.
Indeed, it is not the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 4 was never appointed in the Department of Bio-Chemistry.
The designation of respondent No. 4 as given in the seniority-list is Senior Bio-Chemist.
He has been shown to be working in the Department of Vegetable Crops on the date of issue of the seniority-list.
According to the respondent-University various teachers appointed in a particular discipline are required to work in different department on teaching as well as research sides and even in the office.
This stand of the University is supported by the seniority-list issued in June, 1988 and, in my opinion, there is nothing illegal in determining the seniority of all persons belonging to one discipline irrespective of the fact that they might be working in other departments.
In fact, exclusion of a person from the seniority-list of the department to which he originally belongs would attract the charge of hostile discrimination.
Therefore, placement of respondent No. 4 in the seniority-list of the Department of Bio-Chemistry does not suffer from any legal error.
I also do not find any illegality in the practice of the University in giving various designations to the persons while treating them equivalent to the post of Professor.
If for better efficiency, the University utilises the services of member of one department in another department, no exception can be taken to this practice of the University.
10.
Third and the last contention of the learned counsel is that the Selection Committee, which had met on 331993, was not properly constituted, inasmuch as it did not include a representative of the ICAR.
Learned counsel emphatically argued that a person could not be treated as representative of the ICAR unless his name is sponsored by the said Council at the initiation of the University and as Dr. Ganguli was not sponsored by the Council, he could not have been treated as a representative of the ICAR.
He argued that the defect in the composition of the Selection Committee has the effect of vitiating the entire selection.
To this Shri Khehar replied by arguing that Dr. Ganguli was one of the persons whose name was included in the list of Experts approved by the Board of Management of the respondent-University and, therefore, the Vice-Chancellor of the University had every right to call Dr. Ganguli to act as representative of ICAR in the Selection Committee.
Relevant provision of Statute 4 regarding the constitution of the Selection Committee reads as under :-  ``The Selection Committee for selection of the Head of Department in Departments covered in sub-clause (iii) above shall consist of the following :-  (a) The Dean of the College in which the vacancy exists,  (b) The Director of Research; (c) The Director of Extension Education; (d) The Dean, Postgraduate Studies; and (e) Three other persons nominated by the Vice-Chancellor including at least two outside experts, one of which will be a representative of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.''
11.
An analysis of the provision contained in clause (e) shows that the Selection Committee shall amongst others consist of three other persons nominated by the Vice-Chancellor including at least two outside experts, one of which is to be a representative of the ICAR.
The very fact that three persons are required to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor envisages exercise of discretion by the Vice-Chancellor.
Therefore, if there already existed a list of experts duly approved by the Board of Management of the University and the Vice-Chancellor exercised his discretion to nominate one person from that list, that action of the Vice-Chancellor cannot be termed as contrary to the Statute.
Though another mode could possibly be adopted by the Vice-Chancellor by calling upon ICAR to send a list of experts to act its representative in the Selection Committee, a mere possibility of adopting a better course cannot lead to a conclusion that the composition of the Selection Committee should be declared as bad because the Vice-Chancellor did not send an intimation to the ICAR to send one person as its representative.
12.
The allegation contained in the replication indicating that Dr. Ganguli was retired from the service of the ICAR has not been substantiated by any document showing the date of retirement of Dr. Ganguli.
Moreover, the petitioner cannot get any relief from the Court on the ground of alleged defect in the constitution of the Selection Committee, because he had participated in the process of selection without any objection regarding the participation of Dr. Ganguli.
If the petitioner felt that an outsider was taking part in the process of selection, he ought to have protested against the presence of Dr. Ganguli.
Having taken part in the process of selection without any objection, the petitioner cannot be allowed to say that the selection should be quashed on the ground of defect in the composition of the Selection Committee.
The petitioner has not come out with the case that he was unaware of the composition of the Selection Committee.
Even in his representation (Annexure P-8) dated 1731993, he did not raise any objection against the composition of the Selection Committee.
It is, therefore, reasonable to infer that he had participated in the process of selection without any objection to the constitution of the Selection Committee.
Had the petitioner been recommended by the Selection Committee, he would have made no grievance on this score.
After having taken part in the proceedings of the Selection Committee, the petitioner cannot turn round and question the composition of the Selection Committee.
In this regard, observations made by the Supreme Court in Dr. G Sarana v. Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428, deserve to be quoted below :-  ``Where a candidate for selection knowing fully well the relevant facts about the members of the Selection Board voluntarily appeared for interview without raising any kind of objection against the constitution of the Selection Board and took a chance of favourable recommendation in his favour, it was not open to him to turn round and question the constitution of the Board when the decision was unfavourable to him.''
No other point was argued.
13.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is held to be without merit and is, therefore, dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.