Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as a clerk by the Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar vide order dated June 18, 1975.
A copy of the order of appointment has been produced as Annexure P-1.
The petitioner was put on probation for a period of 12 months with effect from June 19, 1975 vide order dated September 17, 1976 the petitioner was confirmed with effect from June 19, 1976.
Thereafter, vide letter dated November 4, 1985, the petitioner was served with a three months' notice informing him that his services would stand terminated with effect from February 4, 1986.
The notice was kept in abeyance.
However, vide letter dated October 12, 1987, the petitioner was informed that his services shall stand terminated w.e.f.
July 31, 1987.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner approached the Deputy Commissioner with a petition under the provision of the Punjab Privately Managed Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, the Deputy Commissioner found that he had no jurisdiction.
Consequently, vide order dated June 6, 1988, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-12 the appeal was allowed to be withdrawn for presentation before the Director, Technical Education.
The petitioner approached the Director, Technical Education, Punjab.
However, even there, he met with the same fate and vide order dated November 3, 1988, it was held that the Act did not confer any jurisdiction upon the Director.
Technical Education and Industrial Training.
Faced with this situation, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
He challenges the order of termination primarily on the ground that after confirmation, his services could not have been terminated except after holding an enquiry in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner's services have been terminated "in accordance with the contract and three months notice had been give.
This clause is not against the public policy.
It is not penal.
The termination is in accordance with the contract.
it is not illegal"  3.
I have heard Mr. RK Joshi, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. SSMahajan, has appeared for the respondents.
4.
Mr. Joshi has contended that the provision regarding termination of a permanent employee by giving of three months notice, cannot be sustained in view of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in West Bengal State Electricity Board and others v. Shri Desh Bandhu Ghosh and others.
1982 (2) SLR 304.
On the other hand, Mr. Mahajan, appearing for the respondents had submitted that the termination being in strict conformity with the terms of appointment, the action cannot be questioned by the petitioner.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the petitioner was offered the post of Clerk vide order dated June 18, 1975.
He was informed that he shall be on probation for a period of 12 months.
In this order, it was also mentioned that during the period of probation, his services could be terminated by one month's notice on either side and after confirmation, his services could be terminated by three months' notice.
On completion of the period of probation, the petitioner was confirmed w.e.f.
June 19, 1976.
A copy of the order dated September 17, 1976 confirming the petitioner has been placed on record as Annexure P-3.
However, in this order, it was not stipulated that the petitioner's services were liable to be terminated by giving of three months' notice.
Irrespective of that, even if it is assumed that the condition stipulated in the letter of initial appointment is to be read into this order, such a condition shall not be valid in view of the authoritative pronouncement of their lordships of the Supreme Court in Shri Desh Bandhu Ghosh's case (supra).
In this case, the provisions of the Regulation providing for termination of the services of a permanent employee by serving three months' notice or on payment of salary for the corresponding period in lieu thereof, were held to be arbitrary in nature and suffering from the vice of "enabling discrimination".
This view has been reiterated in various subsequent decisions.
6.
In view of this authoritative pronouncement, it has to be held that condition No. 3 in the offer of appointment in so far as it provided for termination by three months' notice after confirmation, was wholly illegal and cannot be sustained.
Resultantly, even the order passed there under suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and cannot be sustained.
7.
No other point has been urged.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order of termination passed by the respondents on October 12,1987, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-10, is quashed.
8.
Mr. SS Mahajan, learned counsel for the respondents, submits that since the petitioner has not performed the duties of the post of Clerk in the Institution, he should not be paid any arrears of salary for the period from the date of termination till his reinstatment.
He, however, undertakes that the petitioner shall be reinstated within one month from today.
9.
The position taken by Mr. Mahajan is very fair.
Since the petitioner has not performed the duties of the post, he is not entitled to any salary.
However, he shall be reinstated within one month from today.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
A copy of this order shall be supplied to the counsel for the parties within one week by the copying Branch.