Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner retired as a Headmaster on February 28, 1994.
On that very day, the Director of School Education, Haryana, passed an order holding him responsible for the embezzlement of government money amounting to Rs. 86,42550 paise and ordered the recovery of Rs. 43,21275 paise and Rs. 12315 paise from him.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
It was kept pending for a very long time.
Ultimately, in pursuance to the directions issued by this Court, the appeal was decided by the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Department of Education vide order dated April 30, 1991.
The appeal was dismissed.
Aggrieved by the two orders, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The primary grievance made by the petitioner is that a charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, having been issued to him and he having denied the charges, the impugned order could not have been passed except after completing the proceedings of enquiry etc. in accordance with the procedure laid down in Rule 7.
Additionally, the petitioner submits that even at the stage of submission of reply to the charge-sheet, the relevant documents were not shown and that the authorities passed the impugned orders without the grant of a due and reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that no enquiry was required to be held as only a minor penalty has been imposed and that the petitioner had been afforded a due and reasonable opportunity before the passing of the impugned orders.
3.
A perusal of the order dated February 28, 1984 shows that the petitioner had admittedly submitted his reply to the charge-sheet under Rule 7 vide letter dated January 25, 1984.
He had categorically averred that the relevant documents had not been shown and that he would file a detailed statement after the receipt of copies or inspection thereof.
He had prayed that the copies of the relevant documents and twenty-three forged bills may be given to him for inspection so as to enable him to submit a reply.
The Director of School Education noticed the petitioner's request that he would submit a detailed reply to the charge-sheet ``after inspection of relevant documents/record.''
However, he proceeded to observe that ``more than a month has passed but no further reply has been received from him.''
He did not find that the documents had either been shown to the petitioner or that they were irrelevant.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed an appeal.
The petitioner inter alia made a three-fold grievance.
Firstly, he alleged that the copies of the documents were not supplied.
In spite of the written request, the DEO, Sonepat had not given him a chance to inspect the documents and that no intimation regarding personal hearing had been given to him.
The appellate authority has not considered as to whether or not the pleas raised by the petitioner were correct.
4.
Even before this Court, it has been categorically stated by the petitioner in paragraph 14(a) that it was not possible to reply to the charge-sheet unless he is afforded an opportunity of inspection of relevant records; and that no documents were shown to him as a result of which, he could not submit an effective reply.
There is no categorical denial of the averments made in paragraph 14(a).
5.
In this situation, it appears that the petitioner had not been afforded a reasonable opportunity of meeting the charge before the order for recovery was passed against him.
This discrepancy may not have been very material in case an enquiry as envisaged in Rule 7 had been held.
However, since no enquiry had been held, the petitioner deserved to be given a reasonable opportunity of showing that the allegations levelled against him were not correct and no recovery was called for.
The action in the circumstances of this case was violative of the principle of natural justice.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The order of recovery was passed on the same day on which the petitioner was retiring from service.
His appeal was kept pending for seven long years.
No justification has been shown for such an inordinately long delay.
The case is a typical instance of official red-tapism.
7.
For the view that I have taken on the first point, it is not necessary to examine the second contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that it was necessary for the respondent to hold an enquiry.
8.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the impugned orders cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the orders dated February 28, 1984 and April 30, 1991 are set aside.
The amount of money recovered from the petitioner in pursuance to the impugned orders shall be refunded to him along with interest @ 12 per cent per annum from the date of recovery till the date of actual payment within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Since no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents to contest this petition, I made no order as to costs.