Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who is working as Divisional Accountant in the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Board'),is aggrieved by the order promoting Respondent No. 4, who is admittedly junior to him, as Superintendent Grade - II.
The respondents contest this claim only on the ground that the petitioner having exercised his option for promotion to the post of Divisional Accountant is now debarred from making the claim as raised in this petition.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
The Petitioner, who belongs to the category of Scheduled Castes, joined Service with the respondent- Board as an Assistant on March 11, 1977.
This post was upgraded and redesignated as Senior Assistant on June 15, 1990.
Respondent No.4, who had initially joined as a Clerk in the year 1969 was promoted to the post of Assistant after the petitioner.
In the seniority list issued by the Board on November 30, 1987, the Petitioner's name appears at Serial No.14 while that of Respondent No.4 is at Serial No. 37.
In April, 1988 the Petitioner was given the current duty charge of the post of Divisional Accountant.
Thereafter, in June 1991, certain posts of Superintendent Grade-11 became available.
Vide order dated June 5, 1991, the Managing Director of the respondent-Board ordered the promotion of four person.
The claim of the Petitioner was not considered.
However, these promotions were ordered subject to the decisions of certain Civil Writ Petitions which were pending in this Court.
The petitioner avers that he submitted certain representations.
Copies of some of these representations have been produced as Annexures P.7/1, P7/2, P.7/3.
One of the grievances made by the Petitioner was that while making promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II, the roster point reserved for the member of Scheduled Castes had not been given to the members of that class.
In this representation, the names of the persons promoted vide order dated June 5, 1992 were specifically mentioned.
In fact, in the representation submitted by the Petitioner on September 7, 1992, it was categorically pointed out that the claim of Respondent No.4, who was junior to him was being considered.
He prayed that his claim be considered before that of his junior, viz Respondent No.4.
The fear expressed by the Petitioner in his representation was proved right on September 29,1992, when the Managing Director passed an order reverting Mr. Prem Chand Kaura form the post of Superintendent Grade-II.
By this order, Respondent No.4 was promoted against the resultant vacancy.
The representations submitted by the Petitioner having not been accepted by the respondents, he has approached this Court through the present Writ Petition.
The Petitioner avers that the action of the respondents in not considering his claim for Promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II is arbitrary violative of Art. 16 of the Constitution and against law.
3.
The respondents have filed two separate written statements.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-Board, viz Respondent Nos. 2 and 3, it has been pleaded that a cadre of Divisional Accountants had been created.
The petitioner had opted for this cadre.
According to the respondents the petitioner was promoted to the post of Divisional Accountant in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 vide order dated July 8, 1992.
Having been so promoted, the respondents maintain that the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II on September 30, 1992, when Respondent No. 4 was promoted.
It has been further averred that the representations of the petitioner were considered and rejected.
They also aver that the petitioner having been appointed on the higher post of Divisional Accountant, which is equivalent to that of Superintendent Grade-II, his lien on the post of Senior Assistant stood automatically suspended.
Accordingly, Respondent No. 4, who was next in order of seniority amongst the members of Scheduled Castes was considered and promoted.
4.
A separate written statement has been filed by Respondent No. 4.
The stand is almost akin to that taken on behalf of the official-respondents.
Reliance has been additionally placed on the letter dated June 1, 1992, circulated by the Board by which the Managing Director had called upon the Superintending Engineers to ask for option for promotion of Senior Assistants to the post of Divisional Accountant.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R.4/1, with the written statement.
In this letter, it was mentioned that the Divisional Accountant shall be provisionally placed in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 subject to the revision by the Board of Directors.
The petitioner had exercised his option vide Annexure R.4/1(A).
Respondent No. 4 has also produced a copy of the letter dated June 15, 1992 issued by the Managing Director of Respondent Board by which the various Superintending Engineers were directed to clarify to "the official who are willing to work as Divisional Accountant in the Divisions that if the scale of Rs. 2000-3500 is not granted by the Board of Directors then their willingness will be entertained for the promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
II and if the Board allowed the scale of Rs. 2000-3500 then these Divisional Accountants shall not have the right for the promotion to the post of Suptd.
Gr.
II."
A copy of the order dated July 8, 1992, by which the petitioner was promoted as Divisional Accountant in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200 has been produced as Annexure R.4/3.
This order was partially modified by order dated December 2, 1992, whereby it was ordered that "the scale of Divisional Accountants is hereby revised to Rs. 2000-3500 as decided by the Board of Directors in its 102nd meeting held on 17.9.92".
5.
The Board then filed CM Application No. 5517 of 1994, with which it produced copies of two documents as Annexures R.2/2 and R.2/3.
The first of these documents is a copy of the letter dated October 29, 1990, issued by the Managing Director to the Superintending Engineers and the Executive Engineers of the Board.
In this letter, it was inter alia mentioned that the post of Divisional Accountant shall be filled up on regular basis from amongst the cadre of Assistants.
The first preference was to be given to the persons possessing the qualification of B.Com.
or those who had qualified the Subordinate Accounts Service examination.
The remaining posts, if any, were to be "filled up from amongst the non B.Com/S.A.S.
Assistants.
However, seniority in the cadre of Assistant will remain intact for promotion as Supdt.
Gr.
II and they will be at liberty to switch over to Supdt.
Grade-II only once after their appointment as Divisional Accountant on regular basis.
There will be no other channel of promotion next to Divisional Accountant".
The second letter is a photocopy of the option exercised by the petitioner in pursuance to the circular letter dated October 29, 1990.
6.
The petitioner has filed separate replications to the two written statements filed on behalf of the respondents.
7.
Learned Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Sushant Maini, learned counsel, for the petitioner, has contended that the petitioner had a right to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II in accordance with the provisions of the statutory regulations, called `The Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Services) Regulations, 1982' (hereinafter referred to as `the Regulations').
He submits that the action of the Board in not considering his claim on the erroneous ground that he had opted for the posts of Divisional Accountant is wholly illegal.
He has further submitted that the right conferred by the statutory Regulations could not have been taken away by an executive decision of the Managing Director and that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
He has also submitted that the option given by him at the time when the pay scale of the post was Rs. 1800-3200 cannot be invoked to deny him the promotion which had fallen due in the year 1991 as also thereafter.
On the other hand, Mr. Gopal Mahajan, learned counsel for the respondent-Board has submitted that the petitioner having exercised his option for promotion to the post of Divisional Accountant is now estopped from claiming a right of promotion to the post of Superintending Grade-II.
Mr. DV Sharma, learned counsel for Respondent No. 4, has firstly contended that the petitioner is guilty of concealing the factual position inasmuch as he has not disclosed the factum of his having exercised the option in the writ petition.
He has further submitted that the petitioner having not challenged the order dated June 15, 1992, issued by the Managing Director by which it was provided that in case "the Board allowed the scale of Rs. 2000-3500 then these Divisional Accountants shall not have the right for the promotion to the post of Supdt.
Gr.
II he cannot be permitted to resile from his option, It has also been submitted that the action of the Board in not considering the petitioner's claim for promotion in view of the fact that he was already working as Divisional Accountant is not violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
8.
Before proceeding to consider the merits of the controversy, the charge of concealment as levelled by the learned counsel for respondent No. 4 may be examined.
The petitioner in paragraph 8 of the writ petition has categorically averred that "he was not considered for promotion as Superintendent Grade-II, presumably on the ground that he had already been promoted as Divisional Accountant which is (of) higher responsibility......." It has also been averred that the petitioner has still lien in his own cadre and that he has been shown senior to Respondent No. 4.
It is, thus, clear that the factum of the petitioner's promotion to the post of Divisional Accountant has been specifically mentioned.
Since the petitioner had not been informed of the ground of which he had been overlooked for promotion in spite of the fact that he had submitted various representations even prior to the passing of the impugned order and no decision thereon had been conveyed to him, he could not have guessed or stated as to why he had not been considered for promotion.
If the Board had informed the petitioner that his claim for promotion had not been considered on account of the fact that he had exercised his option for promotion to the post of Divisional Accountant, the matter could have been different.
However, since no such reason has been conveyed to him.
I am of the view that the petitioner cannot be accused of having concealed any vital fact or information from this Court and the writ petition cannot be dismissed on that ground.
Consequently, this plea raised on behalf of Respondent No. 4 is rejected.
9.
Equally lacking in merit is the submission that since there is no challenge to the order dated June 15, 1992, by which it was provided that if the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 is allowed to the Divisional Accountants, then they shall not have the right of promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II, the petitioner cannot claim that he was entitled to be considered for promotion.
The petitioner's case is that under the statutory Regulations governing his conditions of service, he was entitled to be considered for promotion.
The respondents have produced the letter dated June 15, 1992 to contend that he was not entitled to be so considered.
The factual position being not disputed, the petitioner is entitled to say that this letter which had been issued by the Managing Director cannot take away the right conferred on him under the statutory Regulations.
The petitioner can show that the defence raised by the respondents is not legally tenable.
Consequently, even this preliminary submission made on behalf of Respondent No. 4 cannot be sustained.
10.
The basic issue that arises for consideration is 0 was the petitioner entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II in spite of the fact that he had been promoted as Divisional Accountant vide order dated July 8, 1992?
To answer this question, it is apt to notice the provisions of the Regulations governing the conditions of service of the employees of the Board.
These have been laid down under the statutory Regulations framed in accordance with the provisions of Section 12 read with section 72 of the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1976.
Regulation 22. provides that the authority to make the appointment to the service, the qualification and experience and the method of appointment are specified against various posts in Appendix `A' & `B' to the Regulations.
Regulation 29 inter-alia provides that the "persons appointed to various posts shall remain on probation for a period of two years if recruited by direct appointment and one year if recruited otherwise".
Cl. (3) of this Regulation inter alia provides that the total period of probation, including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years.
Regulation 32 deals with the determination of seniority.
While regulation 33 provides that "all appointments by promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit by the competent authority......" on Appendix `B', the entry relating to the post of Superintending Grade-II shows that the post has to be filled up by promotion from amongst the persons, who have five years' experience as Superintending Grade-IV.
Assistants/Accounts Clerks with five years' experience are eligible for promotion as Superintendent Grade-IV.
However, it is admitted by the counsel for the Board that the post of Assistant has been upgraded to that of Senior Assistant and that of Superintendent Grade-IV has been abolished as well as appointment to the post of Superintendent Grade- II is now made by promotion from amongst Senior Assistants, who have worked as such for a period of five years.
Mr. Gopal Mahajan further very fairly points out that in view of the provisions contained in the proviso to Section 12 of the Act, the Punjab Civil Service Rules framed by the Government are applicable to the employees of the Board in matters with respect to which regulations have not been framed.
11.
The petitioner was admittedly recruited as an Assistant in the year 1977.
By virtue of Regulation 29, this appointment was on probation.
Under Regulation 3 the maximum period of probation is three years.
This period expired in the year 1980.
Thereafter, the petitioner is admittedly a confirmed Assistant, which post has since been redesignated as Senior Assistant.
That having happened, the petitioner had a lien on the post of Senior Assistant.
He had also completed the requisite period of service, viz, five years as prescribed under the Regulations for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II in the year 1982.
He was, thus, eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-IV, as originally envisaged under the Regulations, since the year 1986.
As a result, he was entitled to be considered for promotion against a post reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes before any person junior to him could be considered or promoted.
Admittedly, a post against which his claim should have been considered had arisen in the year 1991.
On June 5, 1991, the Board had promoted various persons including Mr. Prem Chand Kaura as Superintendent Grade-IV.
Later on, as had been pointed out by the petitioner also in his representation, the Board found that in the consolidated register of Superintendent Grade-II, the post at roster point No. 26 was to be given to a member of Scheduled Castes.
Against this post, Respondent No. 4 was promoted.
It is the admitted position that the said respondent was junior to the petitioner.
In spite of this, the claim of the petitioner was not considered.
The only justification given on behalf of the respondents is that the petitioner having opted for the post of Divisional Accountant and he having been promoted thereto, he had no right to be considered.
This plea cannot be accepted for two reasons.
Firstly, a right conferred under the statutory regulations cannot be taken away by an executive order.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Mahajan submits that the Regulations are framed by the Board and its decision to appoint Divisional Accountants would ipso facto amount to the amendment of the Regulations.
This contention cannot be accepted.
A persual of Section 72 whereby the power to frame jurisdiction has been conferred on the Board shows that it cannot make regulations on its own.
These can only be framed "with the previous sanction of the Government.
"In fact, a perusal of the Regulations clearly shows that these had been actually framed with the previous sanction of the Government.
There is a recital to that effect in the opening part of the Regulations.
That being so, even an amendment cannot be made without following the provision of Section 72 of the Act.
Admittedly, no sanction has been obtained by the Board for the amendment of the Regulation so as to provide that a person who has been appointed as a Divisional Accountant or even gives his option shall not be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade II.
Consequently, the plea raised by the learned counsel for the Respondent Board cannot be accepted.
Still further, there is another infirmity in the plea raised on behalf of the respondents.
Even if it is assumed that the Board is competent to frame Regulations, no such power is shown to have been conferred on its Managing Director.
The decision dated June 15, 1992 on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondents to contend that a person, who is promoted to the post of Divisional Accountant in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 shall not be entitled for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II was issued only by the Managing Director.
He is neither competent to frame the regulations nor to take any amendment therein.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the provisions of statutory regulations stand amended or that the right conferred under the statutory regulations has been validly taken away by the respondents.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Even if the letter issued by the Managing Director is assumed to be valid, the case of the petitioner would still not be covered by it.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was placed in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 vide order dated December 2, 1982.
It has also been conceded before me that the petitioner has been his salary in this scale w.e.f.
December 2, 1992 only and not for the earlier period.
The impugned promotion had been made in September, 1992.
At that time, the petitioner was admittedly in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200.
Consequently, even in terms of the letter dated June 15, 1992, the petitioner was entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II.
Thus, even if the plea raised on behalf of the respondents regarding the validity of the letter issued by the Managing Director is accepted, their case is not advanced at all.
13.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner is admittedly senior to Respondent No. 4.
He was also eligible.
Yet his claim for promotion was not considered.
This was wholly arbitrary and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
In fact, even before me the plea raised on behalf of Respondent No. 4 is that the petitioner is debarred from promotion for all times to come.
Such a course of action would be highly arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated September 29, 1992, is set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II with effect from the date a person junior to him was promoted at point No. 26 reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes.
Consequential reliefs in the nature of refixation of seniority and pay etc. as well as further promotion to the next higher post shall ensue.
No costs.
Petition allowed.