GS Singhvi, J - This petition was originally filed by Shri Ram Murti Sharma and after his death, Smt. Kamla Sharma, his wife, has been impleaded as petitioner.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner relates to non-payment of death-cum- retirement gratuity.
She has prayed for issue of mandamus to the respondents to release death-cum-retirement gratuity with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum w.e.f.
3171990, the date on which late Shri Ram Murti Sharma retired from service.
3.
Husband of the petitioner was working as a Section Officer of the date of his retirement i.e. 3171990.
According to the petitioner, the death-cum- retirement gratuity became payable to Shri Ram Murti Sharma on the date of his retirement but despite several representations made by him, the payment of death-cum-retirement gratuity was not made to him.
It has been pleaded that withholding of death-cum-retirement gratuity amounts to withholding of property and since then action of the respondents is without the authority of law, the respondents should be directed to pay the amount with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
4.
In their reply, respondents have made a statement of fact that gratuity payable to the petitioner (Rs.36,395.11) has been released by respondent No4 vide letter dated 291993.
A sum of Rs. 320489 has been withheld on account of outstanding recovery against the petitioner towards arrears of Government accommodation.
Respondents have also stated that in terms of instructions issued by the Government vide letter No.2648-2 FICW/88 dated 411989, a Government servant is required to vacate the Government accommodation within 21 days of his transfer/retirement and thereafter he is liable to pay penal rent.
They have stated that the petitioner retired from 3171990 but for a period of over three years since his retirement, he did not vacate the Government accommodation.
On that basis, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioner is not entitled to the award of interest.
5.
No one has appeared to argue that case on behalf of the petitioner.
I have heard learned AAG Haryana and perused the record of the case.
6.
It is no doubt true that the respondents did not release the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner for a period of almost three years after his retirement but there is no denying of the fact that the petitioner did not vacate the Government accommodation for a period of over three years even though he stood retired on 3171990 and he was required to vacate the Government accommodation within 21 days of retirement.
The petitioner had, therefore, misconducted by unathorisedly occupying the Government accommodation.
In terms of Annexure R-1, the Government was entitled to charge penal rent and also to take action against the petitioner for his eviction.
Ordinarily, the Court would have awarded interest to the petitioner on account of delayed payment of gratuity but taking into consideration the fact that the petitioner continued to be in unauthorised occupation of Government accommodation for over three years after his retirement.
I do not consider it to be a fit case for exercise of extra-ordinary jurisdiction in his favour.
A similar view has been taken by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 527 of 1986, Janak Raj Kapuria and others v. The State of Punjab and others, decided on 2661989.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.