RS Mongia and KK Srivastava, JJ.
- The Director Technical Education, Haryana had sent requisition to the Employment Exchange to fill up one vacancy of the Programmer on ad hoc basis, for which interviews were held on November 20, 1990.
The petitioner, whose name had been duly recommended and forwarded by the Employment Exchange, was interviewed and selected.
It may be observed here that he was given the post of System Analyst (Programmer).
The appointment letter is of December 11, 1990.
Annexure P-1 is a copy of letter appointing the petitioner as System Analyst (Programmer) on ad-hoc basis.
The petitioner apprehending termination of his services, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 7865 of 1991 which was decided by Division Bench on September 18, 1991 by passing the following orders :-  ``After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we dispose of this petition with the direction that the services of the petitioner shall not be terminated from the post held by the petitioner at present, till a regular selection is made.''
3.
On September 19, 1992, on Md Ishtique Ahmed joined the department as System Analyst.
The Principal, Haryana Polytechnic Nilokheri wrote to the Director, Technical Education Haryana, Chandigarh on the same day ie September 19, 1992 (Ann.
P. 3) that Md Ishtique Ahmed had joined as System Analyst and the petitioner who had been appointed/posted as System Analyst (Programmer), had been retained in service against the vacant post of Programmer.
He sought the order for adjusting the petitioner against the post of Programmer.
However, the petitioner's services were terminated on October 12, 1992 (Ann.
P. 5).
In this order it was mentioned that the petitioner's services were being terminated as System Analyst w.e.f.
October 12, 1992 (AN).
According to the petitioner, the order of this Court issued in C.W.P.
No. 7865 of 1991 still in operation, the termination order was in violation of the same, the respondents were guilty of contempt.
The petitioner filed a contempt petition which was disposed of with the directions that the petitioner's case may also be considered alongwith others for the appointment to the post of Programmers.
The order appointing the petitioner as Programmer was issued on February 1, 1993 and he joined on February 2, 1993.
The petitioner claims that he having rendered more than two years continuous service as on March 31, 1993, is entitled to regularisation against the post of Programmer in terms of Haryana Government instructions dated May 27, 1993.
4.
In response to the notice of motion, the respondents have filed the reply.
The stand of the respondents inter alia is that the petitioner was given fresh appointment as Programmer on February 1, 1993 and his previous service from December 11, 1990 to October 12, 1992 cannot be counted as there is break in service from October 12, 1992 to February 1, 1993.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that initially the respondents had sent requisition for the post of Programmer and after having been selected to the post of Programmer, he was posted as System Analyst (Programmer).
In other words he was performing the duties of two posts i.e. System Analyst and Programmer.
For all intents and purposes the petitioner was also holding the post of Programmer while discharging the duties of System Analyst also.
Thereafter on Mohd.
Ishtique's joining as System Analyst, the petitioner was adjusted against the post of Programmer, the duties of which he was already performing as is clear from letter dated September 19, 1992, (copy Annexure R.3) written by the Principal to the Director, Technical Education, Haryana.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as was ordered in the earlier writ petition of the petitioner (Civil Writ Petition No. 7865 of 1991) disposed of on September 18, 1991 the petitioner's services were not to be terminated from the post held by him till a regular selection was made.
The petitioner had been earlier selected as a Programmer and was appointed as a System Analyst-cum-Programmer and the petitioner's services could only be terminated if a regular incumbent to the post of Programmer had come.
On the appointment of a person to the post of System Analyst, the petitioner's services could not be terminated and he had to be continued as a Programmer.
This led the petitioner to file a contempt petition, which was disposed of vide order dated January 12, 1993, copy Annexure P-7, with the direction that the petitioner's case be considered for appointment as Programmer.
The petitioner was again appointed as Programmer on February 2, 1993.
Since, according to learned counsel for the petitioner, the alleged break in service from October 12, 1992, to February 1, 1993 was due to no fault of the petitioner but in fact was in violation of the order of this Court in the earlier writ petition of the petitioner referred to above, the break in service should be condoned or not taken into consideration and the order copy Annexure P-14 issued on behalf of the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Technical Education Department, by which the Director, Technical Education, Haryana, has been informed that the services of the petitioner cannot be regularised because of break of more than one month in service is liable to be quashed.
7.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner was given a fresh appointment as a Programmer on February 2, 1993 and therefore, the break in service from October 12, 1992, to February 1, 1993, could not be condoned.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that from the facts, it is clear that the petitioner had earlier been selected as a Programmer and he was appointed as a System Analyst-cum-Programmer and his services should not have been terminated when the incumbent to the post of System Analyst had joined as the post of Programmer was still vacant.
It had been ordered in Civil Writ Petition No. 7865 of 1991 that the petitioner's services would not be terminated till a regular incumbent of Programmer joins the post.
The post of Programmer was vacant as it was sought to be filled again and the petitioner was given appointment letter on February 2, 1993.
9.
On peculiar facts of this case, we are of the view that there should not have been any break in service of the petitioner from October 12, 1992, to February 1, 1993.
If this break is ignored, the petitioner would become entitled to regularisation in view of the instructions of the Haryana Government.
10.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition, quash order, copy Annexure P- 14, and direct the respondents to consider the case of regularisation of the petitioner in accordance with the policy, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-1 with the written statement, by ignoring the break in service from October 12, 1992, to February 1, 1993.
We made it clear that this cordoning of break in service would be only for the purposes of considering the case of regularisation and not for payment of arrears of pay etc. Let these directions be carried out within two months of the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy of the same from the petitioner.