N K Sodhi, J - What is challenged in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is the order of the Chairman of the Punjab School Education Board (for short, the Board) dated March 23, 1994 whereby he cancelled the examination of the 12th class in the paper of Physics held on 18.3.1994 at Malwa College, Bondli examination had been violated as a consequence of unfair assistance rendered to the examinees at that centre.
2.
Petitioners took 10 plus 2 examination (Science Group) conducted by the Board in March, 1994.
The centre of their examination was Malwa College, Bondli (Samrala) District Ludhiana.
As per the date sheet, the examination commenced on 1731994 and the last paper was on 641994.
The examination in the paper of Physics was held on 18.3.1994.
While the examination was going on, Mr. Buta Ram, Assistant Secretary of the Board inspected the centre at Malwa College, Bondli on 18.3.1994 at 1100 am and he remained there till 1150 am In his report given in the prescribed proforma, he found no case of copying and in the column pertaining to `overall report about centre' his comments were ``Centre is OK But the instructions given be complied with.''
It appears that he also submitted a detailed report to the Board on the same day regarding the conduct of the examination held on March 18, 1994 at the aforesaid centre.
In this report, he stated that on search of the candidates no incriminating material was found because prior to him the District Education Officer had already inspected the centre.
He further stated in his report that the centre had four candidates of Government Senior Secondary School, Katani, one candidate of Government Senior Secondary School, Samrala, besides one more private candidate in spite of the fact that these candidates had been allotted centre at Government Senior Secondary School, Samrala.
He also noticed on his arrival at the centre that one lecturer of the College who had a chalk in his hand had come out of the centre and from this, he inferred that efforts had been made to seek the help of this lecturer in solving the questions for the candidates at this centre.
On verification he also found that a candidate having roll number 65065 was taking her examination at the centre although no roll number had been issued to her by the school and that she was the daughter of the Principal of the College at Bondli.
The Assistant Secretary is said to have issued instructions to the Centre Superintendent not to allow the candidates to take the remaining papers at this centre and that they be directed to take the examinations at the centres allotted to them.
On the basis of his inspection of the examination centre on 18.3.1994, he recommended that Physics paper held at Malwa College, Bondli on 18.3.1994 be cancelled and all the science students of Malwa College, Bondli be shifted from this College.
The Chairman of the Board after going through the report of Shri Buta Ram felt satisfied that the sanctity of the examination had been violated as a consequence of unfair assistance rendered to the examinees or the examinees themselves resorted to mass copying during the examination of 12th class in the paper of Physics held on 18.3.1994 at Malwa College, Bondli.
While exercising his powers under Chapter VI of the Punjab School Education Board General Regulations of Examinations read with Regulation 28 of the Punjab School Education Board (Penalties for Misconduct and Use of Unfair Means in the Matriculation and Higher Secondary Examinations) Regulations, 1979, the Chairman by his order dated 2331994 cancelled the examination in the paper of Physics held on 18.3.1994 at the aforesaid centre and ordered re-examination in that paper as per schedule issued separately.
In pursuance of this order, the petitioners received a communication dated April 26, 1994 informing them about the said order.
They were also informed that they had to appear again in the examination in the subject of Physics on 13.5.1994 at a different centre at Ludhiana.
It is this communication as also the order passed by the Chairman on 2331994 that have been impugned in this petition.
3.
At the outset it may be mentioned that the learned counsel appearing for the Board pointed out that the examination centre at Malwa College, Bondli was inspected by the Flying Squad of the Board on 1831994 and it found grave irregularities committed by the examinees which violated the sanctity of the examination and the Flying Squad submitted its detailed report to the Board on the basis of which the Chairman passed the impugned order dated 2331994.
He further submitted that that report is not available on the records of the Board and all that is available is the report of the Assistant Secretary of the Board who inspected the examination centre on 18.3.1994.
However, in the written statement filed on behalf of the Board reliance has been placed only on the report of Shri Buta Ram, Assistant Secretary.
Since no report of the Flying Squad has been produced in Court nor any reference has been made to it in the written statement, the Court cannot take notice of the same.
4.
Now, I come to the report of the Assistant Secretary (Conduct) on the basis of which the impugned order has been passed by the Chairman cancelling the examination in the paper of Physics of Class 12th.
It is clear from the record that he submitted two reports.
The first one is on the prescribed proforma and was written on the spot at the time of inspection.
In this report (Annexure P2 with the writ petition), he has categorically stated that he did not find any case of copying at the aforesaid centre.
His overall report regarding the centre was `OK' but he has referred to some instructions presumably given to the Centre Superintendent which the letter was required to comply with.
From this report, it cannot by any process of reasoning be inferred that the sanctity of the examination at the centre was violated.
The other report which he submitted to the Board on the same day is a detailed one.
In this report also he did not find any incriminating material with any candidate at the centre even though they were searched.
The irregularities that he found at the centre are as under :-  (i) 4 candidates of Government Senior Secondary School, Katani, one candidate of Government Senior Secondary School, Samrala besides one more private candidate were found taking examination at the centre although they have been allotted centre at Government Senior Secondary School, Samrala.
(ii) On his arrival at the centre he found one lecturer of the College coming out of the centre with a chalk in his hand.
(iii) A candidate belonging to Samrala school was seated at this centre who had not been issued any roll number by the school and she on verification turned out to be the daughter of the Principal of the College at Bondli.
The first and the third irregularity noticed by the Assistant Secretary may be serious enough for taking disciplinary action against the supervisory staff including the Centre Superintendent and even against those candidates who had taken the examination at the centre which was not allotted to them.
These irregularities, however, serious cannot be said to have violated the sanctity of the entire examination at the centre so as to punish all the candidates by ordering their re-examination.
5.
Now coming to the irregularity mentioned at (ii) above.
It is true that the Assistant Secretary of the Board found a lecturer of the College coming out of the centre with a chalk in his hand.
From this Shri Buta Ram has drawn an inference that efforts were made to seek the help of this lecturer in getting the questions solved for the candidates at the centre.
He does not say that he held any enquiry and discovered that the lecturer who has come out of the centre had in fact solved the questions for the candidates.
He did not even make an enquiry as to who the lecturer was.
Was he a lecturer in Physics or in any other subject is also not known though learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that he was a Punjabi lecturer who had no concern with the paper of Physics.
Be that as it may, it was necessary for the Assistant Secretary to have probed the matter further when he became suspicious on seeing a lecturer coming out of the examination hall with a chalk in his hand.
In the absence of any other evidence, it is ridiculous to say that the sanctity of the entire examination was violated merely because Shri Buta Ram saw a lecturer coming out of the centre with a chalk in his hand and it is surprising that the Chairman has relied on this innocuous circumstance to cancel the examination of the entire centre.
If the Assistant Secretary had made some enquiry and found that the lecturer who had come out of the centre had in fact solved the questions for the examinees in the hall, the Court could have accepted his version and upheld the impugned order.
On the other hand, when the Assistant Secretary gave his report in the prescribed proforma at the time of inspection he stated that overall report about the centre was `OK'.
He did not mention any such irregularity in the report which he made at the spot.
In this view of the matter, it is difficult to rely on the inference that he has drawn from what he saw at the centre.
It is true that the problem regarding adoption of unfair means by the examinees at the centre is a serious problem which Educational Institutions like the Board have to face from time to time.
No doubt that in the matter of adoption of unfair means sometimes direct evidence is not available and the question may have to be considered and decided in the light of probabilities and circumstantial evidence.
But, nevertheless the proceedings taken by these institutions against the examinees are quasi-judicial in nature and they cannot be allowed to act on mere suspicion without there being any evidence.
The present is a case of no evidence whatsoever and the Chairman while passing the impugned order was not justified in acting on such a report of the Assistant Secretary and his order in these circumstances cannot, therefore, be sustained.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of the Chairman cancelling the examination in the paper of Physics quashed in so far as it pertains to the petitioners and the Board is directed to declare their result on the basis of the examination taken by them on 18.3.1994.
Parties to bear their own costs.