TS Doabia, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is not necessary to go into the merits of the controversy.
This is because the appellate order in this case has been passed without affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
2.
The brief facts out of which this petition arises are.
3.
The petitioner was an officer of the respondent-State Bank of Indore.
For certain acts of omission and commission, disciplinary proceedings were taken against him.
Thereafter, the disciplinary authority imposed the punishment of removal from service.
Against the order, the petitioner preferred an appeal to the appellate authority.
The appeal was decided by the appellate authority.
Copy of this has been placed on the record as Annexure P/4.
4.
One of the contentions raised by the present petitioner is that the appellate authority did not afford opportunity of personal hearing to him.
The necessary averments are contained in para 6 of the petition.
These read as under :-  "That, the petitioner being aggrieved against the order of removal from service preferred appeal to respondent No. 2.
The respondent No. 2 without giving any opportunity of hearing the in petitioner and without considering illegality and irregularity committed in enquiry and at the time of imposing penalty, dismissed the appeal of the petitioner."
The reply given to this para may also be perused.
This reads as under :-  "The appellate authority considered the entire record of the enquiry report of Enquiring Authority, order passed by the punishing authority and the contents of the appeal.
The appellate authority agreed with the conclusions of the findings and rejected the appeal."
5.
The above averments made in the petition and the reply to the same make it apparent that the petitioner was not afforded a personal hearing.
As a matter of fact, he was also not afforded personal hearing by the disciplinary authority as well.
6.
The requirement on the part of the appellate authority to afford a hearing and to pass a speaking order was indicated in the case of Ram Chander v Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 1173.
The Supreme Court observed as under :-  "Whether a hearing given on appeal is an acceptable substitute for a hearing not given, or not properly given, before the initial decision is in some cases an arguable question.
In principle there ought to be an observance of natural justice equally at both stages ....
If natural justice is violated at the first stage, the right of appeal is not so much a true right of appeal as a corrected initial hearing : instead of fair trial followed by appeal, the procedure is reduced to unfair trial followed by fair trial."
After referring to Megarry, J.'s dictum in a trade union expulsion case holding that, as a general rule a failure of natural justice in the trial body cannot be cured by a sufficiency of natural justice in the appellate body, the learned author observes :  "Nevertheless it is always possible that some statutory scheme may imply that the 'appeal' is to be the only hearing necessary."
xx xx xx "It is not necessary for our purposes to go into the vexed question whether a post-decisional hearing is a substitute of the denial of a right of hearing at the initial stage or the observance of the rules of natural justice since the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case (AIR 1985 SC 1416) unequivocally lays down that the only stage at which a Government servant gets a 'reasonable opportunity' of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him i.e., an opportunity to exonerate himself from the charge by showing that the evidence adduced at the inquiry is not worthy of credence or consideration or that the charges proved against him are not of such a character as to merit the extreme penalty of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank and that any of the lesser punishments ought to have been sufficient in is case, is at the stage of hearing of a departmental appeal, such being the legal position, it is of utmost importance after the Forth-Second Amendment as interpreted by the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case that the appellate authority must not only give a hearing to the Government servant concerned but also pass a reasoned order dealing with the contentions raised by him in the appeal."
Thus, the order passed by the appellate authority which was passed without affording hearing and without affording proper opportunity, is liable to be quashed.
7.
It may be seen that the following contentions have been raised by the petitioner :-  (i) that the charge-sheet which was served on the petitioner was vague; (ii) the charge-sheet was not as per the requirements of rules; (iii) that about 35 documents which were placed on the record were not looked into by the disciplinary authority, appellate authority and the authority enquiring into the disciplinary proceedings.
According to the petitioner, these are all documents from the record of the bank and could very well be verified whether they are genuine or not.
This has materially prejudiced his case.
There is a clear violation of giving a reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
(iv) the copies of the documents mentioned in the appeal were not given to him.
These pertain to the charge handed over by the petitioner at the time of transfer.
According to the petitioner, these were material documents because all the liability has been fastened on the petitioner after he was transferred from the Branch.
(v) The report of the auditor has also not been given to the petitioner.
8.
These are some of the contentions which have been raised by the petitioner.
9.
This petition is disposed of with the direction that the appellate authority shall decide the points raised by the petitioner in this petition in addition to the points already raised or to be raised at the time of personal hearing.
The appellate authority should decide the appeal afresh within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date of the copy of the order of this Court is made available to the appellate authority.
The appellate authority would be at liberty to approach this Court for extension of time in case there is some practical difficulty in disposing the appeal within the aforesaid period of three months.
Security be refunded to the petitioner.