GH Guttal, J - The petitioner a Sub Inspector in the Central Industrial Security Force, Palghat, (the CISF for short) impugns the validity of order No. E28013/GHM/Ad.IV/93-10123 dated 2891993 (Ext.
P1) whereby the Group Commandant of the CISF, the respondent No. 2, in exercise of his power under clause (j) of Rule 56 of the Fundamental Rules retired the petitioner from service in public interest.
The Union of India is the respondent No. 1.
2.
No details of service of the petitioner such as the date of appointment, the length of service, the past record from the confidential rolls have been stated either in the petition or in the counter affidavit of the Group Commandant.
The only fact set out of the parties, is the report of the Review Committee and the grounds on which the impugned order was made.
3.
The Review Committee whose findings led to the impugned order considered the petitioner's continuance in service "on the basis of the imposed punishments."
There is no other reason for the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
Neither the petitioner nor the respondents have stated the dates on which the punishments were imposed.
The catalogue of punishments set out by the respondents is this :  (i) A warning for handing over the pistol to a constable while the petitioner was posted at CISF Unit, BHEL Haridwar.
(ii) Censure for loss of identity card, while he was posted at Rishikesh.
(iii) A fine was imposed for overstaying on leave from 1611992 to 9.2.1992 while he was at Rishikesh.
(iv) A warning for absenting from Unit lines.
(v) Reduction of pay by three stages with cumulative effect for desertion from Internal Security duty at Chandigarh along with Arms and Ammunition.
(vi) Fine for failure to vacate the family accommodation and disobedience of orders.
4.
The petitioner urges that the power to retire him compulsorily under Fundamental Rule 56(j) has been exercised with the object of punishing him for the past misconduct.
Although the impugned order uses the words "public interest" the retirement is intended to punish him.
5.
The judgments of the Supreme Court in Ram Ekbal Sharma v. State of Bihar & another, 1993(3) SCT 621 (SC) : AIR 1990 SC 1368, Baikuntha Nath Das & another v. Chief District Medical Officer, 1992(2) SCT 92 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 1020 and the judgment of this Court in C.J.
Joseph v State of Kerala & Others, 1987(1) KLT 405, lay down the principles governing the validity of orders of compulsory retirement.
Compulsory retirement due to grave dereliction of duty and a lack of sense of responsibility as in CJ.
Joseph v State of Kerala & Others, 1987(1) KLT 405, or based on a report indicting the employee of commission of grave financial irregularities as in Ram Ekbal Sharma v. State of Bihar & another, AIR 1990 SC 1368 : 1993(3) S.C.T.
621, are in reality dismissal or removal in disguise.
However, innocuous the language of the order of retirement is, the Court can lift the veil and Judge whether the order of retirement is in reality a punishment for misconduct.
If the order is found to have disguised the real intent to remove an employee with stigma on his character there is a clear violation of Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the order becomes illegal.
The test in all such cases is whether the order of retirement casts aspersion or attaches stigma to the employee.
If the answer is in the affirmative the order of retirement must be held to be removal or dismissal.
6.
In this case the petitioner has been retired not cause he has become worthless dead wood to the service but because in the past he had been punished for various acts of misconduct.
The counter affidavit of the respondents makes no secret of the fact that the petitioner's continued presence in the service is considered undesirable by reason of the fact that he was punished for misconduct.
Nor do the respondents conceal their opinion that the petitioner lacks sense of responsibility.
That is why they say :  "On the other hand, the petitioner has also certain responsibilities towards the organisation........ lack of which has been exhibited by the petitioner.
Hence the Review Committee did not find him suitable for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years."
If one reads the impugned order in the light of the respondent's contentions in the counter affidavit the conclusion that follows is that the respondents found the petitioner undesirable because of the fact that he was in the past punished for different acts of misconduct.
Therefore the respondents while making the impugned order concealed their real intention to get rid of the petitioner whose presence they found was undesirable and made the order which sounds innocuous and apparently within Rule 56(j) of the Fundamental Rules.
The real intention of the respondents was to remove the petitioner from service because due to his acts of misconduct he was considered undesirable.
The circumstances of this case show that there is a clear aspersion of misconduct which is concealed by the impugned order.
7.
In my opinion, on a plain reading of the order in light of the reasons which led the Review Committee to recommend retirement I have no doubt that the impugned order is intended to punish the petitioner for acts of past misconduct.
No fact such as the adverse remarks in the confidential reports suggesting that the petitioner has become deadwood and needs to be chopped off are discernible from the record.
8.
In the result the OP is allowed.
The impugned order No. E28013/GHM/Ad.
IV/9310123 dated 2891993 (Ext.
P1) made by the Group Commandant, Central Industrial Security Force, Anna Nagar East, Madras - 102, is quashed.
I direct the respondents to reinstate the petitioner back in service as if the impugned order were never made.
Appeal allowed.