GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner retired from service on 30th June, 1988 while holding the post of Chief Accounts Officer.
After retirement he was paid all post-retiral dues except the amount of gratuity.
Petitioner made several representations to the respondents for release of his gratuity but he remained unsuccessful in persuading the authorities of the department to release the gratuity.
Having failed in his attempt to get relief from the administrative authorities, he filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued to the respondents to pay him the amount of gratuity (Rs. 50,000/-) along with interest @ 18% per annum.
2.
Respondents have justified the withholding of the gratuity payable to the petitioner on the ground that a case under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act had been registered against the petitioner and one Shri OP Bhagat.
They have further stated that in more than one case Vigilance Enquiries were pending against the petitioner and due to pendency of the criminal case and the Vigilance Enquiries, the Government had withheld the amount of gratuity.
Respondents have also stated that a huge amount running into thousands of rupees was recoverable from the petitioner, and in order to protect P-2 the public interest, the Government had withheld the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner.
3.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the First Information Report of which reference has been made by the respondents was subsequently filed and no departmental enquiry had been initiated against the petitioner under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1970, till the date of his retirement and, therefore, it was not open to the respondents to withhold the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner on the date of his retirement.
He also pointed out that by an order dated 20th December, 1991, Shri OP Bhagat who was arrayed as a co-delinquent with the petitioner in one of the vigilance cases has been punished with a penalty of recovery of Rs. 1000/- but no case has been instituted against the petitioner.
He also invited my attention towards annexure P-6 dated 1081992 whereby the Government decided not to institute an enquiry against the petitioner in the light of prohibition contained in Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II.
4.
Learned Assistant Advocate General has argued that the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner was withheld in the light of the First Information Report as well as the Vigilance Enquiries pending against the petitioner.
5.
Pension payable to an employee after his retirement has been held to be his property in Devkinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1971 SC 1409, a view which has been reiterated in all its subsequent decisions by the apex Court.
Gratuity payable to an employee on his retirement is also a post-retiral benefit akin to pension and this amount is payable to the employee on the date of his retirement is empowered to withhold payment of gratuity and full pension where a departmental enquiry or a judicial proceeding is pending against the employee on the date of his retirement.
An additional power has been conferred on the Government under Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules to institute a departmental enquiry against an employee even after his retirement.
Of course before a departmental proceeding can be instituted under Rule 2.2(b), the contents enumerated in proviso (2) to Rule 2.2 (b) have to be satisfied.
6.
A departmental enquiry can be said to have been initiated against an employee when a charge-sheet is issued to him.
Till the issue of charge-sheet enquiry can be treated as one under contemplation.
In PR Nayak v Union of India, AIR 1972 (..) 219, the apex Court interpreted Rule 3(3) of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969, and held that departmental enquiry cannot be treated as initiated till the date of issue of charge-sheet.
Though word 'institute' has been used in Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules, in my opinion the interpretation given by the Supreme Court to the word 'institute' can aptly be applied for interpretation of the word instituted used in Rule 2.2(b).
Therefore, a departmental proceeding cannot be said to have been instituted against an employee under the relevant punishment Appeal Rules as also under Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules till the issue of the charge-sheet.
7.
In the instant case, it is an admitted position that the enquiries of which reference has been made in the reply of the respondents were being made by the Vigilance Department.
They were in the nature of preliminary enquiries and not departmental proceedings.
This conclusion is fortified from the fact that no charge-sheet had been issued to the petitioner either before his retirement or even after his retirement.
In fact Annexure P-6 dated 1081992 conclusively establishes that no enquiry was pending against the petitioner on the date of his retirement and none was instituted within the time limit specified in Rule 2.2(b).
8.
In view of the above conclusion it must be held that action of the respondents in withholding the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner was without jurisdiction and the petitioner has been deprived of his property right by virtue of omission of respondents to pay him the gratuity payable on the date of his retirement.
Right to property is no more a part of fundamental rights under Part-III of the Constitution of India.
Nevertheless it is a constitutional right and by virtue of Article 220-A, it is clear that no person can be deprived of his property except in accordance with law.
Denial of gratuity to the petitioner, which is not supported by any provision of law, is, therefore, contrary to Article 300-A as well.
9.
Consequently the writ petition is allowed.
Respondents are directed to release the amount of gratuity payable to the petitioner within a period of one month.
The respondents are also directed to make payment of the interest to the petitioner on the amount of gratuity @ 6% pa. with effect from 171988.
Petition allowed.