GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to treat him as confirmed Forest Ranger with effect from 191966 and to give him promotion against the vacancy reserved for Scheduled caste.
He has also prayed that appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 to the Punjab Forest Service Class-II be declared illegal and they be ousted from the posts held by them.
Appointment of respondent No. 8 has also been challenged on the ground that he was not eligible to be appointed against the reserved vacancy.
2.
In brief the case set up by the petitioner is that he was selected by the Punjab Subordinate Service Selection Board for appointment as Forest Ranger (Stipendary) and in the list prepared by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, his name was placed at No. 1 in the order of merit.
He was sent for training at the Northern Forest Ranger College, Dehradoon.
After successful completion of training, the petitioner was appointed as Forest Ranger on temporary basis in the pay scale of Rs. 100-300 with effect from 1101963 vide order dated 2881963 issued by the Chief Conservator of Forest, Punjab.
A number of persons who were appointed along with the petitioner were confirmed as Forest Rangers vide order dated 27/28101966 (Annexure P/5).
That order included names of persons who were lower in merit than the petitioner at the time of selection.
By another order dated 671971, 7 termporary/officiating Forest Rangers were confirmed with effect from the different dates specified in that order.
The petitioner was confirmed vide order dated 30.12.1977 (Annexure P/7).
Persons junior to the petitioner were promoted to Punjab Forest Service Class II vide orders Annexure P/8 and P/10.
The petitioner has pleaded that on the basis of his placement in the merit list prepared by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, he had a right to be preferred in the matter of confirmation vis-a-vis his juniors and the respondents have arbitrarily denied him confirmation with effect from 191966 i.e. the date when his juniors were confirmed.
Likewise, the respondents have discriminated him by placing him junior to those who were below him in the merit list prepared by the Subordinate Service Selection Board.
Yet another plea raised by the petitioner is that being a member of the Scheduled Caste, he had a right to be preferred in the matter of promotion for Punjab Forest Service Class II but ignoring his claim junior persons have been given promotion.
3.
The respondents have contested the writ petition by stating that none of the legal or fundamental rights of the petitioner had been infringed.
They have further pleaded that selection made by the Subordinate Service Selection Board was meant for sending the candidates for training.
Placement of the petitioner at serial No. 1 in the merit list prepared by the Subordinate Service Selection Board does not entitle him to claim seniority over others.
Respondents have then stated that when the result of the final examination was declared by the Forest Ranger College, Dehradoon, name of the petitioner figured at Serial No. 15 and seniority of the candidates was determined with effect from the date of substantive appointment.
Regarding the claim of the petitioner for confirmation, respondents have pleaded that confirmation of a temporary appointee depends upon many factors, like satisfactory service record and that although petitioner's candidature was considered for confirmation along with other temporary Forest Rangers, due to his bad record, he was not found fit for confirmation.
He was confirmed in the year 1977 with effect from 2861974.
Consequently, those who were confirmed earlier than the petitioner have been treated as senior to him and they have been rightly given promotion to Punjab Forest Service Class II posts.
In short the case of the respondents in that candidature of the petitioner had been considered as and when other temporary Forest Rangers were considered for confirmation but on account of bad service record, he was not found fit for confirmation.
Others who were found fit for confirmation were confirmed by the competent authority and the seniority of the substantive employees have been determined in accordance with the Rule 13 of the Punjab Forest Service Class II Rules, 1944.
4.
Two fold arguments have been advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the first place he argued that the petitioner was wrongly denied confirmation with effect from 191966.
Learned counsel contended that it was not permissible for the respondents to ignore the merit of the petitioner while considering his claim for confirmation.
Elaborating his contention learned counsel argued that once the Subordinate Service Selection Board had assigned merit No. 1 to the petitioner, the same should have been kept in view by the competent authority while making substantive appointment in the cadre of Forest Ranger.
He argued that it was not permissible for the respondent to have confirmed junior persons with effect from 191966 overlooking the claim of the petitioner.
Second argument of learned counsel is that seniority in the cadre of Forest Ranger should have been determined strictly in accordance with the merit list prepared by the Subordinate Service Selection Board and the date of confirmation should not be made the basis while determining seniority.
Another argument advanced by learned counsel is that promotion of persons junior to him has resulted in infringement of the fundamental right of equality available to the petitioner under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Mrs. Tuli learned Assistant Advocate General argued that merit assigned to the petitioner at the time of initial selection by the Subordinate Service Selection Board does not entitle him to claim seniority.
She pointed out the selection made by the Subordinate Service Selection Board did not confer any right upon the petitioner to be appointed in the service.
A candidate could be appointed in the service only after successful completion of the training at Forest Ranger College, Dehradoon, argued Mrs. Tuli.
She further argued that the candidature of the petitioner had been considered by the competent authority as and when temporary Forest Rangers were to be confirmed and on two occasions the petitioner was not found suitable for confirmation.
Mrs. Tuli argued that as and when permanent vacancy in the cadre of Forest Ranger became available the departmental authority examined the record of all eligible persons and accorded substantive confirmation to those who were found suitable.
She then contended that even though the petitioner may be entitled to be considered for benefit of promotion against the reserved quota post, such consideration could be made only in accordance with the provisions of rule and when the petitioner was not considered to be senior qua respondents No. 4 to 8, he cannot make any grievance for denial of promotion.
5.
Mrs. Tuli has produced before the court record of the department in order to substantiate her plea that candidature of the petitioner was considered when confirmation of other temporary Forest Rangers was undertaken by the departmental authority.
6.
In regard to the claim of the petitioner for confirmation with effect from 191966, it is necessary to observe that this petition had been filed in the year 1981, and the last order for confirmation of a person allegedly junior to the petitioner was as early as in the year 1971.
The petitioner had filed appeals/representations against his non-confirmation and the same had been rejected by the Government on 2551976 and 4.5.1977.
The petitioner has not offered any cogent explanation for the delay of over 10 years in the filing of the writ petition calculated from the date of last order of confirmation issued in favour of one of his alleged juniors.
Even after the rejection of his representation/appeal by the Government, there has been delay of four years in filing the petition.
This unexplained delay on the part of the petitioner is by itself sufficient to reject the prayer of the petitioner in so far as it involves a challenge to the period confirmation of his alleged juniors.
Respondent Nos. 4 to 8 have derived benefit on account of their earlier confirmation and had enjoyed that benefit at least one decade prior to the filing of the petition.
As on date, a period of more than 25 ears has elapsed, in regard to some of the respondents and almost 23 years in respect of other respondents.
In my considered view this unexplained delay of one decade is by itself sufficient to disentitle the petitioner to any relief under Article 226 of the Constitution.
This view of mine is fortified from the judgments of the Supreme Court in PS Sadashiva Swamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1976(1) S.L.R.
53 and Roshan Lal v. International Airport Authority, A.I.R. 1981 SC 597.
7.
That apart, I am further of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner to be treated as senior to the respondents is wholly untenable.
Rule 13 of 1994 Rules deals with seniority.
This rule reads as under :-  "(1) The seniority of members of the service shall in each class of appointments shown in Appendix "A" be determined by the dates of their substantive appointment to a permanent vacancy in such class.
Provided that if two or more members are appointed on the same date, members promoted from the service shall take rank in the order of seniority above members appointed direct.
(2) In the case of members, who are promoted from the service seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member drawing a higher rate of pay, and if the rates of pay drawn are the same seniority shall be determined According to length of service, preference being given to a member having of longer service, and if the length of service is also the same, seniority shall be determined according to age, the older member being senior to the younger member; (3) In the case of members who are appointed direct the older member shall be senior to the younger, Provided further that if any member is reverted to his former post, and is subsequently re-appointed to the post from which he reverted, the date of his appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be such date as the appointing authority may determine."
A perusal of the above quoted rule shows that seniority is to be determined from the date of substantive appointment against permanent vacancy.
Initial appointment of the petitioner as well as respondent Nos. 4 to 8 had been made against temporary vacancies.
As and when permanent vacancies became available, respondent No. 2 considered the claim of temporary appointees for appointment against such vacancies.
Annexures P/5 and P/6 and other documents which are available in the record produced before the court by learned Assistant Advocate General show that as and when permanent vacancies became available, temporary appointees brought on the permanent establishment and confirmed in their appointment.
Admittedly the petitioner was brought on the permanent establishment with effect from the year 1974 vide order dated 30.12.1977.
It is thus clear that the petitioner was appointed against permanent vacancy almost 8 years after the appointment of respondents 4 to 8 against permanent vacancies.
This being the fact situation, the petitioner cannot make a grievance that he has been discriminated in the matter of assignment of seniority.
8.
Before me there is no challenge to the vires of rule 13 of 1944 Rules and, therefore, I am not required to examine the question as to whether the date of confirmation could be made basis for determination of seniority amongst the regularly selected persons.
9.
Claim of the petitioner that he has been discriminated in the matter of promotion cannot but be termed as misconceived.
Once it is held that the department had rightly treated respondents 4 to 8 as senior to him, there can be no manner of doubt that promotion of such persons does not suffer from any illegality.
10.
On the basis of above discussion, it is held that the writ petition is without merit.
Consequently, it is dismissed.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.