RP Sethi, J - Heard.
The respondents who are legal advisers in the Punjab Roadways prayed and were granted the relief of parity of pay with the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation w.e.f.
111978 vide the judgment impugned in this appeal.
2 It has been contended that as the different qualifications were prescribed at the time of initial appointment of the respondents and all the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation, the learned Single Judge could not have granted the relief prayed for.
The submission is without any basis inasmuch as the qualification prescribed for the respondents and the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation was LL.B.
though it was mentioned that the persons to be eligible for appointment as Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation should have obtained a degree of LL.B.
in first class which was not the case so far as the writ petitioners were concerned.
It is not disputed that for both the posts, minimum requisite educational qualification was a degree in Law and for those having first class degree, the period for experience was prescribed as two years whereas for those who had not acquired degree in first class, the period of experience was for three years.
It is next contended that as the parity of the salary was not granted after the year 1983, the writ petitioners could not have been granted the relief as was done by the learned Single Judge.
However, the fact of the matter is the pay scales of the writ petitioners and of the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation were treated to be equal till 1983.
There appears to be a conscious decision on the part of the respondents to grant parity in the scales of pay which was withdrawn afterwards without assigning any reasonable ground.
3.
This Court in Haryana State Biologists Association v. The State of Haryana and another, 1994(2) S.L.R.
389, held that once a parity in the pay scales of the employees in two categories is granted, the same cannot be withdrawn and the parity disturbed.
It was further held that once the State is shown to have made a conscious decision of providing parity in the pay scales of employees failing in two different cadres, they cannot be permitted to deprive one class or category by disturbing the parity.
Any order passed or action taken which results in deprivation of the parity in the pay scales would be discriminatory being violative of the provisions of Article 16 of Constitution requiring interference.
4.
The Supreme Court in The Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India Ltd and another v. Union of India and others, 1991(2) SCT 399 (SC) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
131 considered the case of employees of two Corporations and came to the conclusion that once it is shown that there was parity in the pay scales of the employees falling in various categories, the same could not be disturbed.
To the same effect are the judgments of this Court in RS Sharma v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(3) SCT 228 (P&H) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
168, Kirpal Jeet v. State of Punjab and another, 1987(4) S.L.R.
594 and Harsaran Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
384.
5.
Otherwise, also the learned Single Judge has rightly held.
"The nature of work performed by the Legal Assistants in the two departments is almost identical though the petitioners contend that their duties both quantatively and qualitatively are higher than those of their counterparts in the Department of Law and Legislation.
The second pay commission in its recommendation has noticed the different types of duties performed by the Legal Assistants both in the Transport Department as well as in the Department of Law and Legislation and other departments where these posts exist and finding them almost similar recommended a uniform scale of pay for all the Legal Assistants throughout the State."
6.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has not been in a position to point out any other infirmity in the judgment impugned.
7.
There is no merit in the appeal which is hereby dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.