VK Bali, J - The prayer of petitioners is for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant revised pay scales to them which stems from the following facts.
2.
It is an admitted position that all the petitioners were appointed on the posts of Accounts Clerk/Stenographers and Manager Accounts on various dates as duly reflected in paragraph 3 of the petition.
It is also admitted position that the petitioners submitted resignations on various dates from October 7, 1988 to March 31, 1990 which are duly reflected in paragraph 4 of this petition.
It is also admitted position that the pay scales of employees of respondent No. 2 were revised by the Government and the same were adopted by the Milkfed vide order dated June 5, 1989 with effect from January 1, 1986.
The Punjab State Co-operative Milk Producers Federation Limited respondent adopted the recommendations of Third Punjab Pay Commission as accepted by the Punjab Government and communicated by the Registrar Co-operative Societies Punjab respondent No. 1 vide order dated June 2, 1989 (Annexure P-10).
A specific direction was given to the Milkfed Head Office as well as District Co-operative Milk Unions etc. that the recommendations of Third Punjab Pay Commission be implemented and pay of the employees in the revised pay scales be fixed.
It is also admitted position that the pay of the petitioners was also fixed in the revised pay scales by various orders dated August 18, 1989, May 24, 1989, August 18, 1989 and August 11, 1989 respectively.
It is also admitted position that the pay scale for the post of Accounts Clerk on which post petitioner No. 1 was appointed was revised to Rs. 1350-2400 and that the revised pay scales of Stenographers in Rs. 1200-2100 plus Rs. 60/- as special pay and that of Manager Accounts was revised to Rs. 3000-4500.
The case of the petitioners is that they have even approached the respondents a number of times so as to be paid the arrears of revised pay scales but no action at all has been taken in the matter.
It is further the case that even arrears of leave encashment have not been paid to them.
To highlight the highhandedness of the respondents, the case of petitioners is also that revised pay scales have been paid to number of persons reference of which has been given in paragraph 10 of the petition even though there was no distinction in their case and that of the persons mentioned above as they too like the petitioners had left the service of Milkfed.
The petitioners even sent notices for redressal of their grievances but the obstinate attitude adopted by them had left the petitioners with no choice but for to seek an appropriate writ or direction from this Court.
3.
The only contest raised by the respondents is that the employees of Milkfed have not been granted the arrears due to revision of pay scales for the reason that the Punjab State Co-operative Milk Producers' Federation is running under tremendous loss and, therefore as per policy decision, the arrears have to be phased out by way of instalments and it has not been decided so far as to how, when and in what instalments the arrears have to be phased out.
The liability is sought to be contested on yet another ground that the petitioners having resigned prior to the adoption of revision of pay scales irrespective of the fact that the same were revised and adopted from a date when the petitioners were admittedly in service, they would not be entitled for the same.
In so far as the second contention of respondents is concerned, the matter is covered against them by virtue of Division bench judgment of this Court in Vivek Madan and others v. The Punjab Agro Industries Corporation."
Civil Writ Petition No. 981 of 1990 decided on January 21, 1991.
It has been authoritatively held in Vivek Madan's (supra) that persons who had remained in service deserves to be allowed the arrears of salary for the period from January 1, 1986 till the date they remained in service.
I am in respectful agreement with the ratio of Divisional Bench judgment referred to above.
In so far as the first contention of learned counsel for the respondents is concerned that Milkfed is under tremendous loss and, therefore, no employee has, so far, been paid arrears is only an argument of frustration.
If the other employees of the Milkfed have not approached any Court of law, it cannot be said that the petitioners would not have a justifiable cause on that ground alone.
For the reasons aforesaid, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to release to the petitioners, arrears of their salary on the basis of revised pay scales with effect from January 1, 1986 till the date they remained in service of Milkfed alongwith 18% per annum interest allowed vide order dt. 22891 in CM 5452-91 thereon from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
The whole exercise will be completed within three months from today.
Petition allowed.