GS Singhvi, J - Although multi-fold prayers have been made in the writ petition, in my view it is not necessary to make an adjudication on all the claims made by the petitioner because the writ petition deserves to be allowed on a short ground namely, that annexure P/11 dated April 28, 1993, by which deemed promotion has been given to respondent No. 2 in the cadre of Assistant Accounts Officer with effect from 26th November, 1981, is contrary to the principles of natural justice and is, therefore, liable to be quashed.
2.
In brief, case of the petitioner is that he and respondent No. 2 had joined service of respondent No. 1 as Accountant and Senior Accountant respectively.
Respondent No. 2 applied for direct recruitment to the post of Assistant Accounts Officer and on his selection, order dated 1st January, 1980 (Annexure P/1) was issued, appointing respondent No. 2 as Assistant Accounts Officer.
After his appointment to the said post against the quota of direct recruits, respondent No. 2 was called upon to give up his claim based on his past service.
In response to Annexure P/3, respondent No. 2 wrote Annexure P/4 dated 13th February, 1980, informing that he would resign from the existing post after completion of the probation period.
Subsequently, respondent No. 2 was promoted as Senior Accounts Officer vide order Annexure P/6, dated December 23, 1980.
In the tentative seniority list of Assistant Accounts Officers, issued by respondent No. 1 vide circular dated January 27, 1988, the petitioner was shown at serial No. 15 with his date of promotion in the cadre of Senior Accounts Officer as November 22, 1980.
Respondent No. 2 was shown at serial No. 16 with his date of appointment as 7th January, 1980.
Petitioner had been shown higher in the seniority list presumably on the ground that he was a promotee and respondent No. 2 was a direct recruit.
After over five years, Managing Director of respondent No. 1 accepted the request made by respondent No. 2 for restoring his position in the original seniority list as it stood prior to his appointment as Assistant Accounts Officer by way of direct recruitment.
At the same time, Managing Director treated respondent No. 2 as promoted on the post of Assistant Accounts Officer with effect from 27th November, 1980.
His seniority has also been changed from serial No. 16 to a number between 6 and 7.
The petitioner protested against this change in the seniority and having failed to persuade respondent No. 1 to downgrade the seniority of respondent No. 2, he has filed this petition.
3.
In addition to his claim that Annexure P/11 dated April 28, 1993 has been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice, the petitioner has stated that respondent No. 2 has been unlawfully promoted as Senior Accounts Officer and he, who happened to be senior to respondent No. 2, has merely been given charge of Senior Accounts Officer.
His further assertion is that although he is discharging the duties of Senior Accounts Officer, he is being paid salary in the pay-scale prescribed for the post of Assistant Accounts Officer.
4.
Respondent No. 1 has filed a detailed reply but has not controverted the statement of the petitioner that no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to him before passing of order Annexure P/11.
Rather respondent No. 1 has come up with the plea that it is not necessary to hear the petitioner because what has been done by Annexure P/11, is to have accepted the representation made by respondent No. 2 in the changed circumstances.
Respondent No. 1 has further stated that at least three persons senior to the petitioner are still working as Assistant Accounts Officers and, therefore, he cannot be given monetary benefits by fixation of his pay in the scale of pay prescribed for the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
5.
In his separate reply, respondent No. 2 has stated that he was promoted as Senior Accounts Officer and was entitled to be confirmed after the period of probation, but he was unlawfully reverted from the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
His plea is that when his promotion to the post of Senior Accounts Officer was declared illegal, a representation was made to the Managing Director of respondent No. 1 for restoring of his position in the lower cadre and no illegality has been committed by the Managing Director in accepting his representation.
6.
I have heard counsel for the parties and perused the records of the case.
Admitted position, which emerges from the rival pleadings of the parties, is that after his appointment as Assistant Accounts Officer by direct recruitment, respondent No. 2 had given up his claim based on his position in the lower cadre.
He then got promoted on the next senior post of Senior Accounts Officer.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6769 of 1988, NK Dutta v. MARKFED and another, 1994(4) S.C.T.
625 decided on July 29, 1994, this Court declared that respondent No. 2 stood confirmed as Senior Accounts Officer after the expiry of the maximum period of probation and that the order of reversion passed by the Managing Director is unlawful.
7.
However, the fact remains that when the Managing Director issued order Annexure P/11 for restoring the position of respondent No. 2 in the cadre of Senior Accounts Officer and thereby brought a change in the seniority position of respondent No. 2 by placing him above the petitioner, no action oriented notice of hearing was given to the petitioner, even though the order Annexure P/11 had a direct effect on the civil rights of the petitioner.
Although the list Annexure P/10 was a tentative seniority list, so far as the petitioner is concerned, he felt satisfied with the same and had no occasion to make representation against the same.
If at all the Managing Director or any other competent authority thought that there was some error in the seniority list or that one or some of the employees has/have been assigned the seniority incorrectly and the change was considered necessary, it was incumbent upon the Managing Director or the competent authority to issue a notice giving indication of the proposal to effect change in the tentative seniority list to the detriment of the employee.
That was necessary to be done for compliance of minimum requirement of principles of natural justice.
Seniority is one of the recognized civil rights of the employees, which is protected by equality clause, as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Before passing any such order, disturbing seniority of an employee, rule of audi alteram partem has to be followed by the authority.
Since that has not been done, I have little hesitation in quashing the order Annexure P/11.
8.
In so far as claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Senior Accounts Officer is concerned, I find that the statement made by respondent No. 1 about availability of three persons senior to the petitioner in the next lower cadre has remained unrebutted.
When persons senior to the petitioner are available, there is no justification for the court to issue a direction promoting the petitioner against the said post.
Such a direction would clearly violate the right of other person to be considered for promotion.
In exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, it is not open to the Court to issue such a direction, direct or indirect against the rights of other persons.
For this reason, I am of the view that no mandamus deserves to be issued in favour of the petitioner for his promotion as Senior Accounts Officer.
Rather ends of justice would be met by directing respondent No. 1 to undertake an exercise for consideration of cases of all eligible persons for promotion as Senior Accounts Officer against the existing vacancies,  9.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed.
Order Annexure P/11 is quashed.
Respondent No. 1 is, however, left free to consider and decide the representation of respondent No. 2 afresh after giving an action oriented notice to all eligible employees and after giving a reasonable opportunity of hearing to them.
Respondent No. 1 is further directed to undertake an exercise for promotion against the available vacant posts of Senior Accounts Officers and consider the case of the petitioner as per his seniority and the relevant rules.
Petition partly allowed.