NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of three writ petitions No. 12835, 12830 and 12909 of 1991 as similar questions of law and fact arise in them.
Counsel for the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 12830 of 1991 stated that even though the grayer made in this petition was different from that made in the other two petitions, yet this petition could be disposed of with those petitions.
For the sake of convenience, facts, are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 12835 of 1991.
2.
Haryana Dairy Development Corporation Limited (for short the Corporation) which is the predecessor-in-interest of respondent No. 2 is a Government Company incorporated under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 and was carrying on the dairy development activities in the State of Haryana.
Sometime in early 1977 the State Government decided to bring the dairy development activities in the Co-operative sector and therefore, the Haryana Dairy Development Co-operative Federation Limited, Chandigarh (hereinafter called the Federation) was incorporated as an apex Co-operative Society on 141977 under the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 which now stands repealed by the Haryana Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 and the Federation is deemed to have been incorporated under the later Act.
The Federation was established to promote the economic interests of the milk producers in the State and all the dairy activities undertaken by the Corporation along with its assets and staff were transferred to the Federation.
It may be mentioned that the employees of the Corporation were transferred on deputation on the same terms and conditions on which they had been employed by the Corporation but without payment of any deputation allowance by the Federation, Most of the petitioners are those who were the employees of the Corporation and were transferred on deputation to the Federation, whereas some of them were employed by the Federation itself.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioners had been serving the Federation from the year 1977 till December, 1983.
Sometime in the year 1983 a scheme known as Operation Flood-II was launched and the work of procurement of milk and technical input activities was transferred to the District Co-operative Milk Producers Unions (referred to hereinafter as 'milk unions') ten of which were established for the entire State of Haryana for different areas.
These Milk Unions were registered as independent Co-operative Societies having their own Board of Directors to look after their affairs with separate share capital and they were independent financially though the Federation had some administrative control over them in as much as their Chief Executive Officers and Accounts Executives were appointed by the Federation.
Since the procurement and technical input activities had been transferred to the Milk Unions, most of the staff of different categories in the Federation which was engaged in such activities earlier became surplus and it was decided that the Milk Unions shall not make any recruitment of the staff without obtaining prior permission and/or 'Non-availability Certificate' from the Federation.
On the other hand, the Milk Unions required the necessary staff to run the activities which had been transferred to them and the same was provided to them by the Federation.
The Federation decided to send its surplus staff to the Milk Unions either on notional deputation and/or by transferring its employees under Section 25-FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (to be referred to hereinafter as the Act).
The Federation also decided that as and when any post in the milk unions fell vacant, it was required to be filled up by sending a requisition to the Federation which on receipt of such demand would provide a suitable candidate.
It is not is dispute that all the petitioners were transferred to the Milk Unions at Mahendergarh and Bhiwani under Section 25-FF of the Act.
The decision to transfer the petitioners to the milk unions was taken on 19.12.1983 and the terms and conditions of their transfer under Section 25-FF of the Act were as under :-  (1) The services of the employees would not be interrupted by the transfer, the emoluments/benefits which they are enjoying would be protected, and  (2) The terms and conditions of service applicable to the employees after the transfer would not be in any way less favourable to the employees than those applicable to them immediately before the transfer and these would be protected, and  (3) The Milk Union would be liable to pay to the workmen, in the event of retrenchment, compensation on the basis that their services have been continuous and have not been interrupted by this transfer.
(4) The category-wise inter se seniority of the staff transferred to the Milk Unions shall be maintained in the Union."
Since the petitioners before their transfer were working with the Federation in the field, they were required to join that Milk Union which had been established for the area where they were already at work.
All the petitioners submitted their joining reports on the same day when they were transferred.
The petitioners while joining the Milk Unions after being transferred made a representation to the Federation through their union against their wholesale transfers whereby they became the employees of the Milk Unions.
The representatives of the workers' union met the management of the Federation and expressed their apprehension in regard to the protection of their terms and conditions of service with the Milk Unions.
It appears that the matter was considered by the Federation and a clarification was issued on March 5, 1984 giving some assurances to the employees who had been absorbed in the Milk Unions.
Relevant part of the letter dated March 5, 1984 issued by the Managing Director of the Federation to all the Chief Executive Officers of the Milk Unions may be noticed here :-  "You are well aware that staff of the Haryana Dairy Development Co- operative Federation is to be absorbed in the District Co-operative Milk Producers Union by way of issuing fresh appointment letters and some of the staff was transferred for absorption under Section 25-FF of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 inter alia terms and conditions of transfer of staff to the Milk Union were communicated.
Workers Union have met the Management and raised some doubt in regard to protection of terms and conditions of service.
The matter has been considered at length and is clarified as under :  (1) District Milk Unions shall not put up any matter in the meeting of their BOD connected with the retrenchment of staff on the basis of present work-load and for want of funds henceforth.
(2) No Milk Union shall make any retrenchment of staff absorbed in the Union at Union level but retrenchment, if any, to be made at any stage, shall be at state level.
(3) Though the inter se seniority shall be maintained at Milk Union level.
However, for the purpose of promotion etc. the joint seniority of all category of employees would be maintained at Head Office of the Federation and as and when any post in higher cadre is to be filled on the basis of promotion it would be from amongst the employees as per seniority list maintained at HQ of HDDCF.
(4) As and when any recruitment is to be made in the Union guidelines issued vide this office letter No. HDDCF/Admn-II/OFII/5/83/84/11752 dated 271283 will be strictly adhered to.
Similarly as and when any higher post falls vacant in a Union to be filled by promotion, reference shall be made to the HDDCF for providing suitable incumbent.
(5) If employee of the Haryana Dairy Development Co-op.
Federation absorbed in the Union leave the service of union and union is to discharge the liability on account of gratuity etc. but their financial position do not permit for immediate discharge of the liability in that event a reference shall be made to the Haryana Dairy Development Co-operative Federation for making available the necessary funds to discharge that liability.
The above clarifications may be kept in view while deciding the case of the employees of the Haryana Dairy Development Co-operative Federation absorbed in the Milk-Union."
Having been given the aforesaid assurances/clarifications the employees of the Federation including the petitioners accepted their transfers and continued working with the Milk Unions till August, 1991.
To complete the sequence of events, it is necessary to mention that the Board of Directors of the Federation in their meeting held on September 30, 1988 withdrew the clarifications/assurances given to the employees including the petitioners as per letter dated March 5, 1984 referred to above and this decision to withdraw the earlier letter was endorsed to the Chief Executive Officers of the Milk Unions on December 6, 1988 (Annexure P-8 with the writ petition).
The petitioners in this set of writ petitions had been absorbed by the Bhiwani District Co-operative Milk Producers Union, Bhiwani and the Mahendergarh District Co-operative Milk Producers Union, Mahendergarh.
Both these Unions were ordered to be wound up in August, 1991 by the Managing Director of the Federation exercising the powers of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies under Section 105 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984.
Obviously, these two unions having gone into liquidation the services of their employees like the petitioners were suddenly put an end by a general order through a public notice a copy of which is Annexure P-20 with the writ petition.
It was at this stage that the present petitions were filed by the petitioners challenging their order of termination on various grounds claiming that they were the employees of the Federation and that since their juniors who were absorbed in other unions or were working in the head office of the Federation were still in employment.
Article 16 of the Constitution stood violated.
3.
The Federation in reply has controverted the allegations of the petitioners and the main plank of their defence is that the petitioners were the employees of the aforesaid two Milk.
Unions which were separate legal entities and the liability, if any, to pay the compensation at the time of their discharge was that of the unions and that the Federation could not be held responsible.
It is further submitted that the unions having been wound up, the services of the petitioners had to be terminated and, therefore, the writ petitions deserve to be dismissed.
It is also pleaded that the petitioners could not challenge the decision of the, Federation dated September 30, 1988 withdrawing its earlier letter of March 5, 1984 after a lapse of three years and that no specific challenge has been made to this decision in the writ petition.
It was contended that the petitioners had not even challenge the decision of the Federation dated December 19, 1983 (Annexure P-5 with the writ petition) whereby their services stood transferred to the Milk Unions under Section 25-FF of the Act.
4.
I have heard counsel for the parties at length.
From the pleadings of the parties and on the contentions raised before me, the question that arises for consideration is as to what relief, if any, are the petitioners entitled.
While challenging the general order of termination (Annexure P-20 with the writ petition) the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that it can be inferred from the circumstances of the case that the petitioners were in fact employees of the Federation and that their services could not be terminated by the Milk Unions.
I have no hesitation in rejecting this contention.
The admitted case of the parties is that the petitioners were transferred to the Milk Unions under Section 25-FF of the Act in pursuance of the decision taken by the Federation on December 19, 1983 (Annexure P-6 with the writ petition).
According to the terms and conditions of their transfer, it was stipulated that their services would not be interrupted by reason of their transfer and that they would continue to enjoy the same emoluments/benefits which were enjoyed prior to the transfer.
It was also agreed that the Milk Unions would be liable to pay to the petitioners in the event of the latter's termination of services the compensation to which they would be entitled to under the law after recognising their previous services with the Federation.
When the transfer had been effected on these terms, how can it be said that the petitioners continued to be the employees of the Federation.
In terms of Section 25-FF of the Act, they became the employees of the Milk Unions to which they were transferred.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioners continued to work with the Milk Unions at Bhiwani and Mahendergarh till August, 1991 when these unions were ordered to be wound up.
When the Milk Unions were wound up, the services of the employees had naturally to be terminated.
Under the law, the employees who are discharged on the closure of the activity are entitled to certain benefits by way of compensation.
These benefits have to be provided to them by their employers which in the instant case were the Milk Unions.
But for winding up, the Milk Unions in the normal course would have paid them the compensation.
However, in the present case when the employees were transferred under Section 25-FF of the Act they had apprehensions about the protection of their terms and conditions of employment in the Milk Unions and they represented to the Federation in this regard.
As noticed earlier, the Federation through a letter dated March 5, 1984 (Annexure P-7 with the writ petition) gave an assurance in terms of clause 5 of that letter to the effect that in case the Milk Unions are unable to discharge their liability due to their weak financial position the Federation would make available the necessary funds to discharge that liability.
Obviously, the Milk Unions being in the process of winding up are not in a position to meet their liability as employers for the payment of compensation to the employees.
The Federation having undertaken to meet that obligation and have held out this assurance to the workmen at the time of their transfer cannot be allowed to unilaterally withdraw those assurances and go back on its decision to escape its liability.
If this assurance had not been given it is possible that the employees may not have accepted their transfers and would have left the service with the Federation and in that event the Federation would have had to pay them their retiral benefits.
In my opinion, the Federation must pay to the petitioners all their retiral benefits to which they were entitled under the law at the time when their services were terminated due to closure of the Milk Unions in which they were working.
5.
It was then submitted on behalf of the Federation that the decision to withdraw the letter dated 531984 was taken in September, 1988 and communicated to all concerned in December, 1988 and the petitioners cannot be allowed to challenge the same after a lapse of three years.
There is no substance in this contention either.
The petitioners were continuing to work with the Milk Unions and they could challenge the action of the Federation at the time when they were adversely affected by it i.e. when their services were terminated.
In my opinion, there is no delay whatsoever and the petitioners cannot be non-suited on this account.
If the two Milk Unions had not been wound up the petitioners would have continued to work with them.
6.
Lastly, it was urged that the petitioners have not claimed any compensation by way of retiral benefits and the only prayer made in the petition was for the quashing of their general order of termination.
It is true that no specifying prayer to this effect has been made in this petition but one of the prayers made is for the issuance of an appropriate writ or direction which this Court may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the case.
This prayer, in my view, is comprehensive enough to include the claim for retiral benefits to which the petitioners were admittedly entitled at the time when their services were dispensed with on the closure of the Milk Unions.
It is by now well settled that this Court has wide discretion in the matter of granting the relief to the petitioners to suit the exigencies of a particular case and the same cannot be denied simply on the ground that proper writ or direction had not been prayed for.
No other point was raised.
7.
In result, the writ petition is allowed and the Federation is directed to pay to the petitioners their retiral benefits to which they are entitled under the law.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.