GS Singhvi, J (Oral).
- Having served the country for almost about 23 years as a member of the defence services (Indian Air Force), lastly as Wing Commander and having been retired in low medical category as A4G2 with 30% disability as early as on 31.12.1986, the petitioner has now come to this Court for issuance of a direction to the respondents to grant him disability pension w.e.f.
111987.
He has prayed that Annexures P-9 and P-10 be quashed and the respondents be directed to give him disability pension as per the opinion of the Medical Board.
He has also prayed for grant of interest at the rate of 18% P.A.
on the amount of arrears of pension.
2.
In order to decide the controversy involved in the petition, it is necessary to set out a few facts.
3.
The petitioner was examined by the release Medical Board which certified that the petitioner suffered from 30% disability that the petitioner suffered from 30% disability aggravated by the military services.
The petitioner made a claim P/3 for the grant of disability pension, but it was rejected by the Government of India vide communication dated 1561987 (Annexure P-1).
His appeal was also dismissed by the Government of India vide communication dated 361988 (Annexure P-2).
The petitioner appealed to the President of India and on reconsideration of the matter, the Government of India wrote to the Chief of the Air Staff, New Delhi, on September 20, 1988 (Annexure P-3) with a copy to the petitioner that the President of India has been pleased to decide that the disability on account of which the petitioner was relieved from service, was aggravated by military services.
This decision of the President of India resulted in suppersession of Annexures P-1 and P-2.
Notwithstanding, the decision of the President of India regarding the nature of disability suffered by the petitioner, the Government of India, further took a decision that disability of the petitioner should be viewed at less than 20% for the period from 111987 to 2371988.
The petitioner was once again examined by the Re-survey Medical Board as is apparent from Annexure P-4, dated 811992.
The Re-survey Medical Board, opined that the petitioner's disability was to the tune of 20% for the period from 111987 to 2371988.
Annexure P-4 further shows that the opinion of the Medical Board was overruled by the Pension Sanctioning Authority, which opined that the disability of the petitioner was 15% to 10%.
The petitioner was once again referred to the Re-survey Medical Board by the Air Headquarters P/4 New Delhi, vide letter dated 1711992.
Re-survey Medical Board examination of the petitioner was held on 1341992 and on the recommendation of the Re-survey Medical Board, the Chief of the Air Staff, New Delhi wrote letter Annexure P-8, dated 27.7.1992 to the Dy.
C.D.A.
(AF), New Delhi, that in the opinion of the Re-survey Medical Board, the petitioner suffered from 20% disability.
The Chief of the Air Staff, requested that the petitioner be granted disability pension at the earliest.
Once again, the pension authorities thought that the disability of the petitioner was less than 20% and, therefore vide communication dated 3121992, Annexure P-9, the claim of the petitioner for the grant of disability pension was rejected.
In the meanwhile, the petitioner made representations to the Government of India on more than one occasions.
Those representations did not bring the desired result and ultimately the petitioner approached this Court by filing the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
His plea is that once the Medical Board has after thorough examination opined that he suffered from 20% disability, it was not open to the pension sanctioning authority or any other authority to alter the percentage of disability and thereby deny the disability pension to him.
4.
In reply, the respondents have made a reference to the Pension Regulation for the Air Force (1961) and have drawn attention of the Court to the Rules under which disability pension is admissible.
According to them, an employee can get the disability P/5 pension whose disability is assessed at 20% or more.
According to the respondents, the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions) is competent to sanction the disability pension and, therefore, the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) has a right to accept or not to accept the opinion of the Medical Board regarding the disability of an employee who has been released from military service.
The respondents have placed on record Annexure R-4 which is a detailed proforma required to be filled, in pursuance of the proceedings of the Re-survey Medical Board.
They have further pleaded that after the receipt of the report of the Re-survey Medical Board, the office of the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) had assessed the disability of the petitioner to be less than 20% and in view of this assessment a decision was taken not to grant disability pension to the petitioner.
Reliance has also been placed on Annexure R-5 dated 2111993 in support of contention that the competent authority has adjudicated and the degree of disablement has been assessed less than 20% for ten years and for this reason, the petitioner was not entitled to disability pension.
5.
The only argument which has been pressed before me by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that when the Medical Board/Re-survey Medical Board has opined that disability of the petitioner was to the tune of 20%, there was little justification for the respondents to deny the benefits of disability pension to the petitioner.
His submission is that P/6 the Medical Board consists of specialist in the subject in the field of medical science and their opinion could not have been overruled by those authorities who had no occasion to make a real assessment of the disability of the petitioner.
His further submission is that the medical disability of the petitioner was assessed at Chandigarh and the authorities sitting at Allahabad had without any legal or other justification altered the assessment made by the Medical Board to the disadvantage of the petitioner.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, argued that the power to sanction the disability pension rests with the President of India and Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) and, therefore, the authorities of CDA (Pension), Allahabad, had every right to alter the percentage of disability of the petitioner.
He submitted that the decision of the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) was based on the opinion of a Medical Expert and, therefore, rejection of the claim of the petitioner for the grant of disability pension, cannot be termed as arbitrary or un-reasonable.
7.
A perusal of Annexures P-1, P-2 and P-3 shows that in the first instance, the Government of India had rejected the claim of the petitioner for the grant of disability pension on the ground that disability of the petitioner is neither attributable to nor aggravated by the Air Force Services.
Subsequently, the President of India decided that disability of the petitioner should be treated as aggravated by the military services and only after the decision of the President of India, the Government has decided to reduce the percentage of disability of the petitioner, so far to make it less than 20% and thereby disentitled the petitioner from claiming disability pension.
Annexure P-4 together with Annexure P-8, however, shows that in so far as the authorities of the Indian Air Force are concerned, they had maintained that disability of the petitioner was 20%.
The letter written by the office of the Chief of the Air Staff leaves room of doubt on this aspect of the matter Perusal of Annexure R-4 also shows that the disability of the petitioner was assessed at 20%.
It is interesting to note that this Medical Board was headed by an officer of the rank of Colonel.
There were two other doctors.
The approving authority namely the DDM approved the assessment made by the Medical Board.
Thereafter, when the case was sent to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, Assistant Accounts Officer of the said office conveyed that degree of disablement of the petitioner is less than 20%.
This letter of the Assistant Accounts Officer was based on the assessment made by the Lieutenant Colonel AMA Medical Advisor (Pension) and the same was accepted by the authorities of the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad.
Interestingly, none of the documents placed by the respondents gives any reason or rationality or basis on which the authorities of the office of the Controller of the Defence Accounts (Pension) recorded their conclusion that the degree of disablement of the petitioner was less than 20 per cent.
They have also not recorded as to why the expert opinion of the Medical Board at Chandigarh was being treated as erroneous or was not being agreed upon.
A look at Annexure R-6 further shows that where the approving authority does not concur with the findings of the Medical Board, it has to direct the holding of agree Medical Board or to direct further treatment of the individual concerned or the dispose of the matter after due consideration thereof.
The respondents have not shown that after the receipt of the opinion of the Re-survey Medical Board, they have taken a decision to refer the case of the petitioner for examination by a fresh Medical Board or for his treatment in terms of Annexure R-6.
Instead of adopting this procedure, the respondents arbitrarily and casually rejected and overruled the opinion of the Medical Board with regard to the degree of disablement of the petitioner.
I am not suggesting that the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) is, under all circumstances, bound to accept the opinion of the Medical Board, but there can be no manner of doubt that if the opinion expressed by the Medical Board is overruled there must be cogent reasons and this can be done only after following the proper procedure.
In the case in hand, neither any reason has been assigned nor the procedure prescribed in Annexure R-6 has been followed by the respondents before holding that the petitioner's degree of disablement was less than 20 per cent.
Thus, the denial of disability pension to the petitioner and rejection of his claim for grant of disability pension is based on arbitrary and irrational decision.
On account of this decision the petitioner has been discriminated qua other persons who having awarded the disability pension in terms of Annexure R-1.
8.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the opinion of the Medical Board can be relied upon only after the acceptance by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) and that the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) is the final authority to determine the disability of the petitioner, is nothing but a misconceived interpretation of Annexure R-2.
That document simply specifies the authorities which are competent to sanction the disability pension.
The distinction between the authorities who is competent to sanction the disability pension and the authority to determine the degree of disability has been completely lost sight of while advancing the argument that disability is to be finally assessed by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension).
9.
On the basis of the above mentioned reasons, the present writ petition succeeds and is hereby allowed.
The decisions of the respondents as contained in Annexures P-3, P-9 and P-10 are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to grant disability pension to the petitioner by treating his disability to be 20 per cent w.e.f.
111987.
The respondents shall also make payment of arrears of pension to the petitioner to which the petitioner became entitled as a result of the acceptance of this writ petition with a period of four months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order.
Since the respondents have arbitrarily refused disability pension to the petitioner, I deem it appropriate to direct the respondents to pay interest at the rate of 12% P.A.
from the date of the filing of the petition i.e. 19101993, on the arrears of pension.
Current pension should be paid to the petitioner within one month of the receipt of the certified copy of the order.
Costs made easy.
Order accordingly.