RS Mongia, J - By this writ petition, petitioners who are 14 in numbers have impugned the orders passed by the Haryana Minerals Limited (hereinafter called the 'Company'), dated 21st December, 1992, by which their services have been retrenched.
All of them were working as Mining Mates, Blasters etc., in various mines where the operation is carried out by and under the Company.
The statement of reasons for taking impugned action against the petitioners in the orders of retrenchment is as under :  "The Division Bench of Supreme Court of India in their judgment dated 15th May, 1992 in writ petition (Civil) 4677 of 1985 M. C. Mehta etc. v Union of India & others etc. has ordered that all the mechanical stone crushers in Faridabad/Ballabgarh area operating at various places like Lakharpur, Lakhanpur, Surajkund, Cutton, Gurukul, Badkhal, Palinangla, Sarai Khawaja, Anangpur & Ballabgarh should stop operating with effect from 15th August, 1992.
Supreme Court has also ordered stoppage of stone crushers in the Union Territory of Delhi/Faridabad-Ballabgarh Complex, which do not have valid licence from the authorities with immediate effect.
The Central Pollution Control Board also has stopped other stone crushers under Section 31-A of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.
This situation has caused serious crisis in the stone mining industry of the Company.
All the stone mines which were being operated by M/s Haryana Minerals Limited in Faridabad and Ballabgarh area have ceased to operate.
Stone produced in such quarries are required to be crushed to be commercially useful as road metal or building stone.
Hence, M/s Haryana Minerals Limited is unable to provide any employment to workmen in the stone quarries, on account of total stoppage of stone crushers by the order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, as stated above."
It may be observed that the retrenchment was ordered after complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act).
2.
The primary ground for challenging the impugned orders of the respondents is that the retrenchment done under Section 25-F of the Act is bad and in fact provisions of Section 25-N of the Act should have been complied with before ordering retrenchment.
It will be apposite at this stage to notice Section 25-N of the Act :  "25-N.
Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workman :  1.
No workman employed in any industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies, who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until :  a) the woman has been given three months' notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice; and  b) the prior permission of the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified by that Government by notification in the Official Gazette (hereafter in this section referred to as the specified authority) has been obtained on an application made in this behalf.
2.
An application for permission under sub-section (1) shall be made by the employer in the prescribed manner stating clearly the reasons for the intended retrenchment and a copy of such application shall also be served simultaneously on the workman concerned in the prescribed manner.
3.
Where an application for permission under sub-section (1) has been made the appropriate Government on the specified authority after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the employer, the workmen concerned and the persons interested in such retrenchment may having regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the employer, the interests of the workmen and all other relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or refuse to grant such permission and a copy of such order shall be communicated to the employer and the workmen.
4.
Where an application for permission has been made under sub-section (1) and the appropriate Government or the specified authority does not communicate the order granting or refusing to grant permission to the employer within a period of sixty days from the date on which such application is made, the permission applied for shall be deemed to have been granted on the expiration of the said period of sixty days.
5.
An order of the appropriate Government or the specified authority granting or refusing to grant permission shall, subject to the provisions of the sub-section 6, be final and binding on all the parties concerned and shall remain in force for one year from the date of such order.
6.
The appropriate Government or the specified authority may, either on its own motion or on the application made by the employer or any workman, review its order granting or refusing to grant permission under sub-section (3) or refer the matter or, as the case may be, cause it to be referred, to a Tribunal for adjudication :  Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub-section it shall pass an award within a period of thirty days from the date of such reference.
7.
Where no application for permission under sub-section (1) is made, or where the permission for any retrenchment has been refused, soon retrenchment shall be deemed to be illegal from the date on which the notice of retrenchment was given to the workman and the workman shall be entitled to all the benefits under any law for the time being in force as if no notice has been given to him.
8.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the appropriate government may, if it is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the establishment or death of the employer or the like, it is necessary so to do by order, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply in relation to such establishment for such period as may be specified in the order.
9.
Where permission for retrenchment has been granted under sub-section (3) or where permission for retrenchment is deemed to be granted under sub-section (4) every workman who is employed in that establishment immediately before the date of application for permission under this section shall be entitled to receive, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days average pay for every completed year of continuous services or any part thereof in excess of six months.
3.
The stance taken on behalf of the respondents in the written statement and the additional affidavit filed on 21st January, 1994, is that each mine is a separate unit and establishment where less than 100 workers have been employed and, therefore, the question of complying with the provisions of Section 25-A of the Act would not arise.
However, the case of the petitioners is that the Company is one establishment having many units, which are the mines in the present case and the entire Company is to be considered as one establishment.
Each Unit cannot be considered a separate Unit or separate entity for the purposes of Section 25-N of the Act.
4.
In the additional affidavit filed by the respondents, it has been clarified that a joint seniority list of all the employees in various mines is kept joint category-wise.
Also a unit-wise or mine-wise seniority is being kept in each category of employees.
However, while making the retrenchment, the joint seniority list category-wise has been kept in view and no person junior to the petitioners in their category has been kept in service.
The joint seniority list has been shown to me, which has been prepared according to the date of appointment and the learned counsel for the respondents on instructions from the officials at the Company says that in case two persons were appointed on the same day, then their age has been kept in view while preparing the joint seniority list.
5.
It has not been shown to me, if any person of the category of the petitioners who might have been employed by the Company in any unit or the mine later than them has been kept in service after retrenchment.
6.
In view of what has been observed above on facts, I do not consider it necessary to go into the larger issues as to whether the compliance with the provisions of Section 25-N of the Act was necessary inasmuch as no injustice has been done to the petitioners as according to me for the reasons given for retrenchment, the Company was prima facie justified in making some retrenchment.
Since no injustice has been done to the petitioners, inasmuch as no junior person in their respective category has been kept in service after the retrenchment, I am of the view that no case for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been made out.
The learned counsel for the respondents fairly stated that as and when any fresh appointments are made the Company in any of their units in the category of the petitioners, the petitioners would be offered the job in order of their seniority, and a registered letter would be sent to them on their last known address or the address that may be provided by them now.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioners then submitted two of the petitioners, i.e. Petitioners No. 7 and 14 were posted at Silica Sand Mines where no retrenchment was called for and they should not have been retrenched.
I am sure that if any representation is made by them, the Company would consider the same on merits.
8.
Subject to the observations made above, finding no merit in the writ petition, the same is hereby dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.