Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner was appointed as a Research Assistant in October, 1970 on regular basis who was redesignated as Assistant Scientist w.e.f 111973.
On the recommendations of University Grants Commission, Government of India circulated a merit/Personal Promotion Scheme for teachers serving in the Universities Colleges.
Under the Personal Promotion Scheme, a teacher on completion of ten years service was entitled to be placed in the next higher promotional scale.
Under the aforesaid scheme, it was not necessary that a vacancy in the promotional cadre should have been available.
It was a case of upgradation of a teacher from the lower pay scale to the higher promotional pay scale while occupying the same post and performing the same duties.
Assessment of a teacher for promotion under the scheme was to be made every year in the month of June on completion of the qualifying service and the promotion was to be made on the principle of seniority-cum-merit.
2.
Under the scheme, according to the petitioner, he became entitled to be promoted in the year 1984 (according to the respondents in the year 1985) which was denied to him on the ground that on an enquiry held on certain charges, a notice to show cause as to why the petitioner be not removed from service had been issued.
On the basis of the enquiry held, four annual increments with cumulative effect were ordered to be withheld by way of punishment.
Petitioner challenged the imposition of the punishment of stoppage of four annual increments with cumulative effect by filing civil suit in civil Court at Hissar.
Petitioner's suit succeeded and the punishment awarded was set aside on merits and the University was ordered to restore the four increments and to release the consequential arrears in favour of the petitioner (copy of judgment Annexure P2).
This order was upheld by the first appellate court as well as this Court in second appeal.
The judgment Annexure P2 thus became final between the parties.
3.
After the finalisation of the suit, since the promotion of the petitioner under the personal promotion scheme was withheld due to stoppage of four increments, he filed a representation to the respondent University to grant him personal promotion with effect from the due date i.e. 1984 in view of the judgment passed by the Courts of competent jurisdiction.
No action was taken thereafter.
Petitioner filed two more representations copies of which have been attached with this writ petition.
Finally the case of the petitioner for personal promotion was put up vide Agenda Item No. B-17 before the Board of Management in its 146th meeting held on 29121992.
According to the agenda item, petitioner was to be considered for personal promotion w.e.f.
111985.
Another fact mentioned in the agenda was that petitioner had been awarded the punishment of stoppage of one annual increment with cumulative effect in September, 1978 in addition to recovery of Rs. 37/-.
This punishment had been awarded to the petitioner on account of certain irregularities having committed for purchasing of farm yard manure and also for claiming house rent allowance for two months by producing bogus rent receipts.
In the petition, petitioner has stated that the order passed in September, 1978 awarding the punishment of stoppage of one annual increment with cumulative effect and the recovery of Rs. 37/- was not challenged by him.
It has further been stated that the order of imposition of the punishment was bad as the Inquiry Officer had exonerated him.
A copy of report of the Enquiry Officer has been attached as Annexure P6.
The management in the meeting held on the agenda regarding the petitioner decided to grant approval for promotion of the petitioner under the scheme with effect from the date of decision of the Board of Management i.e. 29121992.
Petitioner being aggrieved has challenged this decision of the University granting him promotion under the scheme w.e.f.
29121992 instead of the date on which he had become entitled to the said promotion.
Petitioner has challenged the said order on the ground that the order of punishment Annexure P7 could not be taken into consideration while granting promotional benefits as the same had nothing to do with the teaching functions of the petitioner and that petitioner had been denied the promotion from due date for arbitrary and mala fide decisions.
Another argument raised was that at the most petitioner could be denied promotion for a period of ten years w.e.f.
the date of the order of punishment as under the said scheme the work of a candidate is to be assessed for a period of ten years.
The action of the University for giving promotion to the petitioner after a period of 14 years from the date of awarding of punishment was arbitrary.
4.
Stand of the respondent-University in the written statement filed is that since the punishment of stoppage of one increment on account of certain irregularities committed by the petitioner in purchase of farm yard manure and also claiming house rent allowance by producing bogus rent receipts and punishment still being operative although the punishment awarded was sufficient not to grant him merit promotion but taking a lenient view and taking into consideration that much time had passed when the punishment was imposed, it was decided that ends of justice will meet if the petitioner's claim be considered for personal promotion with effect from the date the order was passed instead of retrospective date.
5.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length.
We do not find any substance in the submission of counsel appearing for the petitioner that promotion of the petitioner was withheld arbitrarily and mala fide reasons.
The promotion to the petitioner under the scheme could be withheld in view of the order of punishment passed against him stopping one annual increment with cumulative effect in the year 1978 but in the circumstances of the present case, we feel that the same could not be done for indefinite period.
Under the scheme, a candidate becomes eligible for promotion after a period of ten years.
The promotion to the petitioner under the personal promotion scheme (where the criteria was not merit and selection alone) could therefore, be withheld for a period of ten years from the date of the passing of the punishment.
If the conduct and the record remains good for a period of ten years after the passing of the punishment then he, in all fair play, should be considered for promotion under the scheme as the candidate should put in ten years of service after passing of the punishment as if he is a new entrant to the service provided his work and conduct remains good for the next ten years.
There are no rules or regulations of the University in this regard.
University, of its own, has taken the decision to promote the petitioner after 14 years which could be stretched for any length of time denying the petitioner the right to be promoted under the scheme.
Since the scheme is a personal promotion scheme in which a teacher on completion of ten years of service was entitled to be placed in the next higher promotional pay scale irrespective of the fact whether a vacancy in the promotional cadre was available or not, we deem it appropriate to lay down that under these circumstances, the petitioner should have been considered for promotion under the scheme after the completion of ten years of service after the punishment was awarded.
It was a case of upgradation of the teacher from lower pay scale to the higher promotional pay scale while occupying the same post and performing the same duties.
Rule of ten years, under the circumstances, would be reasonable and meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above with a direction to the University to reconsider the case of the petitioner under the personal promotion scheme w.e.f.
1989 on completion of ten years after the award of punishment to the petitioner within two months from the date of the communication of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.