N K Kapoor, J - Petitioner has sought issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing Annexures P-5 to P-7 with a further direction to the respondents to promote him from the date when respondent No. 3 was promoted to Class III post of Photostat Machine Operator with all consequential benefits of arrears etc. along with interest or for issuance of such other order, writ or direction as the Court may deem fit or proper in the circumstances of the case.
2.
The petitioner who was appointed as a Peon-cum-Chowkidar, Class IV Post, in the office of Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (for short 'the Board') has challenged the promotion order of respondent No. 3 as Photostat Machine Operator on the ground that he being senior to respondent No. 3 ought to have been appointed to the post in view of the relevant rules governing such an appointment.
The case as set up by the petitioner is that vide order dated 5101989 Sanction was accorded for conversion of the post of a Peon of the Board to Class III post of Photostat Machine Operator in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1,800 subject to the condition that the incumbent of the post will be governed by Class IV Service Rules.
The Board with a view to get a clarification as to how this post is to be filled up wrote to the government vide Annexure P-3.
The government vide communication dated 1461990 replied to the communication Annexure P-3 and clarified that the incumbent of the post of Photostat Machine Operator will be governed by Class IV Service Rules.
Petitioner's case is that despite clarification given vide Annexure P-4 respondent No. 2 arbitrarily, whimsically and illegally has promoted respondent No. 3 to the post of Photostat Machine Operator though he is much junior to him.
A copy of the order is Annexure P-5.
Since the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3, the order of promotion of respondent No. 3, Annexure P-5 is unsustainable in law and thus liable to be set aside.
3.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, respondents have put in appearance and have filed written statement controverting various averments made in the petition.
According to the respondents, the post of Photostat Machine Operator, no doubt, was to be filled up from amongst Class IV employees but the same was to be governed by Class IV Service Rules.
Class IV Service Rules postulate minimum educational qualification as Middle standard with Panjabi as elective subject.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not possess the prescribed qualification and for this reason the respondent-Board in its decision decided to consider the claim of such IV Class employees who had this minimum qualification i.e. educational qualification of middle standard with Panjabi as elective subject and so promoted respondent No. 3.
4.
Respondent No. 3 vide separate written statement justified his appointment on the ground that he possessed the minimum qualification and even otherwise has completed the period of probation successfully as is clear from the certificate issued by the Modi Xerox, Annexure R-I It has further been averred that the petitioner too has been promoted to a Class III post and so in these circumstances the present writ petition merit dismissal.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perusal the various documents referred to by the respective counsel.
The factual aspects are not in dispute.
The petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 were Class IV employees.
It is also admitted case of the parties that the post of Photostat Machine Operator was to be governed by Class IV Service Rules.
It is also not denied that as per amended Class IV Service Rules of 1988 the minimum qualification prescribed for employees to be inducted in this Class is Middle class with Panjabi as one of its elective subject.
It may also be noticed that the government vide communication dated 5.10.89 Annexure P-2 decided to accord sanction to the conversion of the post of a Peon of Board to Class III post of Photostat Machine Operator i.e. after the enforcement of Class IV Service Rules, 1988, so the matter has to be examined in the light of the existing Rules.
The case when examined in the light of Class IV Service Rules 1988, leaves no manner of doubt that promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Photostat Machine Operator is per these rules.
Service Rules of 1988 are not under challenge.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner's contention that he being senior to respondent No. 3 having been recruited to Class IV Service prior to 1988 ought to have been preferred irrespective of the Rules, 1988, does not impress us.
The appointment of respondent No. 3 cannot be said to be contrary to Annexure P-2 and the subsequent clarification given vide Annexure P-4 in pursuance to the query made by the Board vide Annexure P-3.
No useful purpose would be served by dilating upon the judgment in case reported as Gautam Singh and others v. Nar Singh and others, 1991(2) SCT 215 (P&H) (DB) : 1991(1) RSJ 373 and Jai Parkash v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) SCT 240 (P&H) : 1991(1) RSJ 767, cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner as neither of these advance the case as set up by the petitioner.
The Court while interpreting the Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982, wherein it was stipulated that for promotion as Fireman one has to be a Matriculate; held that after the enforcement of these rules i.e. from 1521982 a non- matriculate is barred to be promoted as a Fireman.
Identical is the case in hand.
Petitioner, admittedly does not possess the minimum qualification as per amended rules of 1988 and so was rightly ignored while promoting respondent No. 3 who possessed the qualification as prescribed.
Thus, we find no merit in this petition and consequently dismiss the same.
No order as to costs.