NK Kapoor, J - The petitioner has sought issuance of writ of certiorari quashing promotion order Annexure P which Mange Ram stated to be junior to the petitioner has been promoted without considering the claim of the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner joined the Labour Department as a Clerk in the year 1961 and after getting few promotions is presently working as Statistical Officer which is Class-II post.
According to the petitioner, all Class I and Class II posts of Labour Department were governed by the Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955 (for short '1955 Rules').
The post of Statistical Officer was created sometime in between 1955 to 1966 thus necessitating the required amendment of Rules 1955.
On this account new Rules known as Haryana Labour Department (Group B) Service Rules, 1987 were notified on 1st January, 1988.
Thus the earlier 1955 Rules were repealed.
It is further the case of the petitioner that as there did not exist any promotional avenues for the Statistical Officer, the department framed a rule and sent to the government for approval and notification.
According to the proposed Rules, Rule 7 deals with qualification for the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner and Rule 9 deals with method of recruitment of various posts including the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner Rule 9 reads as under :  9.
(1) Recruitment to the service shall be made :-  (b) In the case of Deputy Labour Commissioner -  (i) by promotion from amongst the Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer, Statistical Officer, Welfare Officer (Women).
Provided that their inter se seniority for purpose of consideration for promotion shall be on the basis of continuous service on the post or  (ii) by direct, or  (iii) by transfer or deputation of an officer already in the service of any State Government, or the Government of India."
3.
It is according to Rule 9 that the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner is to be filled up from amongst the Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer, statistical Officer, and Welfare Officer (Women).
On these premises the petitioner states that promotion of Mange Ram respondent No. 3 as Deputy Labour Commissioner vide Annexure P-1 dated 2911993 is legally unsustainable as the petitioner has not been considered and even otherwise Mange Ram is, admittedly junior to the petitioner.
It is further the case of the petitioner that though the government approved 'Class A Rules' in the year 1979 but the same were not notified.
However, the government has been acting on the draft rules.
In any case, even if the Rules have not been notified, the same can be taken as executive instructions.
4.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 (jointly) and respondent No. 3 have filed written statement controverting the various material averments made in the petition.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 in reply to para No. 2 of the writ petition has stated that though he was asked to work as acting Statistical Officer vide order dated September 14, 1981, but he had been promoted as Statistical Officer on 6.10.1986.
Against this order the petitioner represented to the answering respondents that he ought to have been promoted as Statistical Officer w.e.f.
21.12.1981 when he came back from the Prosecution Department.
This plea was not accepted on the ground that the Labour Department (Group A & B) Service Rules, 1955, had no provision for the promotion to the post of Statistical Officer.
However, an advice of the Haryana Public Service Commission was sought which opined that before such a person is promoted, he must possess the following qualifications :-  (1) B.Sc./B.A.
from a recognised University with Economics or Mathematics from a recognised University.
(2) Three years' experience as Head Statistical Assistant; and  3.
Adequate knowledge of Hindi.
It is when the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualification he was promoted to the post of Statistical Officer w.e.f.
2651983 subject to the approval of the Commission.
It was further stipulated that he would not get any arrears of pay etc. for the period from 26583 to 6.10.1986.
This promotion of the petitioner was challenged by Sh. JC Kataria (since dead).
It is after the examination of the service record of the petitioner as well as Sh. JC Kataria, it was found that Mr. Kataria was appointed as Field Investigator on 871971 whereas the petitioner was promoted on this post on 29.11.1972 and so Sh. Kataria was declared senior to the petitioner.
Shri Kataria died on 431986 and it is how the petitioner has been promoted as Statistical Officer w.e.f.
431986 which date has been further got approved from the Commission.
Examined in the light of these facts, it has further been stated that Mange Ram who was promoted as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer w.e.f.
24.2.84, his case was sent to the Commission for approval.
The Commission has regularised his services w.e.f.
11.1.1986 as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Thus the petitioner is junior to the respondent No. 3 as having been regularised as Statistical Officer w.e.f.
431986.
It has further been stated that there is no provision under the new repealed Rules of 1955 for promoting the Statistical Officer to the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner.
With regard to the rules, it has been stated that the same have not yet been approved by the different agencies and as much the petitioner cannot take benefit of the draft Rules.
5.
Respondent No. 3 in his reply justified his appointment on the ground that under the Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955, the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner can be filled up by way of promotion from the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Labour Officers and Conciliation Officers.
Thus the petitioner who is a Statistical Officer has no right of consideration for the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner.
With regard to petitioner's reliance on draft rules, the respondent has averred that these are mere waste papers till these are notified.
Reliance has been placed upon the decision of this Court in case reported as Jitender Kumar Verma v. The State of Haryana and others, 1985(1) SLR 41.
On merit, it has stated that the answering respondent was promoted as Labour Officer-cum-Reconciliation Officer on 24.2.1984 and his promotion was regularised w.e.f.
11.1.1986 whereas, on the other hand, the petitioner was regularised as a Statistical Officer w.e.f.
431986.
Even otherwise, petitioner who is working as Statistical Officer has no channel of promotion for the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner.
Thus, in brief, it has been stated that the draft Rules for the time being have no value and as and when these are notified even then too these Rules cannot have retrospective applicability.
According to the respondent, the writ petition is wholly devoid of merit and the same may be dismissed.
6.
The matter was heard on 4.10.1993.
In view of the submissions made, it was though appropriate that a direction be given to the State to file a detailed reply specifically indicating whether Draft Rules have been approved by the Public Service Commission and given effect thereto or it is the stand of the State that the post of Statistical Officers are not at all to be considered for the purpose of promotion to the posts of Deputy Labour Commissioners.
Sh. Daya Kishan, Under Secretary to Govt. of Haryana, Labour and Employment Department has filed reply by way of affidavit in view of the directions given by the Court.
The stand of the State Government is reproduced hereunder :-  "...... it is stated that State Government adopted the Punjab Labour Service (Class I & II) Rules, 1955.
In the year 1987, the Service Rules relating to Class-II posts were framed by, the Government and these Rules are called "The Haryana Labour Department (Group-B) Service Rules, 1987.
While issuing gazette notification of these Rules, in Rule 21 it was mentioned that the Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955 are hereby repealed.
In fact the word Class-I" was inadvertently mentioned in this rule.
It is clear from Rule 1 of Rules 1987 that these Rules may be called the Haryana Labour Department (Group B) Service Rules, 1987.
As such Group-B Service Rules cannot have the overriding effect at all on Punjab Labour Service (Class-I) Rules, 1955.
All the vacancies of Class-I posts (Group-A) arc being filled in accordance with the provisions laid down in Class-I Service Rules, 1955.
That so far as the question of notifying the Draft Service Rules (Group-A) as approved by the Haryana Public Commission is concerned, it is submitted that these Draft Rules will be finally notified after getting the approval of the Council of Ministers, which is the final authority.
As soon as these Draft Rules are finally approved by the Council of Ministers, necessary notification will be issued by the Government and these Rules will come into force.
It is further submitted that in Punjab Labour Service (Class-I) Rules, 1955, there is no provision for promoting Statistical Officers to the post of Deputy Labour Commissioners.
As such the petitioner cannot be considered for the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner.
It is a settled law that Draft Rules are no Rules in the presence of notified Rules.
It is also clarified that Class I and II are redesignated as Group A and B respectively."
7.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant material referred to during the course of their submissions.
The petitioner has challenged the appointment of respondent No. 3 to the post of Deputy Labour Commissioner primarily on two counts : (i) that while promoting the respondent No. 3, claim of the petitioner has not been considered; (ii) that Punjab Labour Service (Class I and II) Rules, 1955, having already been repealed and the Draft Rules approved by the Haryana Public Service Commission, entitle the petitioner for consideration in terms of Rule 9; and (iii) the Draft Rules having been approved by the Public Service Commission even if no notified can be taken as executive instructions and if construed so, the petitioner's case has merit.
8.
Admittedly, under 1955 Rules there was no provision with the Labour Department for promotion to the post of Statistical Officer.
It is on the advice of the Haryana Public Service Commission that avenue was created subject to the persons possessing the requisite qualifications and experience.
It is on the basis of qualification and experience prescribed by the Haryana Public Service Commission that the case of the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Statistical Officer w.e.f.
2651983.
However, on the representation of Mr. JC Kataria, he was found senior to the petitioner and thus promoted.
On the death of Mr. JC Kataria, the petitioner was promoted as Statistical Officer w.e.f.
431986.
Mange Ram respondent was promoted as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer w.e.f.
24.2.1984 and the Commission regularised his services w.e.f.
11.1.1986 as Labour Officer-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Thus, there is no manner of doubt that the petitioner is junior to respondent No. 3 and rightly not considered when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
We also find no merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that draft rules having been approved by the Public Service Commission have at least to be considered as executive instructions.
The affidavit of Deputy Secretary is categorical in this regard.
Even otherwise, as per decision in Jitender Kumar Verma's case (supra), Draft Rules cannot be equated with administrative instructions.
Thus, finding no merit in any of the contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioner, the civil writ petition is dismissed.
Parties to hear their own costs.