Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner a Craftsman (Carpenter) in the Department of Health, claims that the action of the respondents in denying the pay scale of Rs. 1,200-2040 to him is violative of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Craftsman on June 24, 1986 in the pay scale of Rs. 350-500.
On the recommendation of the Pay Commission, this scale was raised to Rs. 775-1025 with effect from January 1, 1986.
As a result, the petitioner's pay was fixed in the revision scale of Rs. 775-1025.
In August 1990, the Government further revised the scale of pay.
The persons working in the pay scale of Rs. 775-1025 along with various other categories of employees were placed in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 subject to the condition that they possessed the minimum qualification of Matric with I.T.I./Polytechnic certificate.
The petitioner did not possess the qualification of Matric.
Consequently, he was not placed in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
He represented.
No relief was granted to him.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not granting the scale of Rs. 1200-2040, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
He avers that in the case of technical posts academic qualifications are of no relevance and as such the respondents cannot treat him differently from others holding similar posts only on the basis of academic qualifications.
The petitioner further avers that his conditions of service are governed by the provisions of the Haryana Health Directorate, Technical and Miscellaneous (Group-'C') Service Rules, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
According to the petitioner, the post of craftsman (Carpenter) has been placed in the scale of Rs. 950-1500.
Under the Rules, the minimum qualification required for this post in Middle with Diploma/Certificate from a recognised Institution.
In spite of the fact that he fulfils the qualification, he has not been given the scale of Rs. 950-1500.
On the contrary, he has been placed in the scale of Rs. 950-1400 with effect from May 1, 1990.
The petitioner claims that even if his claim for being placed in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 is not accepted, he is nevertheless entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 950-1500 with effect from June 27, 1989, when the rules were promulgated.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been averred that the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 has been sanctioned by the State Government only in respect of such persons as possessing the qualification of Matric with I.T.I./Polytechnic certificate and not to others.
Since the petitioner does not fulfil this qualification, he is not entitled to the pay scale claimed by him.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was recruited as a Craftsman (Carpenter) on June 24, 1986.
He was placed in the scale of Rs. 350-500.
This scale has been revised and raised to Rs. 775-1025 with effect from January 1, 1986.
Accordingly, the petitioner was placed in this scale with effect from the date of his appointment.
He continued to draw his salary in this scale even after the promulgation of the Rules on June 27, 1989, when the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 was sanctioned.
Once the competent authority had promulgated the statutory rules under Articles 309 of the Constitution of India and sanctioned the scale of Rs. 950-1500 for the category of Craftsman-cum-Carpenter, the petitioner was entitled to the fixation in his pay in the said scale of Rs. 950-1500.
The action of the respondents in denying this scale to the petitioner with effect from June 27, 1989 is per-se contrary to the Rules and cannot be sustained.
To this extent, the petitioner's grievance is well founded and deserves to be sustained.
It is the admitted position that he has been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1400 with effect from May 1, 1990.
The respondents have to give him the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 with effect from June 27, 1989 and refix his pay.
5.
However, the petitioner's claim for being placed in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 cannot be sustained.
This scale of pay has been granted only to such persons as possess the qualification of Matric with ITI/Polytechnic Certificate.
Admittedly, the petitioner does not fulfil this qualification.
He cannot thus claim parity with persons, who actually fulfil the requirement of academic qualifications.
Nor can it be said that the State cannot make a classification on the basis of educational qualifications and that all Craftsmen-cum-Carpenters working in Health Department are entitled to the grant of the same scale of pay irrespective of their academic attainments.
If the competent authority has decided to grant a higher scale of pay to the persons possessing certain academic qualifications, its action cannot be said to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Equal pay for equal work is not an absolute rule.
Differential treatment can be accorded on the basis of academic qualifications, nature of duties or other relevant factors.
It cannot be claimed that persons possessing higher qualifications which have a reasonable relationship with the requirements of a post cannot be given a higher salary than those who do not fulfil such qualifications.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the observations of a Full Bench of this Court in State of Punjab v. Gurcharan Singh, 1983(2) SLR 142.
The following question had arisen for the consideration of the full Bench :-  "Whether higher educational qualifications are a valid basis of classification for the purpose of the grant of a higher pay scale within the same service ......?"
This question was answered in the following words :-  "9.
To finally conclude, the answer to the question posed at the outset is rendered in the affirmative and it is held that higher educational qualifications are a valid basis of classification for the purposes of grant of a higher pay scale within the same service."
6.
The view taken by the Full Bench has the imprimature of the Apex Court in Mewa Ram v. All India Institute of Medical Science and others, AIR 1989 SC 1256.
Their Lordships were pleased to hold as under :-  "The application of doctrine would arise where employees are equal in every respect but they are denied equality in matters relating to the scale of pay.
While considering the question of application of principle of 'Equal pay for equal work' it has to be borne in mind that it is open to the State to classify employees on the basis of qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the posts concerned.
If the classification has reasonable nexus with the objective sought to be achieved, efficiency in the administration, the State would be justified in prescribing different pay scale but if the classification does not stand the test or reasonable nexus and the classification is founded on unreal, and unreasonable basis it would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution Equality must be among the equals, unequals cannot claim equality.
Even if the duties and functions are of similar nature but if the educational qualifications prescribed for the two posts are different and there is difference in measure of responsibilities, the principle of 'Equal pay of equal work' would not apply.
Different treatment to persons belonging to the same class is a permissible classification on the basis of educational qualifications."
7.
In view of the above, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents in denying the scale of Rs. 1,200-2040 to the petitioner on the ground that he does not possess the academic qualification of Matric is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The contention raised by the learned counsel is consequently rejected.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also submitted that in case of persons performing technical duties, academic qualifications are wholly irrelevant.
The contention is wholly devoid of merit.
Doctors, Engineers as well as Technicians perform technical duties.
It cannot be said that academic qualifications have no reasonable nexus with the performance of duties.
The relationship between academic qualifications and duties of different posts is a matter for experts to decide.
If the appropriate authority has after consideration of the matter, decided that even in case of posts of Carpenters etc. persons with minimum academic qualification of Matric should be given a higher scale of pay than others who did not possess such a qualification, its action cannot be questioned either on the anvil of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India or as being violative of the principle of "Equal pay for equal work'.
9.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner is entitled to be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 with effect from June 27, 1989.
His pay would now be fixed in this scale.
Consequential reliefs that ensue shall be granted to him within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In all other respects, there is no merit in this petition.
10.
The petition is disposed of in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.