S K Jain, J - Plaintiff-Kartar Singh joined the services of Punjab State in P.W.D.
Electricity Branch on 1731956 as Lower Division Clerk.
He was promoted to the post of Upper Division Clerk on 2291964 and was confirmed on the said post on 12.5.1967.
He was then promoted as Assistant on 881967 and confirmed on the said post on 2661971.
He was shown senior to Shri K D Dewan and Shri S N Gupta in the seniority list as on 3181972.
It remained unchallenged upto April, 1979.
The Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the 'Board') served a show cause notice dated 341979 (Ex. P.1) on the plaintiff intending to change the date of his confirmation from 2661971 to 16.11.1972 and updating that of Shri K D Dewan from 17111972 to 1831971.
Shri S N Gupta was also sought to be shown senior to him.
The representation of the plaintiff against the said show cause notice was rejected by the Board vide order dated 3031984 (Ex.P- 3).
It necessitated the filing of Civil Suit No. 8, dated 811987, "Kartar Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board."
by the plaintiff for a decree of declaration that Memo No. Ch-223/NGE/G-442 dated 3031984 issued by the Board was null and void, unconstitutional illegal and inoperative and that he was entitled to retain his original seniority as Assistant over and above Sarvshri K D Dewan and S N Gupta as noticed by the Board vide seniority list dated 2681976 (Annexure P.1).
2.
The suit was contested by the Board and on the pleadings of the parties, learned trial Court framed following issues :-  1.
Whether order dated 3031984 is illegal and void ?
2.
Whether plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
3.
Whether plaintiff has any cause of action ?
4.
Whether suit is bad on account of non-joinder of necessary parties ?
5.
Whether plaint has been properly verified ?
After the parties led evidence and their counsel were heard, the learned Sub Judge Ist Class decreed the suit of the plaintiff vide his judgment and decree dated 491989.
3.
Feeling aggrieved, the Board preferred Civil Appeal No. 20/386 of 511990 which was heard and dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Chandigarh vide his judgment and decree dated 2281991.
It is that judgment and decree of the first appellate Court which has been appealed against by the defendant-Board and which requires my examination of its sustainability.
4.
I have seen the pleadings in the suit, the evidence adduced by the parties in the suit and the judgments of both the Courts below.
DW-1 Surinder Kumar, Superintendent of the defendant-Board has deposed to the followed facts :-  "(i) that the plaintiff was appointed as UDC in the Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 1331956.
On bifurcation of the State of Punjab, he was allocated to the defendant-Board; (ii) that S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta who were graduates were directly recruited as UDCs in the said Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 361965 and 1.10.1956 respectively; (iii) that according to long standing policy prevailing in the Board graduate and non-graduate UDCs were to be promoted to the post of Assistant in the ratio 1 : 2 subject to the passing of the departmental examination although there is no record to prove this fact; (iv) that principle of seniority-cum-fitness was followed in the matter of promotions; (v) that prior to the passing of the impugned order Ex. P3, the date of confirmation on the post of Assistant of the plaintiff and S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta was 2661971, 17111972 and 20.11.1972 respectively."
It is not denied that Punjab Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) Provincial Service Class III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952, provided service condition of the employees of the Board in question.
Rule 9 of the said Rules deals with the seniority of the members of service.
It reads as under :-  "9.
The seniority of the members of the service for the time being serving in each class of appointment shown in Appendix 'A' shall be determined as follows :- SENIORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE SERVICE.
(i) Prior to confirmation (i.e. in the case of persons serving on probation or in an officiating capacity) in the order of the dates of their appointment or if such date be the same in respect of two or more persons, in the order of their ages, the older being placed above the younger.
(ii) After confirmation by their respective dates of confirmation, provided that where two or more members are confirmed w.e.f.
the same date they will retain the order to confirmation.
EXCEPTION :- If a member of the service is promoted temporarily to a post earlier than his senior for reasons other than the inefficiency of the senior person they will take rank inter se according to their relative seniority in the class from which they were promoted and the junior person thus promoted shall not be confirmed from a date earlier than the date of confirmation of his senior except on the score of inefficiency of the latter.
Provided further that if a member is appointed to a higher class later than a person who was junior to him in the lower class for reason which the appointing authority may certify in writing to be connected with the public interest the persons so appointed shall be given the same seniority in the higher class vis-a-vis such junior as he held in the lower class."
5.
It is admitted on both ends that the plaintiff was senior to S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta as UDC, both in respect of the date of joining as well as on the basis of date of confirmation.
It is not the case of the Board that S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta were promoted as Assistant earlier to the plaintiff on account of their having fallen under "Exception" to the Seniority Rule.
It is evident that graduate or non-graduate UDCs employed in the defendant-Board were performing same duties.
6.
Now the question which requires determination is whether the Board, i.e. the Haryana State Electricity Board, is competent to discriminate between graduate and non-graduate UDCs forming the same cadre having the common/joint seniority list in the matter of their promotion on the basis of quota fixed by the Board even though the requisite qualification for promotion to the post of Assistant is not BA  7.
Combined reading of para No. 3 of the plaint and corresponding para of the written statement shows that there is no dispute that the name of the plaintiff in the joint seniority list of UDCs in the Board in currency from 3181972 till April 1979 was mentioned at serial No. 61 whereas the names of S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta appeared at serial Nos. 72 and 73 respectively.
Therefore, S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta were undoubtedly junior to the plaintiff as UDCs in the joint seniority list of UDCs comprising of both graduate and non-graduates UDCs in the same cadre.
It is also not denied that the qualification for promotion to the post of Assistant from UDC is not from recognised university.
There is no gainsaying that all the UDCs either graduate or non-graduates are performing the same kind of work and duties and they belong to the same cadre having common/joint seniority list to the posts of Assistants.
The impugned orders dated 3031984 bearing No. CH/223/NGE/442 inserting the name of Shri K D Dewan at serial No. 74/A i.e. below Shri Sada Ram Sharma (Serial No. 74) and above Shri P C Jaswal (Serial No. 75) instead of Sr. No. 80 of the seniority list and that of Shri S N Gupta at serial No. 76/A i.e. below Shri Jai Parkash (Serial No. 76) and above Shri Kartar Singh plaintiff (Serial No. 77) instead of serial No. 81 of the list is wholly illegal, arbitrary discriminatory and violative of the equality clause contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as it supports to place S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta who are admittedly juniors to the plaintiff in service as UDCs in the Board, over and above the plaintiff.
Graduate and non-graduate UGCs are both regarded as fit and therefore, eligible for promotion.
It is, therefore, difficult to see how, consistently with the claim for equal opportunity any differentiation can be made between them by laying down a quota of promotion for each and giving preferential treatment to graduates over non-graduates in the matter of fixation of such quota.
The result of fixation of quota of promotion for each of the two categories of UDCs would be that when a vacancy arises in the post of Assistants which, according to the quota is reserved for graduate UDCs a non graduate UDC cannot be promoted to that vacancy, even if he is senior to all other graduate UDCs and more suitable than they.
His opportunity for promotion would be limited only to vacancies available for non-graduate UDCs.
That would clearly amount to denial of equal opportunity to him.
8.
In holding the above view, I am fortified by the ratio laid down in Mohammad Shujat Ali and others etc. v Union of India and others etc., 1975(1) SCR 449, followed in a set of following three civil appeals by the Apex Court  (i) Civil Appeal No. 3341 of 1983, Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ravinder Kumar and others;  (ii) Civil Appeal No. 3342 of 1983, Gurdial Singh and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and others; and  (iii) Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 2693 of 1984,  Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala  Versus  Ravinder Kumar Sharma.
D/d.
October 27, 1986."
9.
It has, thus, been rightly held by the two Courts below that impugned order Annexure P-3 was null and void, unconstitutional illegal and inoperative.
10.
Learned Counsel for the appellant, has vehemently argued that the suit was bad on account of non-joinder of S/Shri K D Dewan and S N Gupta as parties.
I do not find force in the argument of the learned counsel.
The plaintiff has sought to challenge the impugned order (Annexure P-3) passed by the defendant-Board.
He has not claimed any relief against them.
Admittedly, according to the joint and common seniority list of the UDCs in currency with effect from 3181972 to April 1979, the plaintiff was senior to them.
The fresh seniority list (Annexure D1) has been held to be null and void.
Therefore, the suit cannot be held bad on account of their non-joinder.
11.
As a sequal to the above discussion the concurrent findings recorded by the two Courts below are affirmed.
12.
Resultantly, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.