AL Bahri, J - The petitioner joined Indian Air Force as Airman in 1986.
He failed to pass the examination in spite of three chances for Commission in the Indian Air Force.
He had two opinions :- (i) either to stick on in the Air Force as an Airman or ii) to leave the job.
He chose to leave the job after spending 5 years and 54 days.
He left Air Force on August 2, 1991.
At that time the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-Servicemen Rules, 1982 (hereinafter called as 'Old Rules') were applicable and he being an Ex-Serviceman as defined was entitled to seek civil services.
The definition of Ex-Serviceman as per these Rules reads as under :-  "(c) 'Ex-Serviceman' means a person who joined any rank, whether as a combatant or as a non-combatant, on or after the first day of November 1962, in the Armed Force of the Union, excluding the Assam Rifles, Lok Sahayak Sena, Jammu and Kashmir Militia, Territorial Army, Defence Security Corps and the General Reserve Engineering Force, as had been released otherwise than on grounds of misconduct or inefficiency."
2-3.
In the year 1993, 64 vacancies were advertised in the newspaper which had occurred in the year 1991.
Copy of the advertisement is Annexure P.3.
The applications were invited for PCS (Executive Branch) and allied services examination, 1991.
A press-note was also issued in November 1993 that such vacancies were of 1991 and were being filled.
Copy of the press note is Annexure P4.
The Old Rules were amended in 1982 (to be called the Amended Rules).
These Rules came into force with effect from September 22, 1992.
The definition of Ex-Serviceman stood amended and reads as under :-  "(c) "Ex-Serviceman" means a person who has served in any rank, whether as a combatant or a non-combatant, in the Naval Military and Air Force of the Union of India (hereinafter referred to as 'the Armed Forces of the Union of India') and who has -  (i) retired from such service alter earning his pension; or  (ii) been released from such service on medical grounds attributable to military service or circumstances beyond his control and awarded medical or other disability pension; or  (iii) been released, otherwise than his own request, from such service as a result of reduction in establishment; or (iv) been released from such service after completing the specific period of engagement otherwise than at his own request or by way of dismissal or discharge on account of misconduct or inefficiency and has been given a gratuity;  but does not include a person who has served in the Defence Security' Corps, the General Reserve Engineering Force, the Lok Sahayak Sena and the Para Military Forces, but includes personnel of the Lok Sahayak Sena of the following categories, namely :  (i) pension-holders for continuous embodied service;  (ii) persons with disability attributable to military service; and  (iii) gallantry award winners.
Explanation :- The persons serving in the Armed Forces of the Union, who in retirement from service would come under the category of 'Ex-Servicemen' may be permitted to apply for re-employment one year before the completion of the specified terms of engagement and avail themselves of all concessions available to Ex-Servicemen but shall not be permitted to leave the uniform until they complete the specified terms of engagement in the Armed Forces of the Union."
4.
From the amended definition of Ex-Serviceman as reproduced above, it is now clear that the petitioner cannot be treated as an Ex-Serviceman because he left Indian Air Force on his own request.
In the present writ petition filed by the petitioner he claims that the Amended Rule of 1988 amending the definition of Ex-Serviceman is ultra vires the provision of the Constitution.
The amended Rules will not affect recruitment to the post which fell vacant much prior to the enforcement of the amended Rules.
In other words the relevant law as existing on the date of vacancies occurred would be applicable for filling such posts.
5.
On notice of motion the written statement has been filed on behalf of Punjab Public Service Commission.
The writ petition was amended and reply thereto was also filed by the Commission.
The stand taken up in the written statement is that the relevant law prevalent at the time of filling the posts would be applicable although such posts may have occurred earlier.
6.
The question of law arising in the present case as summarized from the pleadings aforesaid is about the law or the Rules which would be applicable for filling the post which had occurred in 1991 but were being filled in 1993 as during this period there was amendment of the Rules i.e. whether Old Rules would be applicable which were in force in 1991 or the New Rules which were in force in 1993.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Raj Pal Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1985 SC 1263.
That was a case with respect to applicability of Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules as adopted in Haryana.
A proviso added to Rule 4 depriving benefit to persons released on compassionate grounds.
Such amendment was held to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was held that the Ex-Serviceman released on compassionate grounds were also entitled to the benefits of Rule 4 and the mere fact that they were released from military services on compassionate grounds could not disentitle them as they satisfy the requirement of Rule 4 of the Rules as it originally stood.
The grounds on which they were released were not material.
If once they were held to be Ex-military Serviceman, they were entitled to the benefit of Rule 4.
In para 6 of the judgment it was observed as under :-  "All those persons released from military service constitute one class and it is not possible to single out certain persons of the same class for differential treatment.
There appears to be no reasonable classification between the persons who were released on compassionate grounds and those who were released on other grounds and in this respect the petitioner have been deprived of the equal opportunity.
The amendment, by which proviso was added therefore, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and, therefore, bad."
In Y. V. Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852, it was held in para 9 of the judgment as under :  "The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It is admitted by counsel for both the parties that henceforth promotion to the post of Sub-Registrar Grade II will be according to the new rules on the zonal basis and, therefore, there was no question of challenging the new rules.
But the question is of "filling the vacancies that occurred prior to the amended rules.
We have not the slightest doubt that the posts which fell vacant prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the new Rules."
Relying upon the aforesaid decision this Court in Rajinder Gandhi, Deputy Accountant General and others v. Union of India and others, 1983(3) SLR 260, decided the case relating to the Indian Audit and Accounts Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1983 and it was held that the vacancies occurred prior to the promulgation of the Rules were to be filled up according to the Old Rules and not by the Rules of 1983.
YV Rangaiah's case was further approved and relied upon by the Supreme Court in P Ganeshwar Rao and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1988 SC 2068.
8.
Applying the ratio of the decision aforesaid to the facts of the present case the petitioner cannot be denied the benefit of this status of Ex- Serviceman with respect to posts which fell vacant in the year 1991.
At that time the Old Rules were applicable and he was fully covered under the definition of Ex-Serviceman and thus entitled to join Civil Service as such.
On account of delay in not filling such posts such rights could not be taken away by amendment of the Rules.
Such amended Rules would apply prospectively to the posts falling vacant after enforcement of the amended Rules.
Holding as above, the present writ petition is allowed with the direction to the respondents to treat the petitioner as an Ex-Serviceman and consider his case for filling such posts which had fallen vacant before the Rules were amended.
There will be no order as to costs.