MS Liberhan, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has sought two reliefs through this writ petition : (i) that the service rendered by the petitioner in rural area in the State of Punjab should be taken into account for considering the case of the petitioner for admission to MD course against the 33 seats meant for HCMS doctors; (ii) issue a direction to the respondents to permit the petitioner to cross his efficiency bar taking into consideration the rural service rendered in the State of Punjab.
2.
Skeleton facts seeking the above reliefs are that the petitioner joined the State service on 24.4.1984 and his services were regularised with effect from 1121988.
The State of Haryana reserved 33 seats in the Post Graduate Courses for the HCMS doctors serving in the State.
The eligibility condition for competing against the reserved seats provided as under :  "Reserved Seats  (i) In case of 2 years system  (a) HCMS doctors who have successfully completed the probation period and also have total service of 5 years of rural service in the State will be eligible for the grant in the State including three years of No Objection Certificate for PG Course against reserved seats in Medical College, Rohtak.
(b) The period spent on ad hoc service in the State and in the rural areas in the State will be taken into account for the purpose of counting the period of 5 years service in the State and three years rural service respectively.
(c) In lieu of doing the PG Courses they will have to execute a bond to serve the State Government for a period of 5 years/in the case of diploma courses.
In case, they fail to serve the State Government, they will have to deposit in Government Treasury Rs. 60,000/- and Rs. 30,000/- with interest demanded by the Government from times to time respectively.
(d) HCMS doctors selected against reserved seats will be treated on duty and they will be paid full pay and allowances for the duration of their course.
(i) 3 Years System  (a) HCMS doctors who have successfully completed the probationary period and also have total service of 4 years in the State including 2 years of rural service in the State will be eligible for the grant of No Objection Certificate for doing PG Course against reserved seats in Medical College, Rohtak.
(b) The period spent on ad hoc service in the State and in the rural areas in the State will be taken into account for the purpose of counting the period of four years' service in the State and two years' rural service respectively.
(c) In lieu of doing the PG Course they will have to execute a bond to serve the State Government for a period of five years in the case of MD/MS courses and three years in the case of diploma courses.
In case, they fail to serve the State Government, they will have to deposit in Government Treasury Rs. 60,000/ and Rs.30,000/- with interest demanded the Government from time to time respectively.
(d) HCMS doctors selected against reserved seats will be treated on duty and they will be paid full pay and allowances for the duration of their course.
It is not disputed that the petitioner served the State of Punjab in rural area.
3.
The learned counsel for the respondent, on the very outset, and I must appreciate very fairly and candidly, conceded that so far as crossing of efficiency bar is concerned keeping in view the rules for clearing the efficiency bar, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of rural service rendered in the State of Punjab.
Otherwise also reading of Rule 13 of the Haryana Civil Medical Service (Class-II) Rules, 1978 hereinafter referred to as the Rules, the relevant condition for crossing the efficiency bar runs as under :  "Unless he has served at least for one year in rural areas or at least for one year under family welfare programme."
It is categorically stated that the petitioner cannot be deprived of the benefit of serving the rural areas in the State of Punjab, particularly in view of the law laid down in Dr. Sameer Kaushal v. The State of Punjab and others, 1991 Punjab 209 : 1991(3) SCT 627 (P&H), wherein similar rule was under consideration.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondent refuted the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of his rural service in the State of Punjab for seeking admission to Post Graduate Course against the seats reserved for HCMS doctors.
Learned counsel for the respondents states that it is a concession or privilege given by the State keeping in view its interest for providing more qualified doctors in its service and the State decided to send the persons for higher education.
It is for the State to decide as a policy to prescribe the eligibility norms for sending the employees for higher education.
It is the purview of the administrative authorities to lay down the eligibility condition.
Ordinarily, the acts of the State are presumed to be valid and in accordance with the rules unless shown to be otherwise.
Courts cannot substitute their views for those of the administrative authorities who are better placed to judge the requirement of administrative expediency in such situations.
5.
It has been categorically provided that for being considered for grant of the concession for competing against the seats reserved for in service candidates, a person must have served the State for four years out of which two years must be in the rural area in the State of Haryana.
6.
At this stage, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the condition imposed with respect to the service in the State is arbitrary and has no nexus with the object to be achieved by the State.
7.
In order to support both the contentions i.e. the experience gained by the petitioner in rural service of the State of Punjab should be considered and with respect to the arbitrariness of the rule learned counsel relied upon 1992 Punjab and Haryana 209, wherein this Court while interpreting the eligibility condition has held "all the PCMS-II doctors, who have served the State Government for a minimum period of three years' rural regular service (ad hoc service continuous with regular service will be counted) will be eligible for admission to Post-Graduate Medical Degree/Diploma Course under 60% quota."
This Court came to the conclusion that the services rendered in the rural area of the other State cannot be counted.
While in the context of the eligibility condition in the State of Punjab, it was observed that no discrimination can be made on their basis of residence or any other consideration.
The guiding rules have to be professional excellence.
Though finally interpreting the rule, it was observed that the only requirement under those eligible condition was that doctor should be a member of PCMS Class-II and should have rendered three years' rural service in Government Hospital.
Resultantly, it was found that the rural services rendered in the State of Himachal cannot be ignored.
The emphasis of the observation laid by the learned counsel for the petitioner runs as under :-  "That the interview for admission to the MD/M.S./Diploma Course is going to be held within a week and if the No Objection Certificate for doing PG Course in Medical College, Rohtak against reserved seats will not be issued to the petitioner, the petitioner will suffer an irreparable loss and injury."
There is no dispute with the proposition of law observed in view of the facts and circumstances of that case.
However, it is not pari materia with the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Here the policy makers specifically provided the rural service in the State i.e. the State of Haryana alone to be counted for the purposes of eligibility.
I find force in the contention of learned counsel for the respondents to the effect that this condition has been imposed particularly keeping in view that the scheme is for giving incentive to the employees of their State who willingly served the rural area of the State.
Since the State has to meet the expenditure i.e. the salary during the course, it is for the State to decide under what conditions the employees should be sent for higher education.
Courts would be loath to interfere unless the condition imposed is shown to be arbitrary, unreasonable, or violative of the Constitution, which in my view is not the case here.
In the case cited the policy was not capable of any other interpretation than what this Court has put in.
Similarly the rule in hand is plain and is not capable of two interpretations and the only interpretation possible is that only the rural service in the State makes a person eligible for the grant of No Objection Certificate for doing PG Course against the seats reserved for in service candidates in the Medical College, Rohtak.
It is also conceded that No Objection Certificate to the petitioner would be granted against the seats meant for open category and the petitioner would be granted leave for study without pay in accordance with law and the petitioner would not be deprived of his lien against the post during the course.
In view of the observations made above, I find no force in the writ petition except to the extent that the petitioner would be allowed to cross the efficiency bar from the date it was due to it with all consequential benefits.