Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was admitted to the Three Year Course leading to the Degree of MD (Pathology) on August 2, 1993, prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to admit her in the speciality of Radio-diagnosis.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed the MB BS examination from Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot in the year 1991.
In 1993, the respondents issued an advertisement regarding admission to the Post Graduate Medical Courses in the Government Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab.
This admission was to be made on the basis of the result of a competitive entrance examination.
The candidates had to submit their application forms for the entrance test by May 24, 1993.
The test was scheduled to be held on June 13, 1993.
The result was to be declared on June 21, 1993.
Initially the interview was scheduled to be held on July 19, 1993.
The candidates who qualified the written test were to indicate their preference of the College as also the choice of three subjects/specialities in which they wanted to be considered for admission.
3.
The petitioner appeared in the test held on June 13, 1993.
She avers that she was placed at Sr. No. 66 in the entrance test.
Finally after giving her credit for the academic qualifications etc., she was placed at Sr. No. 48 in the merit list.
She avers that she had opted for admission in the Courses for MD (Radio-diagnosis), MS (General Surgery) and MD (Pathology) in order of preference.
According to her, she was informed at the time of interview that a seat in MD (Pathology) only was available at Government Medical College, Patiala.
She consequently opted for this seat and was admitted to the Course.
She has further averted that Dr. Daljit Singh, who was placed at No. 22 in the merit list and had been admitted to MD (Radio- diagnosis) vacated the seat.
The petitioner made a representation for admission against this seat.
A copy of this representation has been produced as Annexure P.3.
Since the respondents did not take any action in this representation and the petitioner apprehended that the claim of a person lower in merit than her was likely to be considered, she approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It has been inter-alia averred that the action of the respondents is not considering her claim from admission in the Speciality of Radio-diagnosis and in proceeding to offer the seat to a person lower in merit is discriminatory and violative of Art. 14 of the Constitution of India.
This writ petition was admitted on November 23, 1993 and was ordered to be listed for hearing within one month.
4.
On the same day, CM Application No. 11612/93 which had been filed by one Dr. Kamal Sharma for being impleaded as a Respondent in the petition, had also came up for hearing before the Motion Bench.
This application was allowed and the applicant was permitted to file his return.
5.
A written statement has been filed by Dr. KC Mishra, Principal, Government Medical College, Amritsar.
Another written statement has also been filed by the newly added respondent, viz. Dr. Kamal Sharma, Mr. Inderjit Malhotra has made a grievance of the fact that the copy of the written statement filed by respondent No. 4 had not been furnished to him.
Mr. Sibal appearing for the respondent asserted that the copy had been supplied to the learned counsel.
Be that as it may, counsel for the parties have only referred to the written statement filed by respondent No. 2.
6.
In this written statement, it has been inter-alia, a averred that on February 8, 1993, a notification had been published in the Gazette laying down the procedure for selection of students for admission to the Three Year Post Graduate Degree Course "in pursuance of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India directions in Civil Misc.
Petition No. 7657 of 1989....." It has been further averred that the petitioner had opted for the course in Pathology and she was accordingly admitted.
It has been categorically stated that "no other option was given by her."
Since she had already been admitted in accordance with the option exercised by her and has joined the course, she cannot be permitted to join any other speciality and "only those candidates are to be given admission against vacant seat who forego selection......at the time of interview."
The respondent also avers that "all the candidates who attended the interview before the selection Board were asked for their choice and depending upon the availability of seat on her/his turn, the admission in the subject of his/her choice was granted.
Accordingly, Dr. Babli was granted admission in MD (Pathology) course at Medical College, Patiala which she accepted under her signature (Annexure R.I.)."
On these premises, the respondent claims that there is no merit in this petition and it deserves to be dismissed.
7.
The procedure for admission has been prescribed vide notification dated February 8 1993.
A perusal thereof shows that 25% of the total seats were to be filled up on All India basis through competitive Entrance Test.
Of the remaining seats, 60% were to be filled up from amongst the eligible members of the State Medical Service and 40% seats from amongst the Medical Graduates of Punjab domicile.
In paragraph 6 of this notification, it was, inter- alia, provide as under :-  "6.
CHOICE OF SUBJECT After the declaration of the result, the choice of subjects for the Post Graduation and of institution will be obtained from the candidates at the time of interview and allocation made immediately will also be displayed on the notice board.
Total number of seats in two Medical/Dental Colleges in each speciality will be printed in the Prospectus.
Interview is mandatory for all eligible candidates on the specified date and no separate interview letters will be issued.
The selection in each speciality and institution will be based on merit-cum-choice of each candidate.
Once choice is exercised and admission taken, no change of speciality will be allowed.
Candidates may, however, choose to remain on the waiting list for a particular speciality after foregoing selection in any other speciality," 
(Emphasis supplied.).
8.
Is the action of the respondents in conformity with the above provision?
9.
Mr. Inderjit Malhotra, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that the petitioner has a right to be admitted to the speciality of Radio- diagnosis in preference to any other person below her in order of merit.
Mr. Sibal, learned counsel for the respondent, contends that the petitioner having exercised her choice and taken the admission, cannot be allowed to change the speciality.
10.
A perusal of the written statement filed by respondent No. 2 shows that a categorical averment has been made in paragraph 10 that the petitioner "opted for MD (Pathology which she was given.
No other option was given by her."
This averment has not been controverted by filing a replication.
Still further, the respondents have produced a copy of the admission order passed in the case of the petitionr as Annexure R.2.
A perusal of this document show that at Sr. No. 8, the petitioner has categorically stated as under :-  "I hereby accept the admission in MD (Pathology) course session, 1993 under 40% quota at Medical College, Patiala and I shall not claim any change in speciality and Institution later on as laid down in the admission rules.
dated 281993.
Sd/-Babli, Signature of the Candidate."
The above statement of the petitioner clearly corroborates the averments made in paragraph 1 of the written statement.
Still further, a perusal of this proforma shows that at Sr. No. 9, a candidate could have been indicated the three specialities and Institutions in order of preference.
The candidate also had the choice to remain on the waiting list for selection in the speciality and institution in order of preference submitted by him/her.
She did not indicate any choice against Sr. No. 9 nor she chose to remain on the waiting list.
In view of above, it is clear that the petitioner had opted for admission to MD (Pathology) course and had not exercised her option for any other speciality.
11.
Is the action of the respondents violative of the provisions of Art. 14 of the Constitution of India?
12.
It is no doubt true that the admissions to various Courses should be made solely on the basis of merits.
This has been repeatedly held by their Lordships of the supreme Court.
Reference in this behalf is made to a decision in Pradeep Jain v Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1420.
It has been reiterated recently in Anand S Biji v. the State of Kerala and others, JT 1993(3) SC 130 : 1993(3) SCT.
268 : 1993(3) SCT.
763.
However, the inter-se merit has to be seen only in respect of the candidates who opt for a particular speciality.
In view of the uncontroverted position that the petitioner had opted only for admission to the course in Pathology and not for any other speciality, her claim as made out in this petition cannot be sustained.
In any event, the petitioner already been studying for the last more than four months.
If she is not allowed to shift to the speciality of Radio-diagnosis, the time, effort and money spent in her study would go waste and it would lead to a chain reaction in different specialities.
This will not promote the interest of education.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am not persuaded to hold that the petitioner has a right to be considered for admission in the speciality of Radio-diagnosis.
In accordance with the provision of paragraph 6, the seat has to be filled up from amongst the persons who had chosen to remain on the waiting list.
It may accordingly be filled up.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly