SD Agarwala, C.J.
- These are two writ petitions.
Civil Writ Petition No 15912 of 1992 has been filed by Ms. Saroj Devi & others and Civil Writ Petition No 16626 of 1992 has been filed by four petitioners, Ms. Sunita and others inter alia for a relief that the respondents be directed to treat the petitioners as eligible for the post of Laboratory Technician.
2.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana issued advertisement No. 3 of 1992, Category No. 14 in respect of some posts of Laboratory Technicians (Malaria) for the Health Department, Government of Haryana dated 771992.
The following academic qualifications were required for these posts :  (a) Matriculation with Hindi;  (b) Diploma in Laboratory Technician from Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal or from an Institute recognised by the Govt. of Haryana.
3.
The petitioners passed their Diploma in Laboratory Technician Vocational course from the Government Vocational Institute Rohtak/Karnal.
The case of the petitioners is that the certificates which they have obtained from the Vocational Training Institute are equivalent to the Diploma in Laboratory Technician from Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal and in any case, it should be treated as an institute recognised by the Government of Haryana as the vocational Training Institutes are run by the Industrial Training Department, Government of Haryana.
4.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Haryana in which it has been categorically stated that the Laboratory Technician Certificate obtained by the petitioners is not equivalent to the Diploma in Laboratory Technical from the Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal.
It has been categorically stated that the Course conducted by the Vocational Training Institute is deficient in practical training and the practical training has to be given to the persons before they can be appointed to the posts in question.
In any case, it is disputed that the Diploma obtained by the petitioners is equivalent to the diploma in Laboratory Technician from Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal.
5.
Whether a particular Diploma is equivalent to the Diplomas given by the Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal is of highly technical nature and it is not possible for this court to go into this question, this is a matter which is entirely in the jurisdiction of the expert of the branch in question.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, they applied primarily on an advertisement issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana which required the following two essential qualifications :  (a) Matriculation with Hindi;  (b) Diploma in Laboratory Technician from Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal or from an Institute recognised by the Government of Haryana.
It is not disputed that the petitioners do not have the Diploma in Laboratory Technician.
Further, it is also not disputed that the Vocational Training Institutes are not recognised by the Government of Haryana.
In these circumstances we are clearly of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to the posts in question unless Diplomas from the Institutes recognised from the Government of Haryana are obtained by the petitioners.
In these circumstances, no mandamus can be issued directing the respondents to consider the petitioners for the posts which were advertised.
In the interest of justice however, we direct that it will be open to the petitioners to make a representation to the Department concerned for the determination of the question as to whether the Diploma obtained by them should be treated as equivalent to the Diploma from Bacteriologist Laboratory, Karnal and when this decision is given, thereafter, it will be open to the petitioners to compete for the posts in question.
In case the representations are filed by the petitioners, the authorities concerned shall dispose of the same in accordance with law and we hope and trust that the authorities concerned will dispose of the representations expeditiously, preferably within three months, in order to enable the petitioners to avail the opportunity to appear for the selection in the next advertisement.
Interim order passed by this court on 4121992 is hereby vacated.
The result of the selection may be declared.
Petitions are disposed of accordingly.