RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner Hans Raj was appointed as a Store Munshi on work-charged basis with the respondents on April 17, 1980.
His services were terminated on July 17, 1987 which led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
On July 30, 1987, notice of motion was issued for April 14, 1987 and the termination of services of the petitioner was stayed till further orders.
While the case was pending at the notice of motion stage, the order of termination of services of the petitioner was withdrawn on September 7, 1987 (Annexure P.6 with the amended writ petition) and he was reverted from the post of Store Munshi to the post of Store Chaukidar.
The formal order to that effect was passed by the Executive Engineer on September 7, 1987 (Annexure P.9 with the writ petition).
The passing of the order of reversion of the petitioner, necessitated amendment of the writ petition to impugn the said order.
Ultimately the writ petition was admitted, after amendment, on January 20, 1988 and the stay was ordered to continue subject to the condition that if the post is not available in the Circle in which the petitioner is working, he can be transferred to another Circle as work Munshi.
Unfortunately, the petitioner died on August 15, 1993 and the Legal Representatives have been ordered to be brought on record in place of the petitioner.
2.
After the stay order was made to continue by the order of the Motion Bench dated January 20, 1988, a letter was written by the Superintending Engineer Canal Lining Circle, Ferozepur to the Chief Engineer (Lining), Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh on February 1, 1988 informing the latter that there was no vacant post of Store Munshi/Work Munshi in the circle, therefore, in view of the stay order granted by this Court on January 20, 1988, petitioner Hans Raj, be posted in some other Circle where the post of Store Munshi was available.
It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that in spite of the stay order, the petitioner was made to work as a Store Chaukidar and not Store Munshi and was in fact paid the emoluments of Store Chaukidar.
He has submitted that a legal notice was also issued by the counsel for the petitioner to the respondent to comply with the stay order and later on even a representation was addressed to the Executive Engineer on September 9, 1988 to post the petitioner as a Store Munshi.
Still he was only allowed to continue as Store Chaukidar.
3.
In view of the fact that petitioner has died during the pendency of the writ petition, it may not be necessary to go into the legality of the order of reversion of the petitioner from the post of Store Munshi to Store Chaukidar.
Suffice it to mention that till the decision of the writ petition, by virtue of the stay order, petitioner was entitled to work as a Store Munshi and naturally would have been entitled to draw the pay as such.
From the letter written by the Superintending Engineer, Canal Lining Circle to the Chief Engineer, Irrigation works, Punjab on February 1, 1988, it cannot be said that there was any misunderstanding on the part of the respondents regarding interpretation of the stay order.
It was clearly understood that the petitioner was to be posted as a Store Munshi by virtue of the stay order.
Depriving the petitioner to work as a Store Munshi in spite of the stay order naturally effected his emoluments which he would have drawn as a Store Munshi.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that he is not in a position to say one way or the other whether the petitioner actually worked as a Store Munshi or Store Chaukidar after the grant of the stay order.
Consequently, it is held that if the petitioner was made to work as Store Chaudkidar instead of Store Munshi in spite of the stay order, he would be entitled to the emoluments of the post of Store Munshi as if he had deemingly worked as such for the said period.
In case he actually worked as Store Munshi and got the emoluments of Store Munshi, then he would not be entitled to any thing more.
5.
In para 9 of the amended writ petition, it has been asserted as under :-  "That the petitioner completed his five years service as Store Munshi on work-charged basis with effect from 17.4.1985.
His case for regularisation as Store Munshi has been sent by the concerned Superintending Engineer vide letter No. 1107/8-E dated 1571986 to respondent No. 1, but no final decision has been taken so far."
This para has been admitted by the respondents in the written statement.
It is clear from the above assertion and the admission on the part of the respondents that the matter regarding regularisation of the petitioner's service was pending consideration with the respondents.
It is not clear from the record of the case, neither the respondents counsel is in a position to apprise this Court as to what is the final decision regarding the regularisation of the services of the petitioner.
6.
Taking the aforesaid facts into consideration, it is hereby held that the petitioner's Legal Representatives would be entitled to receive the difference in emoluments of the post of Store Munshi and Store Choukidar from the period the petitioner was reverted till his death in case the petitioner was made to work as Store choukidar and not as store Munshi in spite of the stay order granted by this Court.
Let this direction be carried out within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Further, the respondents would also decide the case of the petitioner regarding regularisation of service, if already not decided within four months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case it is decided to regularise the services of the petitioner, needless to mention that the legal representatives of the petitioner would be entitled to the consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the above terms.
No costs.