JS Narang, J - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the respective pleas submitted in the application and the reply submitted thereto.
2.
The claim of the workman is that the award dated 2.12.1992/18.6.1993 has been made in favour of the workman vide which the reference has been answered in his favour with a direction that he be reinstated with full back wages from the date of the demand notice which is dated 10.12.1988.
This award has been made the subject-matter of challenge by way of filing CWP No. 1020 of 1994.
The petition was taken up on 321994 and notice of motion was issued and the operation of award had been stayed, subject to compliance of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
Ultimately, the petition was admitted vide order dated May 31, 1994 and for the purpose of arguments with regard to compliance of Section 17-B of the Act, the matter was posted for July 19, 1994.
For unexplainable reasons, the arguments were not addressed in regard thereto.
Subsequently, the instant application has been filed by the workman in the year 2002 as the compliance of Section 17-B of the Act had not been made, despite the affidavit submitted by the workman, which has been contested by the Management.
3.
Notice of the instant application was issued vide order dated August 23, 2002 and that reply to this application was filed by the Management on 27.1.2003 and that replication was filed by the workman which was taken on record by virtue of allowing C.M.
No. 4664 of 2003 vide order dated 2522003.
4.
The plea of the workman is that he has not been paid wages in compliance to Section 17-B of the Act.
The Management has taken the object that the workman is running a shop for repairs of electrical gadgets, therefore, being gainfully employed, is not entitled to relief under Section 17-B of the Act.
5.
This fact has been disputed on the ground that this is not a gainful employment as indicated under Section 17-B of the Act.
He has also categorically stated that de hors a repairs shop, he has to work as a labourer, if any job is available.
6.
The stand of the respondents is that the workman had set up his welding shop at village Dadwan (Dhariwal) and was running the same under electricity connection No. KR-52/639 and that the said connection was being used under commercial category right from the very beginning, as is evident from the reply submitted by the Management to the demand notice.
It is also submitted that one of the officials of the Management has visited the place and found that as a matter of fact the aforesaid connection was being illegally exploited.
Thus, the workman is not entitled to any benefit by virtue of Section 17-B of the Act.
7.
The aforesaid fact has been controverted by the workman by way of submitting rejoinder to the reply filed to the application.
It has been contested that the work carried out by the workman to sustain himself, would not mean gainful employment.
8.
Learned counsel for the Management has argued that a perusal of Section 17-B of the Act would show that if the workman is working for himself that would amount to gainful employment and even if he is earning subsistence allowance, he would not be allowed any benefit by virtue of Section 17-B of the Act.
In support of his contention, he has placed reliance on a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Dena Bank v. Kirti Kumar T Patel, 1998(1) SCT 57 (SC) : 1999(2) Supreme Court Cases 196.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondent-workman has argued that a perusal of Section 17-B of the Act shows that the gainful employment would mean only if the workman is employed in any establishment during the interregnum period.
It is admitted position that some work may have to be carried out to sustain himself but this would not mean gainful employment, in any manner.
10.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the record and their respective pleadings.
11.
I am of the opinion that the workman is certainly not gainfully employed.
Even if, it is accepted that he had been running a shop for welding process or he has been running any electrical repairs shop, this would not mean that he is gainfully employed in any establishment.
The subsistence allowance as has been interpreted or as has been mentioned by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dena Bank's case (supra), cannot be read in the manner, in which the learned counsel for the Management has projected.
Section 17-B of the Act certainly means that the amounts were to be paid, on the basis of the last drawn wages, so that no loss is caused to the Management or additional benefits are being given to the workman.
But such payment would be enough to subsist.
The gainful employment would also mean that something is gained by the workman, while working under some establishment and not under the self-employment.
It may also be noticed that Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that if the work, which was being carried out by the workman under the Management, is available in abundance, the workman may not be granted benefit under Section 17-B of the Act.
Reference is made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kendriya Vidalaya Sangathan and another v. SC Sharma, 2005(1) SCT 569 (SC) : 2005-II LLJ 153.
12.
It shall be apposite to notice Section 17-B of the Act which reads as under :-  "17-B.
Payment of full wages to workman pending proceedings in higher courts.
- Where in any case a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal by its award directs reinstatement of any workman and the employer prefers any proceedings against such award in a High Court or the Supreme Court, the employer shall be liable to pay such workman, during the period of pendency of such proceedings in the High Court or the Supreme Court, full wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such period and an affidavit by such workman had been filed to that effect in such Court : Provided that where it is proved to the satisfaction of the High Court or the Supreme Court that such workman had been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration during any such period or part thereof, the Court shall order that no wages shall be payable under this section for such period or part, as the case may be."
13.
The purpose and object for incorporating the aforesaid provisions is to remove hardship to a certain extent that may be caused to the workman due to delay in implementation of the award during the pendency of the proceedings in which the said award is under challenge before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
There are no buts and ifs provided to such obligation to be complied with but at the same time, it cannot be used for the purpose of enrichment which would mean that if the workman is gainfully employed in any management after the termination and/or during the pendency of the proceedings before the High Court or the Supreme Court, the relief may not be granted under Section 17-B of the Act.
The question every time arises as to what is meant by gainful employment during the pendency of the proceedings before the High Court or the Supreme Court.
In common parlance, the amount being received by a workman for meeting out his personal expenses and also the maintenance of the family is not a gainful employment but anything which is received beyond it, may be termed as a gainful employment.
Keeping this fact in view, the Legislature has specifically provided that during the pendency of the proceedings, the workman should be paid the last drawn wages, which included every kind of payment, received by him at the time of termination of his services.
Thus, it would depend upon the facts of each case as to whether the workman is gainfully employed or not.
In this regard, it shall be incumbent upon the management to controvert the fact of gainful employment on the part of the workman but this shall not absolve the workman from the responsibility to disclose as to how and in what manner, the workman has been sustaining himself after the order of termination of his services and of course, till the date of filing of the affidavit for seeking invocation of the benefit under Section 17-B of the Act.
14.
In the facts of the instant case, I am of the opinion that the workman even if carried out the job of Welder at his instance and has also carried out the job of repairs of electrical gadgets cannot be indicative as to whether he has been earning more than required i.e. the amount beyond the last drawn wages inclusive of all kinds of benefits.
Thus, the mere mentioning that the workman has been engaged in some vocation could not be sufficient to non-suit the claim of the workman under Section 17-B of the Act.
In this regard, reference may be made to the dicta of Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in re : Rajinder Kumar Kinra v. Delhi Administration, 1984(4) SCC 635.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has categorically observed that if the workman has been helping his father-in-law in his absence for maintaining his family during the period of unemployment caused due to unjustified dismissal, such earning could not be termed as gainful employment and, therefore, the workman shall be held entitled to full back wages.
15.
Thus, I hold that the workman is not gainfully employed as envisaged under Section 17-B of the Act.
Therefore, he is entitled to the relief under Section 17-B of the Act of payment of last drawn wages at the time of termination of his services.
16.
In view of the above, the Management is directed to make compliance of Section 17-B of the Act from the date of publication of the award in view of the dicta settled by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dean Bank's case (supra).
It shall be appreciated, if the compliance is made within 15 days before the date fixed for hearing of the petition.
It is further observed that if the compliance is not made, the petition shall stand dismissed without being referred to the Bench for further order.
Adjourned to 10.1.2007.
Petition dismissed.