RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk on 17121956 in the office of Consulting Architect to Government, Punjab at Shimla.
With effect from 1.1.1961,the office of Consulting Architect and the Senior Architect, Capital Project were merged and a new Department of Architecture was created.
As per the averments made in the petition, there were no statutory service rules governing the conditions of service of the Clerks and other staff of the Department of Architecture.
This fact has been admitted by the respondents.
2.
The State of Punjab had issued executive Instructions on 23.9.1957, followed by instructions dated 5.9.1958, laying down a condition that all Clerks were required to qualify the Assistant Grade Examination before they were promoted as Assistants on regular basis.
In accordance with these instructions all Clerks in the Architecture Department were required to qualify the Assistant Grade examination for being considered for regular promotions as Assistants.
Petitioner and respondents No. 3 and 4 (S/Shri Darshan Singh and Om Parkash Kaura) sat in the test (known as Assistant Grade Examination).
The petitioner qualified the test whereas respondents No. 3 and 4 failed to qualify the same.
In view of qualifying the test, the petitioner was promoted as an Assistant on 2021963, earlier than respondents No. 3 and 4 though the was junior to them as Clerk.
Thereafter the petitioner was further promoted as Superintendent on 521975 and was sent on deputation with the Chandigarh Administration.
3.
Similar administrative instructions laying down a condition for the Clerks to qualify Assistant Grade Examination before they could be promoted on regular basis as Assistants in some other department came up for consideration before the Apex Court in State of Haryana and others v. Shamsher Jang Bahadur and others, 1972 SLR 441 wherein the Apex Court struck down those instructions on the ground that the same ran counter to the statutory rules.
Further the instructions changed the service conditions of the existing employees and the same could not be affected without the prior approval of the Central Government under the States Re-organisation Act, 1956.
On the basis of the said judgment, the instructions, which governed the petitioner's case to which the reference has already been made above, were treated as non est by the State Government and it was taken that the passing of the Assistant Grade Examination was not required for a Clerk to be promoted as an Assistant on regular basis.
Some instructions were issued to that effect and on the basis of that the persons who were ignored for promotion as an Assistant or were promoted later on the ground that they had not passed the Assistant Grade Examination or had passed it later were treated and deemed to have been promoted from the date they were otherwise entitled to be promoted without passing the test.
Respondent No. 3 Shri Darshan Singh, though was senior as a Clerk to the petitioner but, as observed above, was promoted as an Assistant later than the petitioner, having failed to qualify the Assistant Grade Examination, was restored his seniority as an Assistant by giving him a deeming date of promotion and the petitioner was reverted by an order dated 23.12.1978 which reads as under :-  "Shri Darshan Singh having been restored seniority as an Assistant on the basis of Chief Secretary's instructions regarding holding the Assistant Grade Examination, ultra vires and consequent upon his promotion as Superintendent in the scale of Rs. 400-650 w.e.f.
4.10.1975.
Shri CD Shad stands reverted as Assistant in the scale of Rs. 160-400 from the said date.
Shri CD Shad will, however, continue to work as Superintendent against a deputation post in the Chandigarh Administration."
This order, a copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-10, to this writ petition has been made the subject matter of challenge.
4.
The sole contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that there were no statutory rules or any executive instructions laying down service conditions of the Clerks in the Department of Architecture, Punjab, and it was only by way of executive instructions issued in 1957 and 1958 that a condition was laid down that a Clerk had to qualify the Assistant Grade Examination before being promoted as an Assistant on regular basis.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the question of the change of any service condition would not arise.
Consequently, argued the counsel, that the judgment in Shamsher Jang Bahadur's case (supra) has no application to the facts of the present case.
In support of his contention he relied upon two Division Bench judgments of this Court i.e. Rajinder Nath Malhotra v. The State of Punjab and others, 1980 PLR 32 and KK Khanna v. State of Punjab and others, (Civil Writ Petition No. 3041 of 1977) decided on October 19, 1979.
5.
In both these judgments it has been held that if there were no statutory rues laying down service conditions of an employee, the same could be laid down by executive instructions and in these circumstances, the instructions laying down a qualifying test for purpose of promotion to an Assistant, where the service conditions are not governed by any statutory rules, would be valid and applicable to such employees.
6.
On the other hand the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the action had been taken against the petitioner in view of Shamsher Jung Bahadur's judgment.
However, no substantial or meaningful arguments could be advanced by learned counsel for the respondents to distinguish the two Division Bench judgments, relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the case of the petitioner is covered by the dictim of the two Division bench judgments, referred to above.
In the present case, the question of the change of any service condition of the petitioner or the private respondents by issuance of executive instructions did not arise as there were no statutory rules in existence laying down the service conditions prior to the issuance of these instructions.
8.
The reversion of the petitioner on the basis that the instructions issued in the years 1957 and 1958 did not hold the field so far as the Department of Architecture was concerned, cannot be sustained.
The writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 23.12.1978, annexure P/10 is hereby quashed.
Consequently, the petitioner will be taken to have been rightly promoted as an Assistant and Superintendent on regular basis from the dates he was earlier ordered to be promoted as such and would naturally be entitled to all consequential benefits, which may be worked out within three months of the receipt of copy of this order.
I make no order as to costs.
9.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe here that during the pendency of the writ petition respondents No. 3 and 4 have since retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation.
This judgment in favour of the petitioner shall not in any way effect them as they have already retired from service.