RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner is a Prabhakar and Shastri and after doing JBT Course, she joined as a J.B.T.
Teacher on regular basis on 321979 in the Education Department of Haryana.
On 3.6.1977 Instructions were issued by the Education Department Haryana by which 25% of the sanctioned posts of Sanskrit/Hindi/Punjabi teachers were to be filled in by promotion from J.B.T./Hindi, Punjabi and qualified (Shastri) teachers.
Certain posts of Hindi teachers and Sanskrit teachers become vacant in the Haryana Education Department and the petitioner staked her claim for promotion under the 25% quota for being considered for promotions a Hindi/Sanskrit teacher.
She was interviewed on 2691980 for both the posts of Sanskrit and Hindi teacher.
However, she was not selected for any of these posts.
On the ground that she was not qualified for the same.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
2.
As per letter dated 581981 from District Education Officer, Sonepat to the Sub Divisional Education Officer, Gohana, copy of which has been attached as Annexure R/2 with the written statement it has been mentioned regarding petitioner as under :  "She had acquired the qualification of Prabhakar and Shastri (Sanskrit) prior to her regular appointment.
The benefit of these higher qualifications has already been given to her at the time of first appointment.
Therefore, as per Instructions of the Department only such JBT teachers can be promoted into the cadre of C&V who have acquired the qualifications of Prabhakar/Shastri/Giani during the service period.
So, Shrimati Bimla Devi, JBT teacher G.M.S.
Jaull cannot be promoted as Hindi/Sanskrit teacher.
3.
The further stand of the respondents in the written statement is that the petitioner was not selected as she lacked the qualifications for the post of Sanskrit teacher, which are Shastri with OT (Sanskrit) whereas the petitioner was not Shastri pass.
In para 6 of the written statement, it has been mentioned as under :  "Referring to para 6 of the petition, it is submitted that the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Sanskrit teacher was considered but she was not found eligible for promotion to the post of Sanskrit teacher as she did not fulfil the qualifications prescribed for the post.
It is submitted that the qualifications as prescribed in the Punjab Education State Service Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955 for the post of Sanskrit teacher are Shastri with OT (Sanskrit) similarly, the qualifications for the post of Hindi teacher are Matric (full subjects), Prabhakar and OT (Hindi).
The petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications in either case, because she is Shastri as well as Prabhakar and does not possess the qualification of OT (Sanskrit/Hindi).
The petitioner was informed accordingly through the Sub-Divisional Education Officer/Headmaster by the answering respondent vide No. E-2-81/1941-42 dated 581981 (copy enclosed and marked as Annexure R-2 and its English version as R-2/1).
Despite that the petitioner is persisting in her claim which has no basis whatsoever are pending the matter is totally wrong and misconceived."
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in fact the petitioner was fully qualified for being promoted to the post of Sanskrit/Hindi teacher and the two objections raised by the respondents as to why the petitioner was not considered to be qualified have already been overruled in case of some other teachers in two different judgments of this Court.
Learned counsel relied on Division Bench judgment of this court in Subhash Kumari v. The State of Haryana and another, CWP.
No. 1137 of 1984 decided on 751986 to contend that it does not make any difference whether a person has acquired the qualifications during the course of service or had the requisite qualifications prior to entry into service.
Simply because the petitioner had the requisite qualifications for consideration for promotion prior to joining the service she cannot be deprived of her claim for consideration for promotion.
It was observed as under :  "Admittedly both of these categories belong to the same grade of teachers.
Such a sub-classification within a class smacks of arbitrariness and is discriminatory.
It has not been shown that this sub-classification on any intelligible differentia, it has no nexus with the object to be achieved.
viz. excellence of education.
The teachers who possess the higher qualifications at the time of joining service are not in any way intellectually or professionally inferior to those teachers who attained these qualifications while in service of the Government, rather former because of their experience and maturity may be able to teach better.
The only justification for this discrimination, which can be spelled out from the written statement, is that an incentive was sought to be provided to the in service teachers to improve their qualifications.
This is undoubtedly a laudable object, but this benefit cannot be extended to one category of teachers at the cost of the other category of teachers, who possess higher academic qualifications while joining service.
It is equally necessary to provide incentive to the latter category of teachers so that no sense of frustration and stagnation is engendered in their minds.
It will serve no purpose to encourage one group of teachers and leaves the other group dissatisfied and disappointed.
The result of impugned decision is that teachers who possessed the degrees of BA, BEd/BT at the time of their initial appointment shall never get an opportunity of promotion, because their juniors in service may go on improving their qualifications and continue to be promoted as Masters.
This is wholly irrational and arbitrary."
5.
Consequently the petitioner could not be held to be ineligible simply because she had passed Prabhakra/Shastri prior to joining the service.
6.
To meet the other objection of the respondent, learned counsel cited a judgment of Learned Single Judge of this Court in Gurcharan Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1991(3) SCT 403 (SC) CWP No. 206 of 1984 decided on 241984 wherein it was held that JBT Course is to be considered equivalent to OT Course.
It was observed as under :  "He, however, very fairly and frankly concedes that this course i.e., S.T.C.
was abolished with effect from the year 1958 and after that it was not available anywhere.
In the face of this factual position, the respondent authorities, to my mind, were entitled to prescribe any other course and more particularly JBT Course as equivalent to OT This was precisely so done by these authorities vide Annexure P.1.
Not only this, when a clarification was sought by one Shakuntla Sharma, a Hindi teacher in a private school, vide Annexure P.3 dated 541979, the office of the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana informed her that "the qualification, for the post of Hindi teacher should be Matric (Full Prabhakar with OT (Hindi) or J.B.T.
(Two years course)."
This communication makes it more than clear that with the abolition of S.T.C.
Course with effect from the year 1958, the JBT Course which admittedly was started in the year 1957, was either taken as a substitute for the first course or at least equivalent to OT Course.
In the light of this it is difficult to hold as sought to be contended by Mr. Bishnoi that the petitioners, though being J.B.T.
cannot be treated either eligible for the posts they are holding or having a qualification equivalent to OT Course."
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, contended that J.B.T.
qualification may be considered equivalent to OT Course for the purpose of initial recruitment in service but cannot be considered equivalent for the purpose of promotion.
The observations noted above in Gurcharan Singh's case (supra) squarely repel the objection of the respondents that the petitioner was not to be considered as qualified for consideration for promotion to the post of Sanskrit teacher/Hindi teacher.
I do not find any merit in the submission of learned counsel for the respondents that according to the judgment in Gurcharan Singh case, the qualification of JBT was to be considered equivalent for the purpose of initial recruitment and not for the purpose of promotion.
Once a particular qualification is considered equivalent to another qualification, then that equivalence would ensure for the entire service and not for initial recruitment only.
8.
I am told that LPA as well as SLP against Gurcharan Singh's case have since been dismissed.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion for the post of Sanskrit teacher/Hindi teacher by treating her to be duly qualified, for which she had already appeared for interview.
If on that basis, she is to be appointed as Sanskrit teacher or Hindi teacher, the appointment will relate back to the date when other teachers were appointed who were interviewed alongwith the petitioner.
Further, in case of such an appointment, the petitioner will not be given any arrears to pay inasmuch as she has not really worked on the post of Sanskrit teacher/Hindi teacher.
However, such an appointment will give all other benefits in service.
Let these directions be carried out within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.