NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of two Letter Patent Appeals 537 and 649 of 1993 which are directed against the common judgment of a learned Single Judge dismissing Civil Writ Petitions 15645 of 1990 and 5831 of 1991 whereby the claim of the writ petitioners (appellants herein) for the grant of benefit of military service for the purposes of seniority and further promotions was rejected.
Facts which lie in a narrow compass are being taken from L.P.A.537 of 1993 since the argument were addressed only in this appeal.
2.
The appellant while studying in BA responded to the clarion call given to defend the mother-land from external aggression by the Chinese and after the emergency was declared on October 26, 1962 he joined the Army and reported for pre-commissioning training on June 17, 1966 which training started on June 20, 1966.
After the completion of training, he was commissioned in the rank of a 2nd Lieutenant.
He was released from the Army on May 21, 1972 when he was holding the rank of a Captain.
3.
Thereafter, in pursuance of an advertisement issued by the State Bank of India (for short, 'the Bank') which appeared in the daily Statesman on February 23, 1973 the appellant joined the Bank on April 23, 1974 as a caretaker in the Officers Grade-II.
It was clearly stipulated in the advertisement that preference would be given to ex-military and police officials and that the assistant security officer/care-taker would be eligible to the benefits as applicable to officers Grade-II in the Bank.
What is important to note here is that as per the policy of the Bank there was no reservation for the ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers/Short Service Commissioned Officers for the post of care-taker and consequently the appellant was not appointed against any reserved post.
He is presently working as Security Officer with the Bank at Jammu.
His claim for the grant of benefit of military service having been rejected by the bank on the ground that there was no rule or executive order which entitled him to such a benefit he filed one of the aforesaid writ petitions which was dismissed by the learned Judge.
Hence the present appeal.
4.
The State Bank of India Act, 1955 (hereinafter called 'the Act') was promulgated by Parliament on May 8, 1955 for constituting the Bank and for transferring to it the undertakings of the Imperial Bank of India and to provide for other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
According to Section 43 of the Act, Bank may appoint such number of officers, advisors and employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and service.
A perusal of the provisions of the Act makes it clear that the Bank is an autonomous body distinct from the Central Government though under Section 49 of the Act the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India has the power to make rules to provide for all matters for which a provision is necessary and expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the Act.
Again, under Section 50 of the Act the Central Board of the Bank may make regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for matter for which a provision is necessary and expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the Act.
It is admitted before us that no rules or regulations have been framed under Sections 49 or 50 of the Act.
However, the Bank has framed rules under Section 43 of the Act determining the terms and conditions of appointment and service of its officers.
There is no provision in these rules providing for the grant of benefit of military service to the officers.
The Government of India, however, advised all the nationalised Banks to consider the desirability of making a provision for reserving vacancies for ex-Army Officers and for giving them the benefit of their military service.
Thereupon the Bank decided on June 30, 1966 to reserve 25 per cent of the vacancies for ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers/Short Service Commissioned Officers in respect of recruitment of 'Probationary Officers' and also decided to give them the benefit of their army service in the matter of fixation of their pay and seniority, provided they were recruited against the reserved vacancies.
No record containing this decision of the Bank has been produced in this case but the decision is discernible from the letter dated Feb 23, 1983 written by the Joint Secretary, Government of India to the Chairman of the Bank (Annexure R-2 with the written statement filed by the Bank).
It will be seen that this reservation and grant of benefit of military service was only for the probationary officers and not others.
The term "Probationary Officer" has been defined in Rule 3(k) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) Service Rules to mean "a person appointed as such on probation to the Officers "Grade-I".
It is common case of the parties that the appellant who joined in the Officers Grade-II is not a probationary officer and as such, is not entitled to the benefit of the decision taken by the Bank on June 30, 1966.
The Government of India had, however, promulgated rules called the Released Emergency Commissioned Officers and Short Service Commissioned Officers (Reservation of Vacancies) Rules, 1967 and the Released Emergency Commissioned Officers and Short Service Commissioned Officers (Reservation of Vacancies) Rules, 1971 for the purposes of providing the benefit of military service to its own Class I and II Officers.
It may be mentioned that these rules also inter alia provide for seniority and pay fixation of those Class I and Class-II officers who had been appointed against vacancies reserved for the ex-Army Personnel under the rules.
Thereafter, the Government of India as perits office memorandum dated January 1, 1972 decided that the initial pay (but not the seniority) of the officers who are appointed to 'unreserved vacancies' shall also be fixed by giving them the benefit of military service.
This decision was circulated to all the public sector undertakings including the Bank.
The Bank accepted the advice of the Government of India and decided to give the benefit of pay fixation only to its officers who joined the Armed Forces between 1111962 and 1011968 even if they were appointed against unreserved vacancies.
This decision was communicated to all the officers of the Bank in Chandigarh Circle as per memorandum dated July 25, 1982 (Annexure P-3 with the writ petition).
Since the appellant had joined the Army during the relevant period and after the release therefrom was appointed against an unreserved vacancy he being covered by the aforesaid decision was given the benefit of pay fixation after counting his military service.
5.
Learned counsel for the appellant contended that since 'probationary officers' had been given the benefit of military service for purposes of seniority as well, there was no reason why the other officers should not be treated alike and, therefore, claimed that the appellant too should get the benefit in seniority after counting his military service even if there is no rule in this regard.
It was also submitted that once military service had been counted for the benefit of pay fixation there was no reason as to why it should not count for purposes of seniority as well.
6.
Having given our thoughtful consideration to the contentions advanced by learned counsel for the appellant we have not been able to persuade ourselves to accept the same.
As has been noticed earlier the Bank as the employer is required under Section 43 of the Act to determine the terms and conditions of appointment and service of its officers and employees and in exercise of this power State Bank of India Officers Service Rules have been framed.
Admittedly, there is no rule providing for the grant of the benefit of military service to any officer.
However, by a decision taken by the Bank on June 30, 1966 the benefit of military service for seniority and pay fixation was given by the Bank to its probationary officers, provided they were appointed against 25 per cent seats for ex-Army personnel.
The appellant is not a probationary officer as he was not appointed against a Class-I post nor was he appointed against a reserved vacancy.
He is, therefore, not entitled to any such benefit.
When the Bank decided to give the benefit of pay fixation to its officers who had served the Armed Forces during the relevant period and were appointed against unreserved seats, the appellant was given the said benefit.
The right to claim the benefit of military service is not a right which inheres in every officer who is an ex-Army personnel but such rights are to be regulated by service rules or other executive orders determining their terms and conditions of employment.
There being no rule for the grant of the benefit of military service for purposes of seniority governing officers like the appelant nor any executive direction in this regard they are not entitled to any such benefit.
The learned Judge was, therefore, right in dismissing the claim of the appellant for the said benefit.
7.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
Even if the benefit as claimed by the appellant were to be given to him, he would steal a march over a large number of other officers who are presently senior to him.
Such officers would obviously be affected adversely by the court order.
They were not impleaded as parties before the learned single Judge nor are they parties before us.
It would not be fair to pass an order against the interest of those officers behind their back.
For this reason as well, the appellant must fail.
We may at this stage refer to a decision of this Court in Pritam Chand v. State of Punjab and another, 1979(3) SLR 302 on which reliance was placed by the counsel for the appellant to contend that persons who are likely to be adversely affected in the event of acceptance of his claim are not necessary parties.
That was also a case in which the petitioner had claimed the benefit of military service but has not impleaded those who were likely to be adversely affected in the event of the acceptance of the writ petition.
The learned Judge overruling a preliminary objection held that the petitioner therein had only claimed the benefit of military service rendered by him and observed "I am, therefore, at a loss to understand how the other clerks will be adversely affected if he is entitled to the benefit of his military service under the 1965 rules because under rule 4 of the aforesaid rules, the period spent by the person on military service has to count for increments, seniority etc." We do not subscribe to the view of the learned judge and in our opinion, the persons likely to be affected are necessary parties in the absence of whom the lis cannot be properly adjudicated.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in overruling the decision in Pritam Chand's case (supra).
In the result, we find no merit in these appeals and dismiss the same.
There is no order as to costs.