RS Mongia, J (Oral) - An application was moved by the petitioner for issuing ad-interim directions to the respondents for releasing his dues lying with the respondents in provident fund account etc.
The parties' counsel consented that the main case itself may be decided.
Consequently, I heard the counsel for both the parties on merits in the main case and I proceed to dispose of the same.
2.
The petitioner joined as a constable in the Punjab Armed Police in the year 1980.
As per the averments made in the petition, while he was serving in 27th Battalion at Jalandhar, his brother came from home on 4th June, 1987 and informed him that his (Petitioner's) wife was seriously ill.
The petitioner left for his village immediately.
Though he tried to inform his senior officers about his leaving for his village but he could not contact any officer.
Since he had to leave immediately, under the circumstances mentioned above, he left the battalion without taking any leave.
The petitioner was put under suspension vide order dated 15th July, 1987 with effect from 4th June, 1987 ie the date he absented from duty without permission or sanctioned leave.
He reported back for duty on 5th August, 1987.
His suspension was revoked vide order dated 15th August, 1987.
3.
A regular departmental enquiry was held on the charge of wilful absence from duty and after complying with the procedure under the Rules, the petitioner was found guilty of the alleged charge.
A show cause notice was issued as to why the petitioner be not dismissed from service.
After receiving the reply to the show cause notice, the Commandant, 27th Battalion passed order of dismissal on 7th January, 1988.
The appeal and the revision by the petitioner against the order of dismissal to the Deputy Inspector General of Police and the Inspector General of Police were also dismissed on 1121988 and 23rd April 1991 respectively.
Aggrieved by the order of dismissal and the rejection of his appeal and revision, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
4.
In reply to the averments made in the petition, it has been stated in the written statement on behalf of the respondents that the petition was absent in the morning general parade on 4th June, 1987 without leave/permission and consequently, his absence report was recorded in the Battalion Roznamacha.
He was placed under suspension on 15th July, 1987, with effect from the date of his absence i.e. 4th June, 1987.
A registered notice dated 5th June, 1987 was sent to the petitioner at his home address to report back for duty.
The said registered notice was received back undelivered with the remarks from the postal authorities that the addressee had refused to take the delivery of the registered notice.
Again a letter was sent on 31st July, 1987, asking the petitioner to report for duty through special messenger which was duly received by him.
Another notice was sent to the petitioner through registered post on 381987 as till that date the petitioner had not reported back for duty.
He only reported back for duty on 5th August, 1988.
His arrival report was recorded on the said date wherein it was mentioned that a man from his village had come to inform him about his wife's serious illness and on coming to know of the same he had left for the village without intimating his superiors.
A regular departmental enquiry was ordered to enquire into the alleged absence of the petitioner.
Reference has also been made in the written statement to the past record of the petitioner.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner has been dismissed from service by treating him absent from duty from 4th June, 1987 to 14th August, 1987, whereas in law, the petitioner cannot be treated absent after he was put under suspension.
In other words the, petitioner could not be treated as absent as he stood suspended vide order dated 15th July, 1987 with effect from 4th June, 1987.
In support of his contention, he relied upon a judgment of this Court in Ex. HC Munshi Ram v. The State of Haryana, 1991 (2) RSJ.
345.
It was also contended by the learned counsel that until and unless the punishing authority comes to a firm conclusion and record a firm finding that the act complained of was of such a grave nature that it proved incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service, the extreme penalty of dismissal cannot be resorted to under Rule 162 (1) of the Punjab Police Rules.
To substantiate this submission, he relied upon a judgment of this court in State of Haryana v. Lakhan Lal, 1991 (2) P.L.R.
595 : 1991(2) SCT 718 (P&H).
Further counsel for the petitioner contended that before passing the impugned order, the appointing authority should have taken into consideration the length of service of the petitioner and his claim to pension.
In this regard, the petitioner relied upon a judgment of this Court in State of Haryana v. Lachman Singh, 1992(2) RSJ.
398 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
545.
It was also argued that the previous record of service had also been taken into consideration for awarding the punishment without making the same a subject- matter of charge-sheet or the show cause notice.
6.
So far as the first point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned, it may be observed that it has never been the case of the petitioner before the respondent-authorities that since while he was absent from duty, he had been served with the order of suspension and, therefore, he did not report for duty.
The petitioner, in fact, even after he was put under suspension, was asked in writing more than once to report for duty but it was only on 5th August, 1987, that he reported for duty.
In these circumstances, the petitioner had remained absent without permission or sanction of leave from 4th June, 1987, to 14th August, 1987, as has been found by the respondent authorities.
The judgment cited by the learned counsel in Ex. HC Munshi Ram's case (supra), has no application to the facts of the present case.
In that case the petitioner was not asked, after the order of suspension, to join duty, whereas in the present case it is so.
Moreover, as observed above, it was never the case of the petitioner before the authorities that he did not report for duty because of the suspension order having been served on him.
Consequently, I do not find any force in the first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
So far as the next point that a firm finding has to be recorded that the alleged misconduct was of such a grave nature leading to the conclusion that the petitioner was incorrigible, suffice it to mention that it has been noticed by the authorities that the petitioner had already been awarded quite a number of punishment earlier and there was no extenuating circumstances to reduce the punishment.
It has further been observed that from all this it is quite evident that the petitioner did not want to serve the department honestly and keeping in view Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules and the discipline of the police department, the punishment was being awarded.
This clearly goes to show that mind was applied as to whether the act complained of coupled with his earlier punishments, lead to the conclusion that the petitioner was incorrigible and would not make a good police official.
Consequently, I do not find any force in this contention.
8.
So far as the third point that his past record and his length of service was not taken into consideration, suffice it to mention that even according to the petitioner's counsel, the petitioner had put in about seven years of service prior to the order of dismissal.
Such years of service would not entitle a person for pensionary benefits.
Apart from that, as observed earlier, the previous record was taken into consideration while considering the fact whether any lesser punishment could be awarded to the petitioner or not.
So no fault can be found in the impugned order on this score.
9.
So far as the last point, i.e. previous record was taken into consideration, without making the same a subject-matter of the charge-sheet or show-cause notice, suffice it to mention that the previous record was taken into consideration really not for awarding the present punishment but to see whether any lesser punishment could be awarded or there were any extenuating circumstances to award any lesser punishment.
Consequently, this argument is also rejected.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Before parting with this judgment, I may observe here that if there are any dues in the form of provident fund etc. lying with the respondents, the same be released within one month after the receipt of copy of the judgment.
Order accordingly