Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners originally joined service in the Punjab State Social Welfare Advisory Board, Chandigarh.
On June 21, 1974, the projects being run by the Board were taken over by the State Government alongwith the staff with effect from April 1, 1974.
The short grievance of the petitioners is that their service prior to April 1, 1974 is not being taken into consideration by the Respondent-State for the purpose of computing their retiral benefits - On behalf of the respondents, it has been inter-alia averred that vide order dated May 10, 1978, it had been specifically directed that "no benefit in respect of earned leave, pension etc. will be given for the service rendered by the employees before taking over the projects."
2.
I have hear learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. Dadwal, learned counsel for the petitioners, submits that the projects where the petitioners were employed having been taken over by the State Government the order denying them benefit of past service towards pension etc. is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
On the other hand, Ms. Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the respondents, submits that it having been specifically stipulated in the order dated May 10, 1978 that the past service shall not count for pension, the petitioners have no right to claim such a benefit through this petition.
She further submits that in the Social Welfare Department of the Government, no cadre of Bal Sewaks/Sewikas existed on which petitioners No. 1 to 6 were appointed by the Board and consequently, the relief claimed in this petition cannot be granted to them.
3.
Indisputably, the projects etc. where the petitioners were working, had been taken over by the Government vide order dated June 21, 1974 with effect from April, 1974.
At that time, it had not been stated that the petitioners shall not be given the benefit of their past service towards leave or pension.
The order by which the projects were taken over is on record as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
A persual thereof shows that the pay and allowances etc. were protected.
It was nowhere mentioned that on being appointed in Government service, the petitioners will not be given the benefit of past service towards pension etc.
The condition was imposed only subsequently.
Further more, no reason for imposing such a condition have been disclosed.
The protection of pay etc. is indicative of the fact that the petitioners were not to be denied the benefit of their service on their becoming the employees of the Government.
The benefit of their past service towards pay was duly protected.
Once the past service has been recognised for the purpose of pay, there appears to be no justification for denying them the same benefit towards pension etc.
The admitted position is that the petitioners had served the Board which is virtually an instrumentality of the State for long period ranging from 10 to 16 years before their absorption in Govt. service.
The denial of the benefit claimed by the petitioners would cause them a heavy recurring loss.
It would be unfair.
It would be arbitrary.
4.
Even on the basis of precedents in this court, such a benefit has been afforded to the persons working in different organizations.
In Ram Chander & Ors. v. State of Haryana, (C.W.P.
No. 10069 of 1988, decided on July 19, 1989), it was held that the service rendered by a person in the District Boards or Zila Prishads prior to absorption in Government service shall count for pension.
Similar was the view taken in C.W.P.
No. 10070 of 1988, decided on July 20, 1988 (Bhim Singh v. State of Haryana) 1992(3) SCT 573 (P&H) Following these decisions, it was held in Randhir Singh v. State of Punjab etc., 1991(6) S.L.R.
736 that the JBT teachers working in District Board Schools would be entitled to the benefit of their past service in the matter of pension etc. on their absorption in Government service.
It is admitted that L.P.A. No. 860 of 1992 against this judgment was dismissed on 681992.
That being so, both in equity and on precedent, the petitioners are entitled to the benefit claimed by them.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents points out that there was no cadre of Bal Sewaks/Sewikas in the Department of Social Welfare.
According to her, Petitioners No. 1 to 6 were actually absorbed as Supervisors.
There is no charm in the label attached to a post.
The fact remains that the petitioners were absorbed in the Government service.
The mere fact that the designation was altered is of no consequence.
6.
In fairness to Ms. Charu Tuli, an objection raised by her regarding delay may also be noticed.
It has been contended that vide order dated May 10, 1978, it had been clearly provided that the benefit of past service shall not be granted.
She submits that the petition was filed more than 13 years thereafter.
This objection cannot be sustained.
Firstly, there is nothing on record to show that this order dated May 20, 1978 was ever conveyed to the petitioners.
Secondly, it is the admitted position that the petitioners have been continuously representing.
Copies of some of the representations have been produced as Annexures P.4 to P.7 with the writ petition.
Even a legal notice was sent.
There is nothing on record to show that they were ever conveyed any decision on these representations.
Even otherwise, the petitioners had approached this Court when they were in service.
Pension accrues only after reaching the age of superannuation.
In this situation, the objection of delay cannot really be sustained.
In any event, no prejudice whatsoever can be said to have been caused to the State.
7.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, this writ petition is allowed.
Respondents Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to count the service rendered by the petitioners with the State Social Welfare Advisory Broad prior to April 1, 1974 for the purpose of computing their pension etc.
In case, some of the petitioners have already retired, their pension shall be redetermined and arrears paid to them.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.