SS Nijjar, J - Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that on identical grounds, a Division Bench of this Court had earlier allowed the civil writ petition.
The respondents have earlier rejected the claim of the petitioner on the same grounds.
2.
We have perused the entire paper-book.
We have also perused the order passed by the respondents on 10.1.2006 (Annexure P-12).
We are of the considered opinion that the respondents have not committed and illegality in rejecting the claim of the petitioner.
We may notice some of the salient facts leading to the decision dated 10.1.2006.
3.
The father of the petitioner was serving as a Clerk with the respondent- Bank i.e. Central Bank of India.
He passed away due to heart attack on 20112000 whilst in service.
The petitioner passed the Senior Secondary Certificate Examination in 2001.
He claimed that he was dependent on his deceased-father.
He is eligible for appointment to the post of Clerk on compassionate grounds, on the basis of instructions issued from time to time.
At the time of death of the deceased, the family of the petitioner consisted of 7 members.
The details of the family of the petitioner are given in paragraph (5) of the petition which are as under :-  (a) Great grand father (b) Great grand mother (c) Grand mother (d) Mother (e) Petitioner (f) Younger sister (g) Younger brother 4.
All the children of the deceased are unemployed.
The petitioner claims that the family is not in a position to pull on as an acute financial crisis has occurred due to the untimely death of the father of the petitioner.
On 14122000, the mother of the petitioner made a representation to the respondents for appointment of the petitioner on compassionate grounds.
However, the respondents did not take any action.
The petitioner again made representations on 16102001 and 21.1.2002 respectively.
The petitioner claims employment on the basis of policy of the Bank dated 9.10.1998 (Annexure P-4).
Vide letter dated 952002 (Annexure P-5), the respondents rejected the representation for appointment of the petitioner without any rhyme or reason.
However, they asked the mother of the petitioner to submit her consent, if she is willing to do the job.
The mother of the petitioner, however, declined the offer of appointment as the family circumstances did not permit her to do so.
Therefore, the petitioner filed CWP No. 15257 of 2002 seeking relief of quashing of letter dated 952002 (Annexure P-5).
This writ petition was disposed of on 2392002 and the following order was passed :-  "This petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to consider the peculiar facts and circumstances stated in the representation, a copy whereof is annexed to the petition as Annexure P-6 made by the mother of the petitioner.
We are hopeful are particularly keeping in view the fact that the respondents are ready to give appointment to the mother of the petitioner, they could also consider the case for the grant of employment to her son i.e. the petitioner, who is otherwise stated to be qualified.
The representation afore-stated be disposed of by the respondents within a period of four months from the date of certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
Sd/- Swatanter Kumar Judge Sd/- SS Saron Judge" September 23, 2002  5.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the respondents took a fresh decision.
This time Central Office of the Bank passed an order which was communicated by letter dated 2112003.
In this letter the petitioner has been informed that the Management, on carefully going through the application, has declined to consider the request of the mother of the petitioner for appointment of the petitioner on compassionate grounds on the following grounds :-  "(i) Late Sh. Maya Chand joined the Bank on 3071983.
He expired on 20112000.
He is survived by wife, two sons and one daughter as dependents as one daughter is already married.
(ii) Compassionate appointments are not offered as routine matter and Govt. of India, vide letter No. 18/139/95-IR dated 10.7.1998 has reiterated that Supreme Court guidelines/observations-viz. "The Govt. or the Public Authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased and only if it is satisfied that but for the provision of employment the family will not be able to meet the crisis, that, a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family" should be strictly followed in letter and spirit.
(iii) Dependents of deceased employee are in respect of Rs. 185 lacs as terminal benefits after adjusting the loan amounts and reasonable income can be generated from this amount for the survival of the family.
(iv) The dependents of an employee dying in harness can be considered for compassionate appointment provided family is without any means of livelihood whereas Smt. Bimla Devi has failed to give any evidence to that effect to the Bank.
(v) It may be clarified that originally the application for appointment of her son Mr. Sunil Kumar was received by the Bank and before considering the merits of the case, as the wife of the deceased employee is the first person to be shown compassion, the Bank enquired whether she herself is interested to take up the job and if her application is received accordingly, the same will be considered as per rules.
It may be clarified that the bank never intimated that they will give appointment to Smt. Bimla Devi.
We reiterate that the job was not offered to Smt. Bimla Devi, but we have only enquired whether she is interested to take up the job to examine further in the matter.
(vi) The fact that she has to look after her grand parent-in-laws and mother- in-law was not informed to us at that time.
The bank has scrutinized the proposal for appointment of her son Mr. Sunil Kumar on compassionate grounds, and is not able to consider the case favourably due to the reasons stated under columns (i) to (iv) above.
(vii) Since the proposal is not conforming to the guidelines/rules, it is made clear that the compassionate appointment cannot be considered either for her son, herself or any other dependents.
In view of what is stated above, Management regrets its inability to consider the request of Smt. Bimla Devi to appointment her son in the service of the bank.
Sd/- SK Gupta General Manager (PRS)" 6.
Even this order was challenged by the petitioner by filing CWP No. 15288 of 2003.
Notice of motion was issued.
The respondents filed the written statement.
In the written statement, the respondents raised a number of preliminary objections.
To avoid repetition of the entire written statement, we may notice concisely the plea raised by the respondents.
It was stated, as follows :-  "As the nomenclature compassionate appointment itself indicates, the same is not as a matter of right."
7.
It was further explained that the respondents were not disinclined for considering the name of the spouse of the deceased employee.
In the policy dated 9.10.1998, the definition of dependent family member, "spouse" is mentioned at the first instance.
In fact the mother had moved an application for appointment on 1072002 but again after some days, she wrote to the Bank for considering the name of her son instead of herself.
Therefore, her request could not be considered.
The Bank goes on the explain that "humbly speaking, it has been consistently held that the compassionate appointments are not as of right and the same are meant to help the needy, economically hard pressed members of the family of deceased employee who have been staying in a state of utter penury.
Technical speaking, the employment in the bank has to be through an open offer to every one whosoever qualifies for the same.
In these circumstances respectfully it is submitted that the petitioner has not come with clean hands to Hon'ble High Court.
It will be relevant to bring to the notice of Hon'ble High Court earlier decision in case of Mohit Chopra v. Punjab National Bank reported in 1997(4) SCT 507 : 1998 ISJ (Banking) 57 in which Hon'ble Division Bench of our own Hon'ble High Court observed as under :-  "Public Office are not hereditary.
These are not passed on from father to son.
Basically, under the Constitution, every post has to be filled up after considering the claims of all eligible persons.
That is the guarantee enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
An exception has been made by the departments of the Government and various other Institutions by making a provision for the grant of appointment on compassionate grounds.
However, such a power is an exception to the general rule of equality as enshrined in the Constitution.
It has to be rarely resorted to and to help only such person as are really needy.
A provision meant to help a person in distress cannot be made into a rule.
There are a large number of unemployed persons in this country.
They have no source of livelihood.
Under the law, they are required to compete with the other eligible candidates before they can be granted any appointment.
Herein, the petitioner wants to get into the service of the Bank without competing on the basis of the death of his father.
He has no right to maintain such a claim."
8.
After noticing the aforesaid observations of the Division Bench, it has been pleaded by the respondents that the petitioner is not entitled to any legal or equitable relief as she has not come to Court with clean hands.
Thereafter, the respondents have set out the efforts which have been made by the mother of the petitioner to improve her case at every stage.
It has further been stated by the Bank that it is not permissible for the applicant to prevail upon the employer essentially to provide employment to the family of their choice.
When under the scheme the spouse has been mentioned at the first instance, it cannot be insisted upon that the appointment must be given to the son only.
It has further been pointed out by the respondents that the similar situation arose in a recent case titled as State of HP and others v. Rajesh Kumar reported in 2002(3) SCT 1048 (SC) : 2002(4) SLR 103 in which the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "In the face of this policy decision, the High Court was not justified in issuing a direction to the appellant to grant employment to the respondent on compassionate grounds as his elder brother was already in Government service.
No right vested in the respondent to claim an appointment on compassionate grounds.
If, at all, any claim could have been made, it could only have been made by the widow in accordance with the above policy of the Government for consideration in the light of the policy guidelines dated 1811990.
The directions of the High Court to grant employment to the respondent, under the circumstances, is erroneous and cannot be sustained.
The judgment of the High Court is, accordingly, set aside.
This appeal thus succeeds and is allowed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs."
9.
It was further pointed out that the family of the deceased got a sum of Rs. 185 lacs as retiral benefits after adjusting all the dues and liabilities.
Elder son i.e. the petitioner is a grown up person of around 20 years of age.
He is competent to search appropriate employment of his own and render requisite assistance to the family too.
The widow of the deceased too is quite young and competent to work appropriately.
They have their own house constructed with the assistance provided by the Bank.
The deceased had served the Bank nearly 17 years.
Therefore, there may have been some savings also.
It was further stated that taking into account all the circumstances, it cannot be construed that the family of the petitioner is in such a grave hardship in which it is competent to seek employment through the back door channel on compassionate ground.
It was discovered that the father of the deceased was owning some land which was agricultural in nature.
After taking into consideration all these circumstances, the Bank had come to the conclusion that the family of the petitioner is not living in penury.
However, the Division Bench of this court allowed the writ petition by passing the following order :-  "Present : Mr. YP Singh, Advocate, for the petitioner Mr. AP Jagga, Advocate, for the respondents We have gone through the impugned order Annexure P-8.
The petitioner's claim for compassionate appointment has been declined on the ground that the financial condition of the family did not warrant appointment as the dependents of the deceased employee had already been paid Rs. 185 lacs as terminal benefits and a reasonable income could be generated from this amount for their survival.
To supplement this argument, Mr. Jagga, the learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that the petitioner's family was also living in their own house and Bimla Devi, mother of the petitioner, owned one kanal of land as well.
We are of the opinion that all these things put together, cannot even provide a bare minimal subsistence to a family of seven members.
We accordingly quash Annexure P-8 and direct the respondents to pass a fresh order taking a realistic view of the needs of the family.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
The fresh decision shall be taken within a period of four months from the date that a certified copy of this order is applied to the respondents.
Sd/- HS Bedi Judge Dated 13.9.2005 Sd/- Viney Mittal Judge" 10.
Pursuant to the aforesaid directions, the respondents have now passed the impugned order.
In this order, the respondents have again reiterated the law which has now been settled by the Supreme Court in a number of judgments.
In paragraph 1 of the order, the respondents have cited the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Punjab National Bank v. Ashwani Kumar Taneja, 2004(3) SCT 835 (SC) : 2004(4) RSJ 111.
It has also been stated that the competent authority after re-examining and reanalyzing the facts and circumstances of the case in terms of the order of this Court viz. the guidelines/observations of the Supreme Court and Government of India, has seen no justification to alter Bank's decision of declining the proposal by giving an appointment on compassionate grounds to the petitioner.
The respondents have reiterated the grounds that were stated earlier for objecting the claim of the petitioner.
It would be wholly unnecessary to burden this order by re- stating the facts which we have noticed earlier in this order.
However, to be doubly certain the respondents have quoted the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Punjab National Bank (supra) which is as follows :-  "For the purpose of record, the same may be quoted hereunder : Quote - "As per rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitations of applications and merit.
However, to this general rule, there are some exceptions carved out in the interests of justice and one such exception is in favour of the dependents of the employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
The whole object of granting compassionate appointment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased and it is only if it is satisfied that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family."
11.
We have been constrained to pass this lengthy order as the counsel for the petitioner had insisted that the respondents have deliberately by-passed the order passed by this Court in CWP No. 15288 of 2003 on 13.9.2005.
Undoubtedly, this Court while allowing the earlier writ petition had quashed the order dated 2112003 which has been enclosed with the letter dated 2112003.
The Division Bench had also made some pious observations by expressing the opinion that "all these things put together, cannot even provide a bare minimal subsistence to a family of seven members".
These observations, however, are not the directions of the Division Bench.
The directions are that a fresh decision shall be taken by the respondents within a period of four months on the receipt of the certified copy of the order.
The opinion of the Bench cannot be treated as a direction for appointment.
The respondents have clearly understood the order of the Division Bench dated 13.9.2005 and passed by the impugned order dated 10.1.2006.
The respondents have taken into account the financial condition of the family.
They have also taken into account the policy which governs the appointment on compassionate grounds.
The respondents have also taken into consideration the fact that the petitioner himself is 22 years of age.
He possesses minimum educational qualifications to start looking for a job independently for himself.
The respondents had offered to consider the claim of the mother of the petitioner.
But she had declined to accept the offer.
In such circumstances, the respondents had come to the conclusion that the family of the petitioner cannot be said to be living in a state of penury.
These observations of the respondents, in our opinion, are in consonance with the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : 1994(4) SCC 143.
In this case, the Supreme Court has categorically laid down the circumstances in which appointment ought to be offered on compassionate grounds.
The law is well settled.
However, for the sake of emphasis, we may again quote verbatim the observations of the Supreme Court which are as follows :-  "2.
"The question relates to the considerations which should guide while giving appointment in public services on compassionate ground.
It appears that there has been a good deal of obfuscation on the issue.
As a rule, appointments in the public services should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and merit.
No other mode of appointment nor any other consideration is permissible.
Neither the Governments nor the public authorities are at liberty to follow any other procedure or relax the qualifications laid down by the rules for the post.
However, to this general rule which is to be followed strictly in every case, there are some exceptions carved out in the interests of justice and to meet certain contingencies.
One such exception is in favour of the dependents of an employee dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood.
In such cases, out of pure humanitarian consideration taking into consideration the fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided, the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a provision is made in the rules to provide gainful employment to one of the dependents of the deceased who may be eligible for such employment.
The whole object of granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis.
The object is not to give a member of such family a post much less a post for post held by the deceased.
What is further, mere death of an employee in harness does not entitle his family to such source of livelihood.
The Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
(Emphasis Supplied).
The posts in Class-III and IV are the lowest posts in non-manual and manual categories and hence they alone can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object being to relieve the family of the financial destitution and to help it get over the emergency.
The provision of employment in such lowest posts by making an exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is not discriminatory.
The favourable treatment given to such dependent of the deceased employee in such posts has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved, viz., relief against destitution.
No other posts are expected or required to be given by the public authorities for the purpose.
It must be remembered in this connection that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other familities which are equally, if not more, destitute.
The exception to the rule made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is in consideration of the services rendered by him and the legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and affairs of the family engendered by the erstwhile employment which are suddenly upturned."
12.
After laying down the aforesaid law, the Supreme Court in this very judgment disapproved the attitude of some Government and Public Authorities for offering compassionate appointments sometimes as a matter of course.
It was categorically laid down that this is legally impermissible.
The Supreme Court reiterated that the only ground which can justify compassionate employment is the penurious condition of the deceased's family.
Neither the qualifications of his dependent nor the post which he held, is relevant.
The Supreme Court also emphasised that the employment on compassionate grounds is to be given only as an emergent measure, which was stated, as follows :-  "6.
For these very reasons, the compassionate employment cannot be granted after a lapse of a reasonable period which must be specified in the rules.
The consideration for such employment is not a vested right which can be exercised at any time in future.
The object being to enable the family to get over the financial crisis which it faces at the time of the death of the sole bread- winner, the compassionate employment cannot be claimed and offered whatever the lapse of time and after the crisis is over."
In view of the afore-mentioned observations of the Supreme Court, we find that the respondents have rightly declined the claim of the petitioner.
The decision taken by the respondents is not contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal (supra).
We find no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.