VK Bali, J (Oral) - Ramneesh Lakhanpal and Rita Devi through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant them admission in two years diploma in Education Course in the Government Primary Teachers Training Institute, Dharla at Morni Hills against the seats reserved for the residents of Morni Hills.
2.
The facts on which the relief, as indicated above rests, reveal that the State of Haryana set up Government Primary Teachers Training Institute, Dharla at Morni Hills in the year 1989.
There are in all 105 seats in Diploma in Education (hereinafter to be referred as D.Ed.)
in the Institute with the following break-up :  (i) Seats reserved for all Categories : 100.
(ii) Seats reserved for villages who have donated land for setting up the Institute : 5.
3.
It is pleaded that five Institutes of similar nature for D.Ed.
course were set up throughout the State of Haryana at Adampur, District Hissar : Kol, District Kaithal; Odan, District Sirsa; Biswan Mill, District Sonepat and Morni Hills, District Ambala.
An advertisement was inserted by the department of Secondary Education, Government of Haryana in 'Dainik Tribune' dated 391992 inviting applications for admission in D.Ed.
course, clearly reserving five seats for the residents of the village who donated land for setting up of the Institutes.
The petitioners along with 20 others applied in this category.
They attached with their applications, their domicile certificates, rural area certificates, character certificates from Government Vocational Education Institute, Morni Hills, Matriculation Certificates and Senior Secondary Examination Certificates.
After the applications given by the petitioners and others were scrutinised, they were called for interview which was to be held on 21.9.1992.
Petitioners were also invited to attend the interview.
However, when the petitioners appeared for the interviews, an objection was raised with regard to the authenticity of their domicile certificates and doubting the same, admission was denied to them.
It is in the circumstances, referred to above, that they have come to this Court asking for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of the order.
4.
It is so pleaded and argued by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners that a bare perusal of facts along with documents attached would clearly manifest that the petitioners were residents of village Morni Hills and were entitled for admission in the D.Ed.
Course.
5.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 3, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objection that four candidates who were permanent residents of village Morni Hills and who have been admitted to D.Ed.
course have not been impleaded as party respondents in this petition as also that village Morni is described as village Morni Hills in the record of the respondents.
The various Institutions located in village Morni are mentioned to be located at village Morni Hills.
The petitioners are not permanent residents of village Morni and consequently they are not eligible for being considered against five seats reserved for the permanent residents of village Morni or Morni Hills.
On merits of the case, it is pleaded that the documents produced by the petitioner were checked and their permanent resident certificates issued by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) were considered to be not correct.
It is further pleaded that the petitioners could not be given admission as they failed to produce certificates showing that they were permanent residents of village Morni Hills.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the cause of the petitioners is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
7.
From advertisement copy whereof has been placed as Annexure P-1, it is clearly made out that five seats were advertised which were to be kept reserved for the residents of village who gave either land or building to the Government for running the Institutes for D.Ed.
Permanent residents of villages Adampur, Kol, Odan, Biswan Mill and Morni Hills were eligible to apply for the said reserved seats.
They were required to give domicile certificates to be issued by the local Sub Divisional Magistrate (Civil).
Annexure P-2 is the domicile certificate issued by the Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil), Panchkula, on 171992 certifying that the petitioner No. 1 was resident of village Morni Hills, Tehsil Panchkula, District Ambala and, thus, a domicile of State of Haryana.
This certificate was given after getting verification from the Naib Tehsildar, Morni Hills.
This certificate was issued in accordance with the instructions issued by the Chief Secretary dated 1091991.
Annexure P-3 is a Rural Area Certificate to the effect that petitioner Ramneesh Lakhanpal was resident of village Morni, Tehsil Panchkula, District Ambala and this village was not covered by any Municipal Committee/Notified Area or any Corporation.
On the other hand, the village is under panchayat as verified by the Naib Tehsildar, Morni.
Annexures P-4 and P-5 are similar certificates issued by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) Panchkula with regard to other petitioner Miss Rita Devi.
In view of the certificates that have been issued by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) which till date have not been cancelled, it cannot be said that the petitioners were not residents of village Morni or that certificates issued by the Sub- Divisional Officer (Civil) were not authentic.
The said certificates, as referred to above, were given after verifying the facts from the Naib Tehsildar and it is nowhere pleaded that on doubt having been entertained, Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil) was ever asked to hold an enquiry into the matter.
That being so, the petitioners could not be denied admission in D.Ed.
who are otherwise admittedly higher in merit in their category.
That apart, it is not disputed that the petitioners were given provisional admission by this Court and by now they have studied for a period of over one year out of course of two years, and it will be inequituous at this stage to deny them the benefit of having studied in the course for a period of one year.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the admission of the petitioners.
Petition allowed.