VK Bali, J - Sant Parkash survived by his legal representatives as he died during pendency of this petition, sought for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant his disability pension.
This claim even after his death is being pursued by his legal representatives who have been duly brought on records of this case.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that Sant Parkash was enrolled as a Boy in the Balauch Regiment on March 12, 1946 and was discharged on November 5, 1946 by saying "Service no longer required."
After that he was enrolled in the J&K Rifle Unit as Under Trainee on December 30, 1947.
Even though he was fit to be enrolled as Boy but he was directly enrolled as Sepoy on December 30, 1947 as the war conditions existed and there was need of youngmen in the Army.
He was issued weapon (rifle) and was asked to clean the same while on active service and unfortunately he was injured due to bullet injury on the left leg due to accidental fire from his rifle.
He was immediately taken to Hospital for treatment and after about 6-8 months, he was downgraded to category CEE with 100% disability and was invalidated from Military Service on September 26, 1948 on the recommendations of the Medical Board.
It is pleaded that J&K Rifle later on merged with the Indian Army and became part of the Indian Army with Record Office at Jabalpur.
Sant Parkash pursued his case for grant of disability pension by writing various letters to the authorities concerned but the respondents had declared that the disability was not attributable to Military service.
Demand notice was served through lawyer on May 8, 1989 and its reply was received on July 6, 1989 wherein it was mentioned that he had already been intimated vide letter dated June 14, 1989 that disability from which he suffered was not attributable nor aggravated by Military service and he was not entitled to disability/war injury pension under the Rules.
After rejection of his claim, as mentioned above, vide Annexure P-3 on July 6, 1989, he had approached this Court for the relief indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it has been pleaded that no record with regard to the enrolment of petitioner as a Boy in Baluch Regiment on March 12, 1946 is available.
It is, however, true that petitioner was enrolled in the J&K State Forces on December 30, 1947 when he was 18<$E1/2> years old and he was quite capable of handling weapons.
On the basis of the statement made by Sant Parkash himself the cause of his death has been mentioned in the written statement.
The statement of Sant Parkash that has been relied upon, reads as follows :-  "On 19th CHET 2004 at 1900 hours, I charged magazine at the time of 'stand to'.
After 'stand down' I went back to my bed.
At about 2045 hours I manipulated that bolt and the rifle was loaded.
Sepoy Tahru Ram stopped me to do so.
Then on this I sat on my charpoy, began to uncharge the magazine as the rifle was pressed with my right finger instead of magazine catch.
The rifle was fired resulting injury to the calf of my left leg."
On the basis of the above statement made by Sant Parkash, it is pleaded that he was immediately admitted to the Hospital and was discharged from service w.e.f.
September 26, 1948 being declared medically unfit.
It is mentioned that the character given to him at the time of discharge was assessed as 'EXEMPLARY'.
It is, however, pleaded that according to the medical board and decision of Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, Sant Parkash's invaliding disease was not considered as attributable to the Military service vide its letter dated October 24, 1956 and the Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter dated October 30, 1957.
It is for this reason, it is stated that he was not granted any pension.
It is further pleaded that Sant Parkash was not given disability pension as the injury was not sustained during performance of Military service as also the injury was not attributable to the duty and the same was on account of his own fault.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, I am, however, of the opinion that the cause of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
It is not disputed that petitioner was enrolled in the Army and he was very much on duty when he was injured and later on discharged from Army.
Simply because the firing was accidental and the injury was not suffered by Sant Parkash in as exchange of fire on border or otherwise, it cannot be said that he was not on duty or that the injury suffered by him was not attributable to the Military service.
It is not necessary for grant of disability pension that the person concerned at the time when he suffered disability, should actually be performing the duties.
Such a stand taken by the respondents would result in declining the claim of many who are serving the cause of Nation.
No rule otherwise also has been brought to my notice which might go to the extent of saying that it is only an injury which is suffered while actively performing the duty which would entitle a person to disability pension.
5.
The petition, of course, is belated.
Sant Parkash was discharged way back in the year 1948.
The pleading that he had been making efforts to get disability pension, however, has not been disputed.
Last letter on that behalf was in the year 1989 when Sant Parkash served a legal notice through a lawyer.
A Division Bench of this Court in Sardara Singh v. Union of India, 1992(6) SLR 683, has held, "It is no doubt correct that the petitioner has filed the writ petition after a lapse of almost 40 years.
A perusal of the order, quoted above, however, shows that the petitioner had been regularly representing to the authorities and his claim was declined only on the ground that the disability was not attributable to or aggravated by military service.
This being factually incorrect, we have no alternative but to quash the order.
Furthermore, in the circumstances of the case and more particularly the continuing disability, delay in approaching the court even in the matter of pension cannot completely defeat his claim.
We consider it to be in the interest of justice to allow his claim for the payment of pension.
However, on account of delay, we decline the petitioner's prayer for the payment of interest."
6.
The Division Bench in Sardara Singh's case (supra) has taken notice of the delay but yet allowed the claim as it pertains to pension for which every possible effort was made by the petitioner of this case.
7.
In view of what has been said above, this writ is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant disability pension to the legal representatives of Sant Parkash to the extent that he might have been entitled to under the Rules.
This disability pension would, however, be admissible upto October 31, 1992, the date uptill when Sant Parkas was alive.
After that date the claim of legal representatives of Sant Parkash be also considered for family pension under the Rules.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.