A L Bahri, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution by Sudesh Kumar Sud, former Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, prays for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay salary and allowances to him as per terms of appointment.
He also made a claim to House Rent Allowance, Conveyance Allowance, Telephone Bill charges.
He found his claim on the following facts :-  2.
The petitioner initially joined State of Haryana as Assistant District Attorney in 1971.
Subsequently he was promoted as Deputy District Attorney and in 1987 he was promoted and appointed as District Attorney in the office of Advocate General, Haryana.
In 1989, Advocate General, Haryana, recommended for his promotion and appointment as Assistant Advocate General.
However, for one or the other reason the same did not mature.
The petitioner sought voluntary retirement by giving 3 months' notice and was relieved of his duties on December 9, 1990 afternoon.
The Advocate General, Haryana, respondent No. 2, keeping in view that the petitioner while in service in the office of the Advocate General was handling important cases wanted the petitioner to be appointed as Assistant Advocate General.
He approached the Chief Minister who agreed to his proposal.
Thus the petitioner was offered the job of Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, protecting his pension and giving him other allowances.
His appointment was to be on the same terms and conditions which were applicable to Shri Nobat Singh, Sr. Deputy Advocate General.
At the time of retirement the petitioner was getting basic pay of Rs. 4125/- in the scale of Rs. 3700-5000.
He was getting special pay of Rs. 400/-, the telephone bills of the petitioner in respect of telephone installed at his house were being paid by the Government as would appear from Annexure P1/1.
The scale of the post of Assistant Advocate General was Rs. 4100-5300 plus 500/- as special pay plus usual allowances.
The letter written by Advocate General in this respect is Annexure P2.
However, when the Government subsequently conveyed his order of appointment dated January 17, 1991, it was mentioned therein that the pay would be fixed later on under normal Rules.
There was no mention regarding other amenities and facilities which were agreed to be allowed to the petitioner.
Likewise there was no mention about protecting his pension or meeting out expenses of telephone at his residence.
Annexure P. 5 contains the terms and conditions of appointment of Shri Nobat Singh Panwar as communicated in the State Government by the Advocate General and requesting the State Government to modify the terms and conditions of the petitioner as agreed by the Chief Minister, i.e. the retainer fee was to be Rs. 6250/- per month, (ii) House Rent Allowance admissible (iii) telephone charges of the telephone installed at his residence to be met by the State, (iv) Conveyance Allowance of Rs. 500/- per month as given to Shri Nobat Singh, and (v) the petitioner to be allowed to draw his pension in addition to retainer fee.
The petitioner was also to be appointed as Assistant Advocate General with effect from December 10, 1990 as he was allowed to work as such in the office of the Advocate General after the Chief Minister had passed the order.
To the same effect is the letter Annexure P.6 written by the Advocate General to the State Government.
The services of the petitioner were terminated vide order dated June 28, 1991 (Annexure P.8).
It was on July 15, 1991 (after the new Government had taken over) that pay of the petitioner on the post of Assistant Advocate General was fixed by the Government as retainer fee of Rs. 4,500/- per mensem subject to the condition that the total emoluments from all sources including pension would not exceed Rs. 7,600/- per mensem as laid down in Rule 718 of the Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
This fixation of pay was not in accordance with the order passed by the Chief Minister.
Thus the petitioner served a legal notice Annexure P. 10 on the State making claim as detailed above.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued, reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents, inter-alia, asserting that the petitioner accepted the terms and conditions of the appointment letter and joined the service.
Subsequently he could not challenge the same.
On merits broad facts are admitted that earlier the petitioner was working as District Attorney in the office of the Advocate General and after his voluntary retirement he was re- employed as Assistant Advocate General.
Thus he was not entitled to any other benefits or facilities except those which were mentioned in the appointment letter.
Reference has been made to Civil Services Rules that he was not entitled to House Rent Allowance etc. as he was not regularly appointed against the post of Assistant Advocate General and even on such a post telephone facilities were not available at the residence.
At times it is stated that it was a contractual appointment and the facilities which were allowed to Shri Nobat Singh and Shri H S Gill were not permissible to the petitioner as they were appointed Deputy Advocates General.
Replication has been filed by the petitioner to the written statement, inter alia, reiterating his stand that his terms and conditions were finalised by the Chief Minister and he was entitled to all the benefits as described above on the same terms and conditions which were applicable to Shri Nobat Singh.
4.
Since there was no specific denial about the orders passed by the Chief Minister with respect to the terms and conditions on which the petitioner was re-employed as Assistant Advocate General, the records were produced by the Advocate General.
Brief reference is being made to the record which would help in deciding the question raised in the petition.
On the letter of Advocate General, Haryana, dated December 21, 1990, order of the Chief Minister as under :-  "C.M.
has approved as proposed by AG order be issued today."
The Advocate General had made the following proposal :-  "Shri S K Sood was working as District Attorney in this office and has now retired at the age of 55 years and has been relieved on 9.12.1990 A.N.
Shri Sood was doing very good work in this office and I am of the view that we should avail his services by appointing him as Assistant Advocate General in this office on contractual basis and he gets a salary permissible to Assistant Advocate General.
His pension may be protected as has been done in the case of Shri Nobat Singh Panwar who was appointed as Senior Dy.
Advocate General in this office.
He should also be allowed to retain Telephone installed at his residence."
When the aforesaid letter of the Advocate General reached the office, a detailed note was prepared incorporating the proposals aforesaid by the Dealing Assistant.
The authorities prepared a note thereon which was finally approved by the Chief Minister on January 19, 1991.
It reads as under :-  "There are no service Rules for Class I Offices of Advocate General Office but other Rules of Government are applicable to them.
Appointment cannot be given from the back-date (i.e. 101290) to Sh. S K Sood because no post of A.AG was vacant.
The post of A.A.G falls vacant only after promotion/appointment of Shri Jaivir Yadav AAG as DAG.
If approved :-  (i) Shri Jaivir Yadav AAG may be appointed as DAG with immediate effect.
(ii) Shri S K Sood retired DA may be appointed as AAG in the vacancy caused by above promotion.
(iii) Matter regarding fixation of pay and retention of Govt. telephone at the residence of Shri S K Sood may be taken later on.
DFA I & II are submitted for approval/orders please."
Thereafter whatever notes were prepared and orders passed the file was not put up before the Chief Minister and the Chief Minister did not approve any other action.
With respect to the fixation of the retainer to be payable to the petitioner, the matter was sent to the Finance Department.
Although subsequently the proposals of the Advocate General were to fix the retainer at Rs. 6,250/-, and to treat the appointment of the petitioner with effect from December 10, 1990 instead of January 17, 1991, payment of House Rent Allowance to the petitioner similar to Shri Nobat Singh, to pay telephone charges for the private telephone installed at the residence of the petitioner and to allow conveyance allowance to the petitioner, the Finance Department finally took the decision for allowing a retainer of Rs. 4,500/- per month to the petition subject to the condition that the total emoluments from all sources were not to exceed Rs. 7,600/- per month, a condition laid down in Rule 718 of Civil Services Rules Volume II.
It is, therefore, taken that the other proposals as mentioned above were not acceded to by the Finance Department.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the respondents are estopped from denying the benefits which were earlier allowed to Shri Nobat Singh as the proposal of the Advocate General contained in his letter was finally approved by the Chief Minister.
There is no force in this contention though not with respect to all the conditions of service.
6.
In order to apply the principle of promissory estoppel it was required of the petitioner to show that there was some promise from the side of the State which the petitioner believed to be true and he changed his position that the State cannot back out from such a promise.
The facts as stated above indicate that proposal of the Advocate General in letter Annexure P2 was approved by the Chief Minister on the official file.
However, before the letter was issued in response thereto the Chief Minister had modified the approval.
Thus to the extent the approval was modified it is binding on the State.
Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Bhim Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, (1981) 2 Supreme Court Cases 673.
In that case expressly promise was made in a document Exhibit P.1 and on that basis the official moved into new department.
Thereafter the State by virtue of another letter Exhibit P.3 sought to back out from the earlier promise.
In these circumstances it was observed that the official having believed the representation and having acted thereupon could not be defeated of the hopes which had crystallised into rights.
As far as position of law is concerned, there is no dispute.
However, the ratio of the decision of the aforesaid case cannot be applied to the case in hand as such.
In fact there was no promise from the side of the State, which was to be accepted by the petitioner.
After the Chief Minister had approved the proposal, the Advocate General allowed the petitioner to join the post of Assistant Advocate General which was lying vacant in his office.
Some cases were entrusted to the petitioner and he conducted the same.
Otherwise there is no indication from the record that the State had ever approached the petitioner with any promise of appointment to the post of Assistant Advocate General on certain conditions.
The Advocate General's letter aforesaid indicates that he wanted to have the services of the petitioner that he approached the Chief Minister with the proposal which was approved by the Chief Minister.
Upto that stage it cannot be said that any promise was given by the State to the petitioner.
When appointment letter was issued which was accepted by the petitioner and he submitted his joining report of January 17, 1991, the petitioner accepted the terms and conditions as mentioned therein.
7.
Out of different proposals of the terms and conditions of the post of Assistant Advocate General which were accepted by the Chief Minister only one such term was in fact modified under subsequent order of the Chief Minister and that was with respect to the date of joining of the petitioner.
In fact the proposal of Advocate General was only with respect to three matters which were approved i.e. (1) posting as AAG under the Rules, (2) Protection of pension, and (3) Expenditure of telephone at residence.
While issuing appointment letter it was ordered that the petitioner was appointed as AAG and his retainer was to be fixed under the Rules with respect to other matters, they were to be taken up separately.
If subsequently such terms and conditions were to be modified the office was required to obtain orders of the Chief Minister.
From the file of the case as produced it is quite apparent that at no stage papers were out up before the Chief Minister for obtaining his orders to modify the previous orders.
That being the position all the terms and conditions which were not modified but were earlier approved by the Chief Minister would continue to govern the service of the petitioner.
8.
Shri Arun Nehra, Additional Advocate General, has argued that retainer of the petitioner has been fixed under Rule 718 of the Civil Services Rules.
At one stage it was argued that the appointment of the petitioner though made against the post of Assistant Advocate General was contractual appointment.
It is on that account that the Finance Department fixed retainer for the petitioner for appointment as Assistant Advocate General under Rule 718 of the Civil Service Rules Vol. II, as was the approval of the Chief Minister.
There is force in this contention.
Salary or retainer was to be fixed under Rule 718 aforesaid, however, that does not mean that the pension could not be protected.
Re : protection of pension as was the case of Shri Nobat Singh, Chief Minister had already approved and such order was not subsequently modified by him or his successor.
Similar is the position with respect to meeting out expenses of telephone installed at the residence of the petitioner.
In our view it is a clear case of contractual appointment.
The proposal of the Advocate General as contained in letter Annexure P2 was approved by the Chief Minister to appoint him as Assistant Advocate General.
The State could agree to allow more facilities and amenities to the petitioner on his contractual appointment to the post of Assistant Advocate General.
The present appointment being on contractual basis, the order of the Chief Minister approving the terms and conditions would be binding on the State or the executive machinery of the State who is to implement such orders.
9.
With respect to other proposals of Advocate General as contained in his letters dated January 18, 1991 and May 22, 1991 Annexure P.5 and P.6 there is no indication from the record that the Chief Minister or any other Competent Authority had passed orders and approved them.
Those proposals briefly are as under :-  1.
Retainer at Rs. 6225/-,  2.
Payment of House Rent Allowance,  3.
Conveyance Allowance,  4.
Protection of Pension,  5.
Expenditure of Telephone installed at the residence.
Proposals as at Sr. Nos. 1 to 3 were not in the first letter of Advocate General Annexure P2 which were approved by the Chief Minister.
These cannot be allowed to the petitioner.
10.
The petitioner conducted some of the cases entrusted to him by the Advocate General during the period from December 10, 1990 to January 16, 1991 and list of such cases is available on the official file.
The Advocate General would make payment to the petitioner for conducting such cases as per Rules applicable for payment of fees to private advocates.
11.
With respect to the appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Advocate General, he will be deemed to have joined the service on January 17, 1991 on retainer of Rs. 4,500/- per month as per Annexure P.9.
The amount of pension drawn by the petitioner shall stand protected as was in the case of Shri Nobat Singh.
The petitioner would be entitled to reimbursement of expenditure on telephone installed at his residence during the period the petitioner remained posted as Assistant Advocate General.
The respondents would comply with the direction aforesaid within a period of two months.
The petition is allowed with the directions as aforesaid.
With respect to other claims the writ petition is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Records returned to A.AG Haryana.