RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, the respondent in the present writ petition (In short the Board) sent requisition for some posts of Clerks-cum-Typists to the various Employment Exchanges in February, 1980.
It may be observed here that in the letter which was sent by the Employment Exchange to the petitioner for appearing in the interview with the respondent-Board, it was mentioned that the educational qualifications required for the post are Matric with Punjabi and knowledge of English and Punjabi typing.
It is not disputed that the petitioner is Matric with Punjabi.
2.
The petitioner appeared in the interview in response to a letter from the respondent and was selected for one of the posts.
She was issued an appointment letter dated 27th March, 1980 copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2 with this petition.
One of the conditions mentioned in the appointment letter was that the appointee will have to furnish a medical fitness certificate from the Principal Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh, within 6 days of joining.
The petitioner submitted her joining report with the respondent on 28th March, 1980 and was sent for medical examination.
She was medically examined on 31st March, 1980.
A communication was sent on 7th April, 1980 by the Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Sector 16, to the Executive Engineer, Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh (where the petitioner had been appointed), that the petitioner had been declared temporarily unfit due to pregnancy of 18 weeks.
Consequently, the petitioner was relieved on 23rd April, 1980.
After the delivery of a child and having been declared medically fit, as alleged by her, she reported back for duty on 11th September 1980, but according to the averments made in the writ petition, she was not assigned any work.
However, an order was issued on 25th October, 1980, appointing the petitioner on ad hoc basis for 89 days and it was further mentioned that the appointment is subject to the condition that the petitioner fulfils the conditions provided for the post of a Clerk, i.e. Matric First Class/Intermediate Second Class/BA Since the petitioner is not Matric Ist Class or Intermediate Second Class or BA she was not allowed to join in pursuance of the appointment letter, dated 25th October, 1980.
3.
The present writ petition was filed challenging the action of the respondent in not allowing the petitioner to join the service in pursuance of the earlier order of appointment dated 27th March, 1980, and further impugning the action of the respondent in offering the petitioner only ad hoc appointment vide order dated 25th October, 1980 and that too with a condition that she should be Matric Ist Class/Intermediate 2nd Class/BA which was not the required qualification at the time the petitioner was initially selected.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner had joined in pursuance of the earlier appointment order dated 27th March, 1980 and she was only declared temporarily medically unfit due to pregnancy and it was on this count that she was relieved on 23rd April, 1980.
It was further submitted that moment the temporary medical unfitness was no more there, the petitioner had a right to continue in service in pursuance of the appointment letter issued on 27th March, 1980.
According to the learned counsel, the respondent was not justified in issuing fresh appointment order on 25th October, 1980, offering ad hoc appointment to the petitioner and that too with a condition that the petitioner must have Matric Ist Class/Intermediate 2nd Class/BA qualification.
The qualifications, the learned counsel submitted, had to be seen which were prescribed at the time the petitioner was initially selected and appointed.
He also submitted that there is no specific order revising the qualifications and the alleged resolution of the Board, dated 8th May, 1980 only dealt with the revision of pay scales to be given to the employees having particular qualifications and the resolution did not in any way modify or amend the qualifications.
He relied upon a judgment of this Court in Gurnam Kaur and others versus Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh, C.W.P.
No. 502 of 1981, decided on 12th April, 1985, to support the contention that the qualifications which are relevant are the one which are prescribed at the time the selection and appointment is made and if these are changed later on, the same cannot be applied retrospectively.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent, submitted that the petitioner has joined on 27th March, 1980 in pursuance of a conditional appointment order, i.e. subject to her medical fitness.
Since the petitioner was declared temporarily medically unfit, she could not be said to have been appointed and she was only allowed to continue till 23rd April, 1980, i.e. till the medical report was received.
Further, he submitted that after the petitioner became medically fit, she had no right to appointment on the basis of her earlier selection and at the time the fresh appointment was offered on 25th October, 1980, she had to possess the academic qualifications which were prescribed for the post at the relevant time.
According to the learned counsel, the qualifications were revised vide Resolution dated 8th May, 1980 (Annexure P-8).
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
The petitioner was initially allowed to join the service on 28th March, 1980 in pursuance of the appointment letter dated 27th March, 1980.
She was only declared temporarily medically unfit on account of pregnancy, but was not permanently declared unfit.
Moment this impediment became non-existent, i.e. the petitioner became medically fit, she had the right to continue in the service, inasmuch as the appointment order was subject to her medical fitness and the petitioner had only been declared temporarily medically unfit.
As observed above, the petitioner did continue in service from 28th March, 1980 to 23rd April, 1980 and the respondent was required to allow her to join the moment she gave her medical fitness certificate.
There was no question of issuing any fresh order as the appointment order had already been issued on 27th March, 1980.
It would have been a totally different proposition if the petitioner had been permanently found medically unfit.
I am also not oblivious of the fact that the temporary medical unfitness was due to pregnancy and for no other reason which unfitness normally ceases to exist some time after the delivery of the child.
Apart from this, in the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court held that the revised qualifications cannot be made applicable to the persons already selected and appointed.
There were some selectees alongwith the petitioner who had also been given appointment on 27th March, 1980, vide same appointment order, as the petitioner was issued.
The services of some of those appointees were sought to be terminated on the ground that they did not have the requisite qualifications, which were laid down vide resolution of the Board, dated 8th May, 1980.
This Court, as observed above, held that the amended academic qualifications could not be made applicable to the earlier selection and appointments.
In the present case, the petitioner had been selected and given appointment on 27th March, 1980, though conditionally i.e. subject to her medical fitness.
As observed earlier, the petitioner was declared temporarily medically unfit, and therefore, the qualifications which were prescribed vide resolution dated 8th May, 1980 by the Board cannot be made applicable to the petitioner's appointment.
7.
I do not agree with the learned counsel for the respondent that the services of the petitioner stood automatically terminated as she was found medically unfit for Government service, and, therefore, she was rightly offered fresh appointment in October, 1980, on the basis of the revised qualifications.
As has already been dealt by me, the revised qualifications could not be made applicable in the case of the petitioner, as in fact she had been appointed earlier, i.e. on 27th March, 1980 and she was found only temporarily medically unfit.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondent is directed to allow the petitioner to join the service with effect from the date she submitted her medical fitness certificate.
9.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that long period has elapsed when the writ petition was filed and the petitioner has not worked with the Board for all this period.
Consequently, the petitioner would not be entitled to any arrears of pay whatsoever.
However, she will be entitled to other service benefits arising from this order.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.