S K Jain, J :- Suit of the plaintiff-respondent, who was a Clerk in the Office of the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, for a decree of declaration that he was entitled to be considered as a regular clerk and grant of seniority with effect from 1.12.1975 and senior selection grade with effect from 111978 was partially decreed.
He was granted first two reliefs but was declined the grant of the relief of senior selection grade.
Both the plaintiffs and the defendant challenged the said judgment and decree dated 23.12.1991 passed by Sub Judge 3rd Class, Ferozepore.
The appeal was heard by Additional District Judge, Ferozepore who affirmed the findings of the learned trial Court.
Additionally, he directed the department to consider the case of the plaintiff for the grant of senior selection grade, if he was otherwise eligible, taking into consideration that he will be deemed to be regular clerk with effect from 1.12.1975.
The respondents State of Punjab and the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Ferozepur have impugned the abovesaid judgment and decree of the Court below in this Regular Second Appeal.
2.
Notice of motion having been issued, Mr. S C Chhabra, Advocate has appeared on behalf of the plaintiff-respondent.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
Mr. Boparai, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab has submitted that the plaintiff was originally employed as peon in the department.
He was promoted as clerk subject to the condition that his services would be regularised on his qualifying Punjabi typing test as required under circular letter No. 4/17/79/9979 dated 2481983 (Annexure R-2).
5.
Mr. Chhabra, learned counsel for the respondent, has in reply urged that the respondent was promoted as clerk with effect from 1.12.1975 whereas Circular Annexure R-2 came into force with effect from 2481983 and, therefore, this circular could not be made effective retrospectively.
When the respondent was promoted Punjab Government Circular Letter No. 1487- SII(3)72/16190 dated the 25th April, 1972, from the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, to all the Heads of Departments, was in force, wherein no such condition was laid.
In support of his argument he has relied upon Chetan Kumar v. Punjab State through Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Punjab, Patiala, 1992(2) Recent Services Judgments 388.
6.
I have given a thoughtful consideration to rival arguments and have also taken into consideration the abovesaid judgment.
There is no denying of the fact that when the plaintiff-respondent was promoted as a clerk on 1121975, 1972 instructions were in force.
It will be seen from these instructions, a photocopy whereas placed on the record, that there was absolutely no stipulation in those instructions that the respondent or others similarly situated were to pass a Punjabi typing test.
The instructions, Annexure P-2, which admittedly do require the passing of a Punjabi typing test, however, saw the light of the day of 2481983 and as such could not be applied retrospectively to the case of the respondent who was promoted as a clerk on 1.12.1975.
It is not the case of the appellants that at the time of the promotion of the respondent a condition was imposed that his services would be regularised after he passed Punjabi typing test.
7.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any fault with the concurrent findings of the Courts below and the part of the judgment of the Lower Appellate Court vide which he had directed the department to consider the case of the plaintiff-respondent for grant of senior/selection grade taking into consideration that he will be deemed to be regular with effect from 1.12.1975.
Resultantly, this Regular Second Appeal is dismissed in limine.
Appeal dismissed.