Nirmal Singh, J - Petitioner was enrolled in Border Security Force on 15th June 1991, as a Cook.
After completion of training, he was remustered as Constable (GD) on 30th May, 1995.
He proceeded on one day's casual leave on 1st March, 1999 with permission to avail one day's gazetted holiday on 2nd March, 1999.
He was due to join his duties on 3rd March, 1999 but he did not join and instead sent an application on 18th March, 1999 for grant of 30 days earned leave due to the sickness of his wife without any medical document in support of his claim.
His request for grant of said leave was not accepted by the competent authority due to exigency of service.
The petitioner was informed at his residential address on 5th March, 1999 vide letter No. Estt/41/Disc/AR/75BN/99/3938 directing him to join the duty.
After more than 30 days of absence of the petitioner, a one man Court of Inquiry was ordered on 29th May, 1999 under Section 62 of the Border Security Force Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
After completion of the Court of Inquiry, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner through Registered letter dated 2nd July, 1999, at his home address but the show cause notice was received back undelivered.
Petitioner was arrested as per Rule 36(1)(iii)(d) of BSF Rules, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as `rules'), for disposal of disciplinary action under Section 19(B) of the rules.
After completion of Summary Court proceedings, petitioner was dismissed from service.
Petitioner impugned order of dismissal in this court in SWP No. 2650/99.
The said writ petition was disposed of by observing as under :-  "In view of what has been stated above, the respondents are directed to reconsider the issue as to whether the extreme penalty of dismissal was required to be inflicted or the ends of justice would be served by reverting the petitioner to the post which he was occupying earlier to whom he was remustered as a Constable.
These are matters on which decision has to be taken by the respondents.
They are left free to take a decision.
This petition would be treated as a statutory appeal in terms of Section 117-A of the Border Security Force Act read with Section 168 of the Border Security Force Act.
Let a decision be taken within a period of four months from the date, a copy of the order passed by this Court is made available by the petitioner to the respondents and also to the learned counsel (Mr. Ajay Sharma, Additional Central Government Standing Counsel), who has put in appearance on behalf of the respondents today.
The competent authority to see as to what relief the petitioner is found entitled.
Disposed of accordingly."
2.
In pursuance of order passed by this Court, respondent No. 2 considered the appeal of the petitioner and rejected the same vide order dated 7th October, 2002, impugned in the present writ petition.
Petitioner thus, is seeking quashing of order dated 7th September, 1999 vide which the petitioner was dismissed from service and order dated 7th October, 2002, vide which the appeal of the petitioner has been rejected.
Petitioner is also seeking mandamus directing respondents to treat the petitioner on active duty and pay him all consequential benefits.
3.
Mr. Sudershan Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner had not committed any such misconduct in discharge of his official duty which deserved dismissal from service.
He submitted that the punishment awarded is not commensurate with the act of the petitioner.
It was stated that while imposing the punishment, the disciplinary authority must act reasonably and should impose the penalty which commensurates with the act of the delinquent official.
He submitted that the petitioner proceeded on one day's casual leave but could not join his duty as the wife of the petitioner fell ill and the petitioner had applied for earned leave, which was not sanctioned and, in the meanwhile, the petitioner himself fell ill as a result of which the petitioner could not join his duty.
It is submitted that respondents in their reply have admitted that the petitioner approached Commandant of the Battalion of grant of 30 days earned leave on the ground of sickness of wife but the said leave application was rejected as there was no medical document attached with the application.
He contended that the Commandant should have directed the petitioner to produce the medical evidence.
It is stated that the petitioner has placed on record the medical certificates issued by a Government doctor which would substantiate the claim of the petitioner that his wife as also he himself fell ill.  4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for respondents submitted that no error whatsoever has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner in holding the Court of Inquiry or proceedings adopted by the respondents.
He submitted that the Court of Inquiry was conducted according to the rules and the principles of natural justice were also followed.
It is submitted that the petitioner is a habitual absentee and he has now made a ground that firstly his wife fell and then he himself fell ill.
The learned counsel submitted that the writ courts are not to disturb the punishment awarded by the competent authority under the Act as the writ court is not a court of appeal.
In support of his submission, reliance was placed on Vidya Parkash v. Union of India, AIR 1988 SC 705; Union of India and others v. Major A Hussain, 1998(1) RCR(Crl.)
300 : 1998(1) SCT 288 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 577 and Director General, RPF and others v. Ch.
Sai Babu, 2003(1) SCT 820 (SC) : AIR 2003 SC 1437.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not challenged the court of inquiry proceedings conducted by respondents.
The only contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the penalty imposed is not commensurate with the act of the petitioner.
It is admitted case that the petitioner absented himself from duty earlier on two occasions and this was the third time when the petitioner has chosen to remain absent.
The petitioner when earlier filed the writ petition, referred to above, he had taken a stand that no opportunity was given to the petitioner with regard to explaining the previous absence which has been taken note of by the punishing authority.
Petitioner in the present writ petition has not given any explanation for remaining absent on earlier two occasions.
The petitioner has failed to point out any error in holding the court of inquiry proceedings or that the principles of natural justice have not been complied with.
The writ court cannot reopen and appreciate the evidence as to whether the evidence was sufficient for imposing a major penalty.
This is the domain of disciplinary authority to see as to what punishment is to be awarded.
The scope of judicial review has been considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Major A Hussain (supra).
In para 22 of the judgment, it has been observed as under :-  "Though court martial proceedings are subject to judicial review by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, the court-martial is not subject to the superintendence of the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution.
If a court-martial has been properly convened and there is no challenge to its composition and the proceedings are in accordance with the procedure prescribed, the High Court or for that matter any court must stay its hands.
Proceedings of a court-martial are not to be compared with the proceedings in a criminal Court under the Code of Criminal Procedure where adjournments have become a matter of routine though that is also against the provisions of law.
It has been rightly said that court-martial remains to a significant degree, a specialized part of overall mechanism by which the military discipline is preserved.
It is for the special need for the armed forces that a person subject to Army Act is tried by court martial for an act which is an offence under the Act.
Court-martial discharges judicial function and to a great extent is a Court where provisions of Evidence Act are applicable.
A court-martial has also the same responsibility as any Court to protect the rights of the accused charged before it and to follow the procedural safeguards.
If one looks at the provisions of law relating to court-martial in the Army Act, the Army Rules, Defence Service Regulations and other Administrative Instructions of the Army, it is manifestly clear that the procedure prescribed is perhaps equally fair if not more than a criminal trial provides to the accused.
When there is sufficient evidence to sustain conviction, it is unnecessary to examine if pre-trial investigation was adequate or not.
Requirement of proper and adequate investigation if not jurisdictional and any violation thereof does not invalidate the court-martial unless it is shown that accused has been prejudiced or a mandatory provision has been violated.
One may usefully refer to Rule 149 quoted above.
The High Court should not allow the challenge to the validity of conviction and sentence of the accused when evidence is sufficient, court-martial has jurisdiction over the subject-matter and has followed the prescribed procedure and is within its power to award punishment....." 7.
In Ch.
Sai Babu's case, referred to above, it was further interpreted as under :-  "Normally, the punishment imposed by disciplinary authority should not be disturbed by the High Court or tribunal except in appropriate cases that too only after reaching a conclusion that the punishment imposed is grossly or shockingly disproportionate, after examining all the relevant factors including nature of charges proved against the delinquent, the past conduct, penalty imposed earlier, the nature of duties assigned having due regard to their sensitiveness, exactness expected on and discipline required to be maintained, and the department/establishment in which the concerned delinquent person works.
Merely because it is felt that the punishment imposed was extreme is not enough to disturb or modify the punishment imposed on a delinquent officer.
The Court has to record reasons to say as to how the punishment imposed on the delinquent is shockingly or grossly disproportionate to the gravity of charges held proved against him.
It is not that in every case of imposing a punishment or removal or dismissal from service a High Court can modify such punishment merely saying that it is shockingly disproportionate...." 8.
Chapter III of the Act specifies the offences and also the punishment for such offences.
Section 19 specifies that `absence without leave' constitutes an offence and on conviction by the Security Force Court, the person concerned is liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is mentioned in this Act.
9.
Chapter IV deals with the punishments.
One of the punishments provided under the Act is dismissal from service.
In this case, the petitioner after availing the leave, did not report back.
He applied for earned leave after remaining absent for about sixteen days on the ground that his wife is ill but during this period, he did not join his duties even though, his wife was not admitted in any hospital and as per the certificate placed on record (Annexure A), she was advised home treatment.
Same is the case of the petitioner.
These medical certificates seem to have been procured by the petitioner to justify his absence.
Petitioner is a member of disciplined force, and therefore, there is no scope for taking a lenient view for a person who is habitual absentee.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is found to be without merit and dismissed along with connected CMP(s), if any.
Petition dismissed.