SK Jain, J - The appellant was employed as Clerk in the office of Sub Registrar, Ferozepur.
He was found absent and one Jaswant Singh was found working in his place.
Government cash in his custody was also found short by one rupee.
He was charge sheeted.
Departmental Enquiry was conducted by Mr. Megh Raj, Executive Magistrate, Ferozepur.
He submitted his report on 24111985 thereby exonerating him of two charges but found him guilty of one of the charges.
A show-cause notice was served on him as to why the punishment of stoppage of two increments with comulative effect be not imposed on him.
Reply was submitted by the appellant and the same was found unsatisfactory and the proposed punishment was awarded.
2.
Feeling aggrieved, the plaintiff challenged the said order dated 231987 passed by the Deputy Commissioner by way of filing a civil suit which was contested on behalf of the State.
3.
Learned Senior Subordinate Judge, Ferozepur, vide his judgment and decree of January 16, 1990 dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
4.
The said judgment and decree of the Court of First Instance was challenged in Civil Appeal No26 of 1990 by the plaintiff before the Additional District Judge, Ferozepur who partly accepted the appeal to the extent that the plaintiff was entitled to full emoluments of the suspension period after he was reinstated.
The said judgment and decree dated 221991 of the Additional District Judge, Ferozepur has been impugned in this Regular Second Appeal.
5.
I have seen the pleadings in the suit, the evidence adduced in the suit and also the judgments of the Courts below and have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Following arguments have been advanced by learned counsel for the appellant.
6.
Firstly, that the competent authority had illegally erred in inflicting the punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect under Rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, because no such punishment is provided under the said rule.
7.
Secondly, that mandatory provisions of Rule 9(2) of the Rules have not been complied with in so far as the competent authority having disagreed with the Enquiry Report should have recorded its reasons for each disagreement and its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
8.
Thirdly, that since it was serious matter and major punishment had to be inflicted on the plaintiff, he was not afforded an opportunity to have the assistance of a co-worker during the enquiry.
AND  9.
Fourthly, that the enquiry was initiated on the basis of a complaint by the Vigilance Department but the copy of the complaint was not supplied to the plaintiff.
10.
In reply, Mr. Boparai, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, has taken me through the provisions of Rules 5(v) of the Rules and has submitted that the said rule includes the punishment of stoppage of increment(s) with cumulative effect.
Mr. Chopra has then drawn my attention towards the fact that sub-rule (v) of rule 5 was amended vide Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) (First Amendment) Rules, 1985 which clearly shows that withholding of increments of pay with cumulative effect was not included in the said rule prior to the amendment.
11.
In order to appreciate this argument, it is expedient to examine sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 prior to and after the amendment.
The same is reproduced below for ready reference :-  Sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 prior to amendment.
"5.
Penalties - The following penalties may, for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on a Government employee, namely :-  Minor Penalties  (i) x x x x x x  (ii) x x x x x x  (iii) x x x x x x  (iv) x x x x x x  Major Penalties.
(v) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay;  x x x x x x  Sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 after the amendment.
(v) Withholding of increments of pay with cumulative effect or reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay."
12.
Analytical examination of Sub Rule (v) of Rule 5 prior to amendment shows that it postulates reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee will earn increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay.
It is an independent head of penalty and it could be imposed as punishment in an appropriate case.
It is one of the major penalties.
The impugned order of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect whether would fall within the meaning of Rule 5(v)?
If it so falls Rules 8 and 9 of the Rules require conducting of regular enquiry.
The submission of Mr. Boparai, learned AAG, Punjab for the State that the punishment of withholding of two increments with cumulative effect squarely falls within the ambit of Rule 5(v) of the Rules has force.
I find it extremely difficult to countenance the contention of Mr. Chopra learned counsel for the appellant, that the penalty of imposition of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect does not fall within the meaning of Rule 5(v).
Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter without any hedge over it certainly comes within the meaning of Rule 5(iv) of the Rules.
But when penalty was imposed withholding two increments with cumulative effect, it would indisputably mean that the two increments earned by the employee was cut off as a measure of penalty for ever in his upward march of earning higher scale of pay.
In other words the clock is put back to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay and on expiry of two years the clock starts working from that stage afresh.
The insidious effect of the impugned order by necessary implication, is that the delinquent employee is reduced in his time scale by two places and it is in perpetuity during the rest of the tenure of his service with a direction that two years' increments would not be counted in his time-scale of pay as a measure of penalty.
The words are the skin to the language which if pealed off, its true colour or its resultant effects would become apparent.
When I broach the problem from this perspective the effect is as envisaged under Rule 5(v) of the Rules.
13.
In view of the above discussion, I have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order would come within the meaning of Rule (v) of the Rules.
In holding the above view, I am fortified by the ratio laid down in Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 413 : 1991(2) SCT 30 (Supreme Court).
14.
Now on to the second argument.
There is nothing on the record to show that the punishing authority after having disagreed with the finding of the Inquiry Officer on two articles of charge, had recorded its reasons for each disagreement and its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record was sufficient for the purpose.
Perusal of the record would show that through the Punishing Authority had disagreed with the findings of the Inquiry Authority on two articles of charge, it had not recorded its reasons for each disagreement and had also not recorded its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record was sufficient for the purpose.
That being so, it can be held unhesitatingly that the mandatory provisions of Rule 9(2) of the Rules have not been complied with.
15.
The word "inquire" means to ask about or to question, with the object of seeking truth (Webster's third New International Directory, Volume I.)
Inquiry is the act of seeking truth, information of knowledge about something.
When used, in the context of departmental inquiry in respect of charge against a Government servant, it means the formal or official investigation by a person having authority to compel testimony.
It is the search for the truth or otherwise of the accusations made against him.
This is done by asking questions, collecting testimony of witnesses and information from documents.
Inquiry is thus the totality of the steps taken in search for truth through the investigating media of issuing notice, recording and fairly considering the evidence, discussion and reasoning.
16.
The Inquiry which commences with the notice to show-cause continues into the written statement by a delinquent employee, follows through the evidence of witnesses, production of documents and culminates in reasoning and conclusions.
It is a continuous process which terminates with a final decision into the question under investigation.
The inquiry does not terminate with the report of the Inquiry Authority, but ends with the decision of the disciplinary authority.
17.
The Inquiring Authority merely aids the disciplinary authority in coming to a conclusion about the truth of the charges.
It is the disciplinary authority who takes a decision in respect of each of the charges, after considering the evidence.
The role of the Inquiring Authority, as the delegate of the disciplinary authority, ends with the making of the report.
His findings on the charges and the report are merely an aid in the inquiry which the disciplinary authority is called upon to hold because it is the disciplinary authority who takes a decision on each of the charges, notwithstanding the conclusion made by the Inquiring Authority.
The disciplinary authority may accept, modify or reject the conclusions made by the Inquiring Authority.
He does this on consideration of the evidence on record which means that his mind is engaged in the search for the truth in respect of the articles of charges.
In this endeavour, his mind considers the record, the inference from facts and evaluates the evidence.
Where it disagrees with the Inquiring Authority, reasons have to be recorded.
The disciplinary authority is required to "determine" what penalty should be imposed on the Government servant.
In my opinion, the scheme of the Rules contemplates one inquiry.
The proceedings before the Inquiring Authority, a delegate of the disciplinary authority, are in aid of the Inquiry which continues beyond the proceedings before the Inquiring Authority.
The decision making process of the disciplinary authority is a part of the Inquiry envisaged by Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and the Rules.
18.
Rule 11 of the Rules provides that the orders made by the punishing authority shall be communicated to the Government employee who shall also be supplied with a copy of the report of the inquiry, if any held by the punishing authority and a copy of its findings on each article of charge, or, where the punishing authority is not the inquiring authority, a copy of the report of the inquiring authority and a statement of the findings of the punishing authority together with brief reasons for its disagreement, if any with the findings of the inquiring authority.
19.
The abovesaid provisions were not complied with in the case in hand inasmuch as reasons for the disagreement of the Punishing Authority with the findings of the Inquiring Authority on two counts have not been supplied to the delinquent official alongwith the orders made by the punishing authority.
This is required because the disciplinary authority has its mind attuned to the evidence, its interpretation and reasons which may lead to one or the other conclusions.
20.
For the reasons stated in the foregoing paragraph, I hold that the impugned order stands vitiated because the mandatory provisions of Rule 9(2) and 11 of the Rules have not been complied with.
21.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that at no stage of the enquiry the petitioner was told that he could have the assistance of any Government employee during the courses of the enquiry.
Rules 8(8) of Punishment and Appeal Rules is reproduced below in this context :-  "8(8) The Government employee may take the assistance of any other Government employee to present the case on his behalf, but may not engage a legal practitioner for the purpose unless the Presenting Officer appointed by the Punishing Authority is a legal practitioner, or the punishing authority having regard to the circumstances of the case, so permits."
According to the learned counsel it was mandatory on the respondents to have asked the petitioner if he wanted to have the assistance of his next friend as envisaged by Rule 8(8) supra.
In support of his argument he has cited at the bar :-  (i) Shri Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 1983(1) SLR 626 : AIR 1983 (SC) 454; and  (ii) Hans Raj Gupta v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) RSJ 462 : 1992(1) SCT 258 (P&H).
There can possibly be no quarrel with the proposition of law laid down in the above said judgments but the perusal of the file shows that on an application moved by the plaintiff before the Inquiring Officer he was allowed to engage some retired Government employee as helper or to seek assistance of any Government employee.
In his statement recorded by S.D.O.
(C), he had admitted that he had engaged one Jaswant Singh to assist him.
Therefore, the third argument of the learned counsel is devoid of any merit.
22.
Lastly, it has been urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the inquiry was initiated on the basis of a complaint by the Vigilance Department but the copy of the complaint was not supplied to the plaintiff.
It is not the case of the respondents that a copy of the said document was supplied to him.
23.
In view of the grievance made by the petitioner that he had not been supplied a copy of the complaint made by the Vigilance Department which was the basic document in the framing of the charges against him.
I have no doubt that the petitioner was seriously handicapped in his defence at the enquiry.
It was the duty of the Inquiring Officer to furnish him a copy of that complaint and his failure to do so has vitiated the enquiry.
In holding the above view, I am supported by Dhup Singh Kanungo v. State of Haryana, 1969 SLR 436 and State of Haryana v. Som Dutt Ex. Constable, 1981(1) SLR 647.
For the foregoing reasons, this Regular Second Appeal is allowed.
The judgment and decree dated 221991 passed by Shri KS Kauldhar, Additional District Judge, Ferozepur are setaside.
The suit of the plaintiff is decreed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.