G R Majithia and H K Sandhu, JJ.
- This order disposes of C.W.P.
No. 494 and 5637 of 1993.
2.
In C.W.P.
No. 494 of 1993, the petitioner has sought a mandate to the respondents to refix his pay counting his ad hoc service from May 4, 1972 to August 22, 1973 for the purpose of grant of increments.
3.
In C.W.P.
No. 5637 of 1993, the petitioner has sought a mandate to the respondents to refix his pay counting the regular service rendered by him under respondent No. 3 from March 21, 1973 to September 13, 1978, for the purpose of grant of increments.
4.
A reference to relevant facts for appreciating the contentions raised at the hearing has been made from the pleadings in CWP No. 494 of 1993.
5.
Before joining service as a Clerk on regular basis in the Social Welfare Department, the petitioner served as a Clerk on ad hoc basis in the office of the Controller, Printing and Stationary Department, Haryana from May 4, 1970 to March 28, 1973.
After the expiry of the ad hoc period in the Printing and Stationary Department he joined as a Clerk on ad hoc basis in the office of Director, Food & Supplies, Haryana, from March 29, 1973 to August 22, 1973.
He was selected as a Clerk by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (for short, the Board) and his name was recommended by the Board for appointment in the office of the Director, Social Welfare Department, Haryana.
The petitioner moved a representation to the Director, Women and Child Development, Haryana, vide letter No. 7116, dated October 7, 1992 saying that his ad hoc service as a Clerk from May 4, 1972 to March 28, 1973 in the office of the Controller, Printing & Stationery Department, Haryana and from March 29, 1973 to August 22, 1973 in the office of the Director, Food & Supplies, Haryana, be counted towards grant of increments.
It is not disclosed as to on which date this representation was received by the concerned authority.
Since the concerned authority did not concede the claim of the petitioner, he has moved this Court for a direction to the respondents as indicated above.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, a preliminary objection has been taken that the petitioner has moved this Court for claiming the benefit of ad hoc service rendered by him from May 4, 1972 to August 22, 1973 after a gap of twenty years and the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of laches and delay.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the instructions contained in Circular letter No. 2179-74/20589, dated June 11, 1974, from the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Finance Department.
The same read thus :-  Sub : Grant of annual increment to purely temporary Government employees appointed locally against vacant post.
I am directed to refer to composite Punjab Govt. letter No. 5927/(1)- I64/5302, dated 30th June, 1964, on the subject noted above and to state that some departments have from time to time been seeking clarification from Government regarding fixation of pay and grant of increments to ad hoc employees.
To make the position clear, I am directed to state that ad hoc employees recruited through employment governed by rules contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part I, under rule 49 of the Punjab CSR Vol.
I, all duty in a position in time scale counts for increments in that time scale.
Contrary to this provision, some Departments have not been allowing an annual increment to such ad hoc employees where the period of employment, with the previous approval of the Public Service Commission/Subordinate Services Selection Board, exceeds one year.
This practice is contrary to the Rules.
It is clarified that annual increment should be given to ad hoc employees under the circumstances mentioned above subject to terms and conditions of their appointment.
On regular absorption of such employees in a Government Department, their pay is to be fixed in accordance with the provisions of Rules in the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.
I, Part-I as has already been clarified in the letter under reference.
In case where an ad hoc employee has resigned his post to take up regular appointment in some other department under the Haryana Government and the application was submitted through proper channel, such resignation would not entail forfeiture of past service within the meaning of Rule Service will be counted for the purpose of fixation of pay and increment subject to the rules as contained in Chapter IV of CSR Vol.
I Part I.
This benefit will also be admissible to those ad hoc employees who submitted their applications direct for employment while they were not in Government service.
3.
This concession will not be admissible in cases where an employee appointed locally on ad hoc basis is appointed in another department under the State Government on ad hoc basis and his appointment on ad hoc basis has not been regularised in either of department by the Public Service Commission and Subordinate Services Selection Board as in such cases the appointment of a person is just as make shift arrangement.
4.
The benefit under these instructions will now be admissible in the revised scales of pay in the case of employees appointed in old scale on ad hoc basis before 121969 and were not holding any post under the State Government on 121969."
This circular letter was issued to clarify in what cases the ad hoc service of an employee is to be counted for the purpose of grant of annual increments.
8.
These instructions are inapplicable to the facts of the instant case.
These instructions postulate that where an employee serving on ad hoc basis resigns his post to take up regular appointment in some other Department under the Haryana Government and the application for regular appointment had been submitted through proper channel such resignation would not entail forfeiture of past service.
The ad hoc service will be counted towards grant of increments in the Department where the employee has been employed on regular basis.
These instructions further postulate that the benefit will not be available where an employee was appointed on ad hoc basis on one Department and thereafter in another Department in the same capacity and his services were not regularised in either of the Departments by the Public Service Commission or by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The petitioner served as a Clerk on ad hoc basis in the office of the Controller, Printing & Stationary Department, Haryana and thereafter in the office of the Director, Food & Supplies, Haryana.
He was selected on regular basis as a Clerk by the Board and his name was recommended by the Board for regular appointment to the Director, Social Welfare, Haryana.
The Board did not forward the name of the petitioner for appointment on regular basis either in the office of the Controller, Printing & Stationery Haryana or the Director Food & Supplies Department, Haryana.
9.
Learned counsel then submitted that in an indentical case, viz. CWP No. 10161 of 1989 (Dharampal Singh v. State of Haryana), decided by a Division Bench of this Court on March 21, 1989, petitioner's claim was allowed.
In that case, the Bench observed Thus :-  "Having heard the learned counsel, we are satisfied that the petitioner's ad hoc service has to be counted for the purpose of grant of increment.
In view of this, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to re-fix the pay of the petitioner in the light of the above-noted observations.
This should be done within three months from today."
A perusal of the order reveals that the Bench directed that petitioner's ad hoc service be counted for the purpose of grant of increment.
The Bench did not refer to any Government instructions or statutory rules while coming to that conclusion.
We do not know on what basis the Bench had issued the direction.
The observations were made for deciding that particular case.
The same do not indicate that the Bench's attention was invited to Circular letter dated June 11, 1974, on which the petitioner has laid his claim.
The Bench had no occasion to deal with those instructions.
The decision rendered in Dharampal Singh's case (supra) is not an authority for the proposition canvassed at the Bar.
For the reasons stated above, these writ petitions fail and are dismissed.