GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of C.W.P.
No. 7285 and 3077 of 1993.
Challenge has been made to the almost identical orders passed by the Chief Engineer (Drainage), Irrigation Department, Punjab and the Chief Engineer (Construction) S.Y.L.
Canal Project, Punjab, whereby the services of the petitioners were assigned to the Director, Rural Development and Panchayat Department, Punjab, Chandigarh, for appointment as Junior Engineers in that Department, in these petitions under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The service record of the petitioners in CWP No. 7285 of 1993 indicating their name, date of birth, date of joining as Tracers in the Irrigation Department and dates of subsequent promotions as Draftsmen and Junior Engineers is as follows :-  Name of the Petitioner Date of birth Date of appointment as Tracer Date of appointment as Draftsman Date of promotion as Junior Engineer.
Ashok Kumar Nanda 29.11.58 3179 11682 14291 Ram Chand 22.8.51 12.12.73 9.5.83 3.3.91 Ram Paul Singla 15.11.62 ... 21.1.83 19.2.91 Raj Kumar 28560 ... 24.12.79 20.2.91 Suresh Kumar Gupta 27.6.56 9.7.77 3.9.83 14.2.91 Wazir Chand 1.6.58 27.4.79 April, 85 14.2.91 Dharam Pal Garg 11362 20.12.82 ... 15.2.91 The service conditions of the petitioners are governed by the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Draftsmen and Tracers' State Service, Class III, Rules, 1960 (the Rules, for brevity).
The Junior Engineers in the Irrigation Branch of the Public Works Department went on strike.
The State Government took a policy decision to appoint officials working in the Irrigation Branch of the Public Works Department as Junior Engineers on ad hoc basis if they fulfilled the minimum qualifications prescribed for the post.
Work charged employees/Beldars/Daily Wage workers were appointed as Junior Engineers on ad hoc basis.
Some of the employees who were not offered ad hoc appointments approached this Court through writ petition for a direction to consider them for promotion as Junior Engineers on ad hoc basis.
This Court issued the directions to the Department that the claim of the employees similarly situated should be considered for appointment as Junior Engineers.
The Junior Engineers so appointed were absorbed in various projects, viz. Ranjit Sagar Dam, Shahpur Kandi Works, Mukerian Hydel Project, Anandpur Sahib Hydel Project and Satluj Yamuna Link.
On completion of work in the various Projects, 341 posts of Junior Engineers were declared surplus.
The petitioners are those Junior Engineers who had been declared surplus.
The Government took a decision to absorb the petitioners and other similarly situated Junior Engineers in other departments wherever the vacancies existed.
Consequently, the Chief Engineer (Drainage), Department of Irrigation, Punjab, Chandigarh requested the Director, Rural Development & Panchayat Department, Punjab, to absorb the Junior Engineers in his Department.
The petitioners are being absorbed in the Rural Development and Panchayat Department, Punjab.
3.
The grouse of the petitioners is that they had been appointed as Junior Engineers in the Irrigation Department and their services cannot be transferred to another Department against their wishes.
4.
The defence taken in the written statement filed on behalf of the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, is that on closure of various on-going Projects, viz., Mukerian Hydel Project, Anandpur Sahib Hydel Project, Satluj Yamuna Link, he declared 341 posts of Junior Engineers as surplus.
The Punjab Government took a policy decision contained in Memo No. 33/35/91-4IPP2/19288, dated November 27, 1992, reading thus :-  "It is intimated that you should declare the staff with you as surplus if you do not need their services and inform the employees as well.
The list of the surplus staff should be sent to the Rural Development Department for appointment, and that Department will offer the alternative appointment to the employees so declared surplus.
If the concerned employees accept the offer of appointment, they may join the new assignments or they may be home."
The petitioners were offered alternative appointments in the Rural Development Department in terms of the aforesaid communication.
It is also averred in the written statement that the surplus staff could either be absorbed in the other Departments or they could be reverted to the original posts.
The petitioners are at liberty to ignore the appointment at their risk and may apply for reversion to their original posts in which they hold a lien.
5.
We sent for Dr. MR Goel, Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, who filed the written statement.
He stated that the petitioners could be absorbed on their original posts in the Irrigation Department or they could opt to join the higher post of Junior Engineer in the Rural Development Department.
He further stated that their promotion to the higher post in their own cadre would be regulated by the Rules and their claim for promotion would be examined in terms of the statutory Rules.
6.
Rule 2(j) of the Rules defines 'Service' which means the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Draftsmen and Tracers' State Service, Class III.
Rule 10 of the Rules deals with the channel of promotion of Tracers and Draftsmen.
The rule also provides for direct appointment and appointment by promotion to the various posts governed by the Rules.
The petitioners have their own channel of promotion under the Service Rules applicable to them.
On their reversion to their original posts, their claim for promotion to higher post would be considered in terms of the Rules.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners were appointed and posted on posts outside the cadre and they could not be reverted to their original cadre posts because they had acquired a right against those posts.
He further submitted that the State Government could not appoint the petitioners in another Department against their wishes.
The submission of the counsel is not correct.
Presumably, the submission has been made in ignorance of the undisputed factual position.
The petitioners are members of the Service known as the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Draftsmen and Tracers' State Service, Class III.
The method of selection to various posts in the Service and the channel of promotion is prescribed under the Rules.
The respondents have taken a positive stand in the written statement that the petitioners can seek reversion to their original posts on which they hold a lien.
It will be useful to reproduce the exact stand taken by the respondents in the written statement :-  "The surplus staff is being got adjusted in other Departments instead of dispensing with their services or reverting them to their original posts and the petitioners should have not agitated against this favourable attitude of the State.
In any way the options are not required for doing so and the petitioners are at liberty to ignore the appointment at their risk and may apply for reversion to their original posts in which they hold a lien."
(Emphasis supplied)  8.
The petitioners were given ad hoc appointments as Overseers/Junior Engineers in the Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch).
The service conditions of the Junior Engineers in the Irrigation Branch of the Public Works Department are governed by the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Overseers' Engineering State Service, Class III, Rules, 1955 (for short, the Overseers' Service Rules).
The petitioners' appointment as Junior Engineers was purely on ad hoc basis.
They did not become members of the Service as defined under Rule 2 (j) of the Oversees' Service Rules, which means the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Overseers' Engineering State Service, Class III.
Their appointment as Junior Engineers on ad hoc basis created no right to the post held by them.
However, their lien to the post held by them, which was governed by the Rules, has been kept intact.
Even the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, stated before us that if the petitioners did not want to join the higher post offered to them in the Rural Development and Panchayat Department, Punjab, they could seek reversion to their original posts in the Irrigation Department.
Thus, no prejudice is caused to them.
To us, it appears that the State Government has taken a benevolent attitude by offering the petitioners higher post of Junior Engineer in the Rural Development and Panchayat Department, to which post they are not entitled to.
The appointment is being offered to them only to accommodate them.
Otherwise in the Department in which they were given ad hoc appointment as Junior Engineers they had been rendered surplus.
In law, they can either seek reversion to their original posts on which they hold a lien or they can face termination.
In the instant case, no right of the petitioners has been violated.
In fact, they have been treated favourably.
9.
For the reasons stated above, the petitions fail and are dismissed.
The petitioners have been continuing as Junior Engineers in terms of the interim orders issued by this Court, which will be deemed to have been vacated.
The Additional Registrar (Judicial) is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh, forthwith for compliance of the directions made therein.