Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The two petitioners claim to be senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
They complain that in spite of being senior to the said respondents they were reverted from the posts of Draftsmen while their juniors were adjusted against the higher posts.
As few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners aver that after selection by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board, they were appointed as Tracers in the Department of Agriculture in January, 1977 and March, 1977 respectively.
They were promoted to the posts of Draftsmen in March, 1982 on the basis of their seniority in the cadre of Tracers but were subsequently reverted in March 1988.
A copy of the order of reversion passed on February 19, 1988 has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
3.
A programme for the development of the drought prone areas was undertaken by the State Government with the aid and assistance of the Central Government.
It was a temporary programme.
In order to implement this programme, the staff was recruited on ad hoc basis by the Additional Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Executive Officer, District Rural Development Agency, Narnaul.
This recruitment was made form amongst the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were appointed as Tracers by the Additional Deputy Commissioner.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were appointed as Tracers in July 1977 while respondent No. 5 was so appointed in February 1984.
Thereafter, the three respondents were promoted as Draftsmen in February 1984, June 1987 and July 1986, respectively.
4.
In the year 1987, the Central Government curtailed the aid to the programme.
Accordingly, a part of the staff including respondents Nos. 3 to 5 was rendered surplus.
The matter was considered by the authorities.
The Director of Agriculture, respondent No. 2 vide his letter No. Nil dated Nil, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2, drew the attention of the Government to a letter dated May 14, 1988 received from the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Narnaul in which a request had been made for the absorption of the surplus staff in the Department of Agriculture.
He requested the Government to take a decision about the absorption of the staff in the Agriculture Department and to sanction funds for this purpose.
Vide letter dated January 27, 1989, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-3, the State Government conveyed its approval "for the transfer of staff and infrastructure created under the Drought Prone Area Programme to the Agriculture Department in the year 1988-89."
It was further mentioned that "staff should be adjusted against the posts/staff sanctioned for the Horticulture Department" and "the proposed expenditure shall be met within from the overall savings of the Department for the year 1988-89."
Similarly, approval was also accorded for the year 1989-90.
5.
The petitioner aver that in pursuance to the decision of the State Government, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have "impliedly been adjusted in the Agriculture Department though no specific order for their merger in the Haryana Department was passed."
The petitioners further maintain that in view of the factual position, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were junior to them and "ought to have been adjusted as Tracers".
Petitioner No. 1 submitted representations dated June 14, 1990 and June 27, 1990 followed by subsequent representations dated December 10, 1990 and January 16, 1991.
It was claimed that they had a better right than respondent Nos. 3 to 5 for appointment as Draftsmen.
Even petitioner No. 2 claims to have made similar representations.
However, no action was taken by the respondents.
Accordingly, the petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition No. 5404 of 1991 in this Court.
Vide order dated April 14, 1991, the Division Bench directed the respondents "to decide the representations of the petitioners within three months."
The writ petition was, accordingly disposed of.
Respondent No. 2 instead of complying with the direction of the Court, issued an order dated July 6, 1991 regarding the absorption of respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen in the Department of Agriculture.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
Thereafter, vide order dated July 9, 1991, the representation of the petitioners was rejected.
The decision was conveyed vide letter dated July 26, 1991.
A copy of this order has been produced on the record as Annexure P-6.
Aggrieved by the order, the petitioners have impugned the orders dated February 19, 1988 (Annexure P-1) by which they were reverted to the posts of Tracers; the order dated July 6, 1991 (Annexure P-5) by which respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have been "absorbed in the Department against the vacant posts" and the order dated July 9, 1991 (Annexure P-6) by which their representations have been rejected.
It has been averred that the orders are patently illegal, arbitrary and unconstitutional.
Accordingly, a prayer for the quashing of these orders has been made.
6.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It has been averred that the claim of the petitioners "has already been conceded and (they) have been promoted vide No. 54265-70 dated 1791991... "It has been further averred that the petitioner had been promoted as Draftsman in the year 1982 against a temporary Scheme.
They were reverted from substantive posts on the abolition of the Scheme.
On the availability of vacancies, they have again been promoted as Draftsman.
With regard to respondent Nos. 3 to 5, it has been mentioned that the staff having been rendered jobless, the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana had decided that "a Special Plan Scheme be sanctioned for the adjustment/transfer of surplus staff and infrastructure created under the abandoned Scheme DPAP (Drought Prone Area Programme) and salary be paid to the surplus staff.
However, the words absorbed in the Department has (have) been inadvertently written in the order dated 671991---."
It has been further averred that "so far as the question of allotting seniority over and above the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 i.e. Babu Lal, Lekh Ram and Ram Chander is concerned, it is premature as the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 do not stand on the strength of the Department till today.
The respondent Nos. 3 to 5 being paid salary by this Department on the advice of Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana and no claim whatsoever regarding status and seniority has not (?)
yet been determined by this Department."
On these premises, it has been averred that the writ petition "be dismissed with special costs."
7.
Another written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
It has been inter alia averred that they were appointed after selection by a duly constituted Selection Committee and respondent Nos. 3 to 4 had been confirmed as Tracers in the year 1978.
It has been further averred that they were promoted as Draftsmen against regular sanctioned posts.
On the winding-up of the Scheme, they were absorbed in the Department of Agriculture "against their own posts on which they were working."
It has also been averred that the Scheme for the Development of Drought Prone Area was to be implemented by the Haryana Government through the Directorate of Agriculture.
The Deputy Commissioner of the District was appointed the Chairman of the Scheme and the Additional Deputy Commissioner was the Project Director.
It has also been stated that the petitioners had been promoted as Draftsmen in March 1987 on purely ad hoc basis under a Scheme and had continued to work as such till the winding up of the said Scheme.
The respondents claim that "there was no common seniority list between the petitioners and the replying respondents.
Moreover, the replying respondents have been merged in this Department as Draftsmen while the petitioners were Tracers immediately before their promotion as draftsmen i.e. prior to 1791991 and hence they have got no right to challenge their promotions at this belated stage i.e. after about 7 years."
It has also been suggested that the writ petition is highly belated and deserves to be dismissed.
8.
The petitioners have reiterated the averments made in the writ petition and controverted those made in the written statements by filling a replication.
9.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
10.
The factual position that emerges from the pleadings of the parties is as under :-  Sr. No. Name S/Sh.
Date of appointment as Tracer Mode of appointment Date of promotion as 1.
Bishan Chand (Petitioner No. 1) Jan.77 Through S.S.S.Board March 1982 2.
Satbir Singh (Petitioner No. 2) March 77 Through S.S.S.Board March 1982 3.
Babu Lal (Respondent 3) July 77 Through Emp.
Ex. February 84 4.
Lekh Ram (Respondent 4) July 77 -do- June 1987 5.
Ram Chander (Respondent 5) February 84 -do- July 1986.
A perusal, of the above shows that the petitioners had been recruited as Tracers prior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
In this context, it deserves notice that respondent No. 5 had been actually recruited as a Tracer about seven years after the petitioners.
It is also apparent that the petitioners had been promoted (even though temporarily) as Draftsmen prior to the date of promotion of the respondents.
Furthermore, it is also apparent that respondent No. 5 had been promoted after only about two years of his initial appointment as a Tracer.
11.
In the background of this factual position, Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 cannot be treated as senior to the petitioners.
He further submits that the action of the Department in absorbing respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen amounts to denial of equality of opportunity to the petitioners.
The claim has been contested by the learned counsel for the respondents.
12.
The first question that arises for consideration is : Are the petitioners senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners were recruited as Tracers after having been regularly selected through the Subordinate Services Selection Board in January and March 1977 respectively.
As against this, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 had been recruited against the programme for the development of Drought Prone Areas after the petitioners.
Even if the fact that the respondents had not been selected through the Board, is ignored, it is apparent that the dates of joining the service as Tracers in case of respondent No. 3 to 5 are later than those of the petitioners.
In fact, while the petitioners have been recruited in the year 1977, respondent No. 5 was appointed as a Tracer almost seven years later than the petitioners.
In view of this position going by the normal rule that seniority has to be determined by the date of appointment, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 cannot be treated as senior to the petitioners.
It would be only fair and proper to treat the said respondents as Junior to the petitioner.
It is, accordingly, held that the petitioners are senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5  13.
The next question that arises for consideration is regarding the action of the Department in absorbing respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen vide order dated July 6, 1991.
Respondent No. 2 by the said order has clearly observed that respondents 3 to 5 "who were appointed by the Additional Deputy Commissioner and Chief Project Officer, DPAP Narnaul at his level are absorbed in the Department against the vacant posts in the following officer ---- and approval is accorded to the charging of their salary from the dates shown against each.----" (emphasis supplied).
A perusal of this order clearly shows that the said respondents had been absorbed in the Department of Agriculture against the available vacant posts.
Furthermore, approval for the charging of their salary as Draftsmen with effect from December 1990 in case of respondent No. 3 and with effect from January 1991 in case of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 has also been accorded by the Director of Agriculture.
The result is that the petitioners who were clearly senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were made to work as Tracers and paid accordingly while their juniors were absorbed Draftsmen and paid the salaries of the posts.
It may be that hardship was causal to respondent Nos. 3 to 5 by the winding up of the programme for the development of the Drought Prone Areas.
They had been rendered surplus.
They were jobless.
In this situation, the Government was entitled to make a Scheme for their adjustment in different Departments including the Department of Agriculture.
However, while doing so, the competent authority could not have acted arbitrarily.
It should have followed a method by which the rights of the person who were already in the service of the Department were not adversely affected.
In the peculiar situation, it would have been absolutely fair and proper for the authorities to have offered the posts of Tracers to respondent Nos. 3 to 5.
It was for them to either accept the posts or to reject the offer.
Instead of doing that, respondent No. 2 ordered the absorption of respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen.
The result was that while the junior persons were posted as Draftsmen, their seniors were made to work as Tracers.
This claim amounted to denial of equality of opportunity.
It adversely affected the interest of the petitioners.
The action was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was even arbitrary.
Accordingly, the order dated July 6, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition is illegal to the extent it directs the absorption of respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen.
It is, accordingly, liable to be set aside.
14.
Another order which has been challenged by the petitioners is the one passed by respondent No. 2 on July 9, 1991 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6.
By this order, the representations submitted by the petitioners were rejected.
In this order, it has been inter alia observed that "there was no post of Draftsmen vacant to promote the petitioners, nor any such post has been created against which the claim of the petitioners for the post of Draftsmen be considered...." It has been further observed that the claim of seniority made by the petitioners viz-a-viz respondent Nos. 3 to 5 "is premature as the respondents do not stand till today on the strength of this Department because they are being paid salary by this Department on the advice of Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana and no claim whatsoever regarding status and seniority has yet been determined by the Department regarding the respondents Nos. 3 to 5."
This order purports to have been passed on July 9, 1991 though the petitioners suggest that it had in fact been passed later on.
Be that as it may the facts established on the record clearly show that respondent No. 2 had himself ordered the absorption of respondent Nos. 3 to 5 in the Department of Agriculture vide his order dated July 6, 1991.
Having done so, he could not have legitimately observed that "the respondents do not stand till today on the strength of this Department" in the order dated July 9, 1991.
It was apparently against the record.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 (the name and designation of the officer filing the reply having not been disclosed), it has been inter alia stated that "the words absorbed in the Department has (have) been inadvertently written in the order dated 671991.
This explanation is hardly satisfactory.
The order dated July 6, 1991 has not been modified or withdrawn by the respondent.
It continues to exist.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 continue to hold the posts of Draftsmen and draw the salary attached to those posts.
It appears that the plea was taken only with the object to defeating the claim of the petitioners.
15.
It also deserves notice that in spite of a categorical statement in the order that "there was no post of Draftsman vacant to promote the petitioners, nor any such post has been created against which the claim of the petitioners for the post of Draftsman be considered...." the factual position as evidenced by the order dated July 6, 1991 is that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have been adjusted in three different offices under the Directorate of Agriculture with effect from December 1990/January 1991.
If there were no posts, either vacant or sanctioned by the Department, it is not understood as to how the respondents could have been absorbed a Draftsmen.
On a consideration of the matter it is clear that in fact, the posts were available and the respondents were actually absorbed against those posts.
16.
In the replication filed by the petitioners, it has been averred that in fact four posts in that cadre of Draftsmen were available with the Department.
They have complained that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were adjusted against these posts without considering the claims of the petitioners.
Prima facie, this averment appears to be correct.
It has not even been controverted by the respondents by filing a rejoinder.
In fact, it appears that vide order dated October 8, 1990, a copy of which has been produced on record with the replication as Annexure P8, the said respondents had been "absorbed in the Department against vacant posts till further orders...."  17.
In view of this factual position, the averment in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that an inadvertently wrong statement had been made in the order dated July 6, 1991 does not appear to be correct.
In fact, it is against the record.
The orders for the absorption of the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen had been passed as far back as October 8, 1990.
These were, apparently reiterated wide order dated July 6, 1991.
However, in order to defeat the claims of the petitioners, it has wrongly been observed in the order dated July 9, 1991 (Annexure P-6) that there were no posts and that respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were not borne on the strength of the Department of Agriculture.
Accordingly, even the order dated July 9, 1991 suffers from an apparent error and cannot be sustained.
It is liable to be set aside.
18.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Existence of a post is a condition precedent for the appointment of a person thereto.
If the posts of Draftsmen were not available with the Department, no order appointing respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as such could have been issued.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, appearing for the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were being paid salary as Draftsmen.
This clearly means that the posts were available.
In such a situation, the petitioners had a right to be considered for appointment as Draftsmen and if they were found suitable for such promotion, the respondents could have been adjusted against the resultant vacancies.
Respondent No. 2 did not consider the claim of the petitioners.
In fact, no head was paid even to their representations.
It is only when the petitioners got a direction from this Court against respondent No. 2 that an order was passed on their representation.
That order, in view of the factual position, as already noticed was based on a wrong assumption of facts.
19.
Mr. Surya Kant also challenges the order dated February 19, 1988 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P/1.
By this order, the two petitioners are alleged to have been reverted as Tracers.
20.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners had been promoted as Draftsmen against the posts sanctioned for the Ground Water Cell.
The Scheme was wound up w.e.f.
February 20, 1988.
The reversion of the petitioners was the direct consequence of the winding up of the Scheme.
They had no right to continue as Draftsmen after the posts had ceased to exist.
Even otherwise, this order was passed in February 1988.
The writ petition was filed in August 1991.
It was highly belated.
Consequently, in find no reason to set aside this order.
21.
Mr. Surya Kant, however, submits that the order rejecting the representations of the petitioners was passed on July 9, 1991 and as such, the petition cannot be said to be belated.
I am unable to accept this contention.
There is no averment in the writ petition that the petitioners had filed any representation challenging the order of their reversion passed in February 1988.
The representations were submitted by the petitioners in the years 1990 and 1991 against the orders by which respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were absorbed as Draftsmen.
It appears that no representations have been filed challenging the orders of reversion passed in February 1988.
Consequently, the explanation sought to be furnished by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
22.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioners are senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Tracers.
They have a right to be considered for promotion as Tracers w.e.f.
the dates on which respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have been absorbed as Draftsmen.
The action of respondent No. 2 in not considering the claims of the petitioners while absorbing respondent Nos. 3 to 5 as Draftsmen vide orders dated October 8, 1990 (Annexure P/8) and July 6, 1991 (Annexure P-5) was illegal.
Since these orders were passed without considering the claims of the petitioners, these were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and are, hereby set aside.
Further more, even the order dated July 9, 1991 (Annexure P-6) by which the representations of the petitioners were rejected, is also illegal and is set aside.
Accordingly, while set asiding these orders, respondent No. 2 is directed to consider the claim of the respondent No. 2 is directed to consider the claims of the petitioners for promotion and Draftsmen with effect from the dates when respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were absorbed as such.
In case, the petitioners are found suitable, they will be promoted as such.
The consequential reliefs shall follow.
The Department will be entitled to adjust respondent Nos. 3 to 5 against the available posts/vacancies.
Accordingly, thewrit petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.
The petitioners are also held entitled to their costs of this petition which are assessed at Rs. 1500/-.
Petition allowed.