Jawahar Lal Gupta, J :- The petitioner who was working as Head of the Department of Automobile Engineering at the Government Polytechnic, Ambala City was promoted as Project Co-ordinator in the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana vide order dated November 28, 1988.
Subsequently, the petitioner was ordered to be reverted to the post of Head of the Department vide order dated August 21, 1990.
On December 10, 1990, Mr. M R Sharma, respondent No. 3 who was working as Head of the Department of Library Sciences at Government Polytechnic for Women, Ambala City was promoted to "Officiate as Principal in his own pay scale till further orders" and posted at Government Institute of Management and Pharmacy, Adampur.
The petitioner's appeal against his reversion having been rejected, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering on December 19, 1963.
On November 15, 1973, he was promoted as Senior Lecturer.
He was further promoted to the post of the Head of the Department on March 1, 1982.
It is averred that in the year 1988, the State of Haryana created a post of Project Co-ordinator in the Head Office of the Directorate, Technical Education, Chandigarh.
This post, the petitioner asserts, was equivalent to that of Principal and carried the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5000.
The petitioner states that since he was the senior-most Head of the Department, he was promoted to this post on November 29, 1988 vide order, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P 1 with the writ petition.
In the last week of August, 1990, the petitioner received the order dated August 24, 1990 by which he was reverted to the post of the Head of the Department and posted against the post of Principal, Government Polytechnic, Sirsa in his own pay scale.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P 2.
By another order passed on the same date, Mr. Ajmer Singh, who was working as Principal at the Government Polytechnic, Nilokheri was transferred to the post of Project Coordinator and in his place Mr. R N Goyal was posted as the Principal.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P. 3.
The petitioner submitted an appeal against the order of his reversion on September 4, 1990.
It has been averred that the petitioner was reverted in spite of the fact that he had completed the initial period of probation and without holding any enquiry.
3.
The petitioner claims that since the order of his reversion was wholly illegal, he filed CWP No. 15594 of 1990 in this Court.
This writ petition was disposed of by the Motion Bench on December 5, 1990 with the direction that the respondents should "decide the appeal/representation dated 4th September, 1990, within a period of one month from the date copy of this order is supplied."
The petitioner has further pointed out that in para 11 of his writ petition he had averred that "his reversion was for extraneous considerations only to adjust respondent No. 3 with the connivance of the higher authorities.....Respondent No. 3 was promoted as Head of the Department of Library Sciences only in June, 1988 and he does not even fulfil the requisite experience of five years as Head of the Department which is necessary before he can be promoted as Principal."
The petitioner had expressed a fear that Mr. R S Mehta would be transferred to Government Polytechnic, Sirsa against the post held by him and that respondent No. 3 would be appointed as Principal in the Government Institute at Adampur.
Exactly the same thing happened when by order dated December 10, 1990, the petitioner was sent to the Government Polytechnic, Ambala City as the Head of the Department of Automobile Engineering and respondent No. 3 was made to officiate as Principal in his own scale.
The petitioner claims that he was reverted in spite of the fact that he was fully qualified and eligible, while respondent No. 3, who was not even eligible had been promoted to the post of Principal.
His appeal was rejected vide order dated January 3, 1991, on the ground that there was no post of Principal.
A copy of this order has been produced on record as Annexure P. 6.
This reason has been challenged as being factually incorrect as "there is one vacancy of Principal in existence against which respondent No. 3 is officiating."
On these premises, the petitioner has challenged the order of his reversion and the rejection of appeal as also the promotion of respondent No. 3.
4.
Two separate written statements have been filed by the respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been inter alia averred that the conditions of service of persons appointed to the Haryana State Technical Education Department(Group A and Group B Services) are governed by the rules called, the Haryana Technical Education Department (Group A) Service Rules, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
In the Technical Education Department, training is imparted "in Engineering and non-Engineering trades....." Method of recruitment and other conditions of service have been laid down.
The post of Principal in both the aforesaid trades is filled up from amongst the respective Heads of the Departments.
It has been further mentioned that there are nine Government Institutions under the Department, out of which 7 are imparting training in non-Engineering Courses while two provide training in non-Engineering Courses.
These two Institutions are the Government Polytechnic for Women, Ambala City and the Government Institute of Management and Pharmacy, Adampur.
The post of Project Co-ordinator does not find mention in the rules.
It was sanctioned for the first time vide order dated September 28, 1988.
This post is meant for implementation of different developmental schemes/programmes, including World Bank Project, preparing five year annual plans and dealing with the All India Council for Technical Education etc.
The post is not permanent and will be abolished with the end of the plan.
At the time of the creation of this post, the mode of recruitment and other service conditions were not finalised.
The petitioner was appointed since he was the senior-most person in the cadre of Head of the Department in Engineering trade.
There is no channel of promotion from the post of the Head of Department to that of Project Coordinator.
The post is not governed under the Service Rules which were notified on September 26, 1986.
This matter is still pending consideration with the State Government.
5.
The Institute at Adampur was started in the year 1985, when the rules had not been promulgated.
After the notification of the rules, the post of Principal at the Institute was required to be filled in from amongst the eligible persons of the non-Engineering cadre, but it could not be done because Sh. O P Goyal's conduct was under enquiry.
He later on sought volutary retirement.
Thereafter, the next person in the non-engineering cadre viz. respondent No. 3 made representation stating that the post at Adampur was meant for the non-engineering person and may be given to him since he was the senior-most person in the cadre.
After considering the representation, the Government posted him in an officiating capacity in his own pay scale.
Since respondent No. 3 was short of the requisite experience as prescribed under the rules, he was not "allowed to avail the scale of Principal."
On the posting of respondent No. 3 at Adampur, the Principal, who belonged to the Engineering cadre was posted at Sirsa.
Prior to this "on the basis of draft service rules of the post of Project Co-ordinator, one of the Principals of Engineering side namely Sh. Ajmer Singh was brought as Project Co-ordinator and the petitioner was reverted to the post of Head of the Department and posted against the post of Principal at Government Polytechnic, Sirsa.
Later on, he was posted at Ambala and his original post of Head of the Department and the Principal (Sh. R S Mehta) who belonged to Engineering side was posted from Adampur to Sirsa.
The petitioner's representation was rejected as there was no vacant post of Principal in the Engineering side.
On these premises, the petitioner's claim as made out in the writ petition has been controverted.
To a similar effect is the written statement filed by respondent No. 3.
6.
I have heard Mr. P S Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner.
M/s Deepak Sibal and C B Kaushik have argued the case on behalf of the respondents.
The primary contention raised by Mr. Patwalia is that the action of the respondents is violative of the principles of natural justice.
He argued that the petitioner had been reverted on the basis of the representation submitted by respondent No. 3, but was not given any opportunity to controvert the claim made by him.
It was further contended that the action suffered from malice in law and cannot be sustained.
On the other hand, Mr. Deepak Sibal appearing for respondent-State submitted that no relief could be granted to the petitioner as Ajmer Singh, who had been posted as Project Co-ordinator had not been impleaded as a party.
It was further submitted that the petitioner had no locus standi to challenge the promotion of respondent No. 3 nor were the principles of natural justice attracted in the circumstances of this case.
7.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties shows that there were a total of 9 posts in the cadre of Principal at the time of the petitioner's promotion to the post of Project Co-ordinator as well as on August 24, 1990 when he was reverted.
In fact, this position was reiterated by the learned counsel for respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
A statement in writing duly given by Mr. Ram Kumar, Assistant, Technical Education Branch, Haryana Civil Secretariat, has also been produced.
It is placed on record as `Mark A'.
Out of these nine posts, 7 belonged to the Engineering Cadre and two to the non-engineering cadre.
75% of the respective shares had to be filled up by promotion and the remaining 25% by the method of direct recruitment etc. as prescribed under the rules.
It is also the admitted position that on November 29, 1988 when the petitioner was promoted as Project Co-ordinator, 8 posts of Principals were actually held by persons belonging to the Engineering Cadre against their quota of 7 posts while only one out of the two posts belonging to the share of non-engineering cadre was held by a person from the non-engineering cadre.
It is also the admitted position that neither the petitioner nor any one senior to him in the Engineering cadre was eligible to be posted against the post of Principal at the Institute at Adampur.
In such a situation, if the Government had actually transferred one of the Principals belonging to the Engineering cadre to the post of Project Co-ordinator, the petitioner could have had no grievance.
In fact, Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner very fairly conceded that in case one of the 8 Principals had been transferred to the post of Project Co-ordinator, the petitioner could have had no grievance whatsoever.
He could not have claimed promotion or appointment to the post of Project Co- ordinator in the year 1988.
8.
It has also been categorically stated in the written statement that the post of Project Coordinator was actually not a permanent post.
It was being sanctioned from year to year.
The petitioner was undoubtedly promoted against this post, but since the post was temporary, the question of his acquiring the right on the alleged completion of the period of probation of one year (which position is also not tenable in view of the fact that the petitioner had not completed the maximum period of probation, viz. 3 years as prescribed under Rule 10) could not mean that he will be deemed to have been confirmed on the post.
In fact, there can be no confirmation unless the post is permanent.
In the present case, it has been categorically stated in the written statement that the post was temporary.
This fact has not been controverted by filing any replication.
That being the position, it is clear that the post was temporary and as such even his appointment was temporary.
9.
It is in the background of this admitted position that the petitioner's contention that he had a right to be heard before he could be reverted has to be considered.
Admittedly, he was not being reverted by way of punishment.
There was no allegation against him.
On his reversion, Mr. Ajmer Singh, who is admittedly senior to him was posted as Project Coordinator.
Since the petitioner had no right to the post and his reversion was not penal, the question of grant of a hearing did not arise.
Mr. Patwalia, however, referred to a decision of this Court in Virender Chawla v. UT, Chandigarh, 1984(1) SLR 452 to contend that an opportunity was required to be given.
This was a case where the petitioner had not only been promoted, but had in fact been confirmed on the higher post.
It was after his confirmation that he was ordered to be reverted.
In this situation, the Division Bench had observed that principles of natural justice were attacted.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
Accordingly, I find no merit in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
10.
Mr. Patwalia then contended that the petitioner was reverted on account of the representation submitted by respondent No. 3.
The official record was sent for.
From the record, it appears that respondent No. 3 had submitted two representations.
First of these representations was submitted by Mr. M R Sharma on March 16, 1990.
The second representation was submitted by Mr. Sharma on September 13, 1990.
Mr. Deepak Sibal has fairly produced before me the original file containing these representations.
Photocopies of these two representations are placed on record as `Mark B' and `Mark C' respectively.
A perusal of the representation dated March 16, 1990, shows that respondent No. 3 had merely claimed that the post of Principal, Government Institute of Management and Pharmacy, Adampur belongs to "my cadre and at present is being held by a Principal belonging to the cadre of Engineering Polytechnics/Technical Institutions."
On this premises, it was requested that being the senior-most Head of the Department in his cadre he may be promoted as Principal.
There was no challenge to the appointment of the petitioner to the post of Project Coordinator.
Further, the respondent had pointed out that Mr. R S Mehta had been unauthorisedly working as Principal at Adampur, which has been declared by the Government as a non-Engineering Institute.
He had thus submitted that Mr. Mehta may be transferred from there and the petitioner be posted in his place.
It is thus apparent that respondent No. 3 had made no claim either to the post of Project Coordinator or to the appointment of the petitioner to that post.
Consequently, there was no occasion for the Government to give a hearing to the petitioner on the representations submitted by respondent No. 3.
The two officers belong to different cadres and have separate promotional avenues.
They do not cross each other's path so far as promotions to the post of Principals in their respective cadres are concerned.
There was no conflict of interest between the two at any stage prior to or at the time of the petitioner's reversion from the post of Project Coordinator.
In such a situation, the petitioner had no right to be heard before the Government decided to promote respondent No. 3 as Principal of a non-Engineering Institute within his own quota.
Accordingly, even this submission is rejected.
11.
Equally lacking in merit is the petitioner's contention that the action suffers from malice in law.
No one junior to the petitioner in his cadre has been appointed as a Project Coordinator or promoted to any post without considering his claim.
The petitioner has no claim to the post of Principal at the Govt. Institute of Management and Pharmacy, Adampur.
This being the position, there is no ground for contending that the action of the Government was tainted by any malice in fact or in law.
In fact, the record as asked for by me was duly produced and it did not indicate any intention to favour one or harm the other.
Accordingly, even this contention is rejected.
12.
Another fact which has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents from the record was that after his reversion, the petitioner was actually promoted as Principal on ad hoc basis on July 25, 1991 and on regular basis w.e.f.
November 29, 1991.
Furthermore, it was also pointed out by Mr. Sibal that the post of Project Coordinator was actually redesignated and upgraded to that of Project Director vide order dated March 10, 1992 and has been equated to the post of Additional Director.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as `Mark D'.
To this post, which is now in the rank of Additional Director, no Head of the Department has any right to be considered for promotion.
In this situation, it is apparent that the petitioner has got his due and has been promoted to the post of Principal on the availability of a vacancy.
No injustice whatsoever has been done to him.
13.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, no injustice whatsoever much less than any manifest injustice can be said to have been caused to the petitioner.
Accordingly, I find that there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.