VK Bali, J - Petitioner-Rajinder Kumar Gupta through the present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to permit him to appear in BDS.
Second Year Examination scheduled to be held on 1061991.
The aforesaid prayer was allowed by the Motion Bench although it was stated that the same would be subject to the decision of the writ petition.
During the pendency of writ petition, the petitioner appeared in third and fourth years of BDS.
course as well but that, too, was on account of interim orders passed by this Court from time to time which was subject to the decision of writ petition.
2.
Briefly the facts on which the relief as contained in the writ petition rests reveal that the petitioner appeared in the Pre-Medical Entrance Test held by the respondent-authorities for admission to the MBBS and BDS.
Courses for the session commencing from 1989-90.
He passed the Entrance Test successfully but was kept in the waiting list.
In view of the fact that the persons above him did not join, he was offered the seat being in the waiting list for the BDS.
Course at Government Dental College, Patiala where he immediately joined.
The date when he joined is 7.2.1990 but this delay occurred on account of fact that the seat was offered to him late.
The annual examination for the session 1989-90 was held in June, 1990 but the admission form of the petitioner was withheld presumably for the reason that the petitioner had not completed the academic session and had fallen short of lectures.
He having completed the lectures appeared in the supplementary examination which was held in October 1990.
He cleared the first year examination and joined BDS.
second year on 31.10.1990.
It requires to be mentioned at this stage that on account of agitation that came into being on account of recommendations made by the Mandal Commission, the regular students who had passed the examination earlier i.e. at the time when the petitioner's candidature was withheld could also join the next year ie second year in November, 1990.
The petitioner submitted his admission form for examination of second year in June 1991 alongwith other students but his candidature was again withheld on the ground that he had not completed the academic year.
It is in the wake of facts as detailed above that the petitioner has come to seek the relief as detailed in the earlier part of judgment.
3.
Written statement has been filed and the cause of petitioner has been contested mainly on the ground that the University Regulations and Rules require a student to attend the academic session before he could possibly be permitted to take the examination.
4.
I do not wish to go into the aforestated defence of the University as it is clearly made out from the averments of the petitioner in the petition as also in the replication that persons equally situate were permitted to take the examination.
The specific case of petitioner as pleaded in the petition as well as in the replication is that Miss Mamta Pal daughter of Shri J.S.
Pal, Manak Singh son of Shri Meharban Singh, Mandeep Singh Riar, son of Shri Santokh Singh Riar, all students of third year were permitted provisionally vide order dated 31.10.1990 and the aforesaid persons had passed their BDS.
second year examination in supplementary examination held in October, 1990 and their admission forms for third year annual examination which was to be held in June, 1991 were accepted.
5.
Even though it has been mentioned in paragraph 10 of the written statement that the persons mentioned above were actually permitted to take examination but it has been qualified by saying that the said candidates were allowed as per University Ordinance 31 which was not applicable to the petitioner.
The petitioner clarified the position in para No. 10 of the replication wherein it has been pleaded that the distinction sought to be made out by the respondents is not correct and that the case of the petitioner is similar and parallel to the case of the students mentioned in para No. 10 of the petitioner.
There is no distinction except that the said students were of third year whereas the petitioner was a student of second year of BDS course.
6.
So far as Regulation 31 is concerned, it is pleaded that the same is not applicable in case of students of third year course and Ordinance 22(a) which is paramateria of Rule 12(a) is applicable to the students of third year.
Ordinance 22(a) runs as follows :-  "22(a) has been enrolled during one academic year preceding the examination in a Dental College, which is admitted to the privileges of the University in the Faculty of Dental Science for the degree of Bachelor of Dental Surgery".
7.
On the basis of Ordinance 22(a), it is pleaded and so argued by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that the students names of whom have been mentioned in paragraph 10 were also provisionally promoted to BDS third year vide order dated 30101990 and if those students have fulfilled the condition of Ordinance 2(a) then the petitioner cannot be detained on the parity of same reasoning.
It is further stated that the students, referred to above, have migrated from Budha Institute of Dental Science, Patna after 25.1.1990 when their first year result was declared and they were admitted in BDS.
second year.
They were allowed to take the examination of BDS second year of Supplementary Examination in October 1990 only after a gap of eight months and now they have been allowed to sit in the annual examination for BDS.
third year to be held in June 1990.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the respondent-University has discriminated against the petitioner as students similarly situate were permitted to take the examination.
The petitioner's candidature was withheld without there being any distinguishing feature.
That apart, the petitioner has already appeared in the third and fourth year examination and if the relief asked for by him is denied, it will work out injustice to him and will ruin his career.
9.
For the aforementioned reasons, this writ petition is accepted and a direction is issued to the respondents to forthwith declare the result of the petitioner for second, third and fourth years of BDS.
course which the petitioner had admittedly taken during the pendency of the writ petition.
10.
Before I part with this judgment, I would like to mention that I had passed a short order on July 7, 1993 and allowed the petition but it was mentioned in the order aforesaid that reasons shall be recorded later in the day.
The order was to be given Dasti to the petitioner and for that reason, the file was sent to the office with a note appended by the Reader that the office should take necessary action and thereafter return the case to the Court.
It is only when contempt petition has been filed for non-compliance of the orders passed on July 7, 1993 that the office has sent the file of this Court.
The explanation of the concerned officer is called for.
It is ordered that he/she would explain the delay in returning the file.
Petition allowed.