RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was enrolled as Clerk (General Duties) in the Indian Army on 13th October, 1952.
He was promoted to the rank of Naib Subedar with effect from 1st July, 1969, with ante-dated seniority from 1st July, 1967 .
According to the petitioner, as per Army instructions, a Non- Commissioned or Junior Commissioned Officer with 10 years' service and Matriculation as qualification, was eligible to be selected for permanent commission (Special List) through Services Selection Board.
He was not selected for permanent commission (Special List) Quartermaster.
According to him, be was not considered for permanent commission (Special List) as Record Officer, though he had applied both for Quartermaster and Record Officer.
The non-selection of the petitioner for permanent commission (Special List) as Quartermaster and his non-consideration for permanent commission as Record Officer, led him to file C.W.P.
No. 141 of 1974, which was dismissed on 7th October, 1982 (Copy Annexure R-1 with the written statement).
The learned Judge had noticed the stand of the respondents to the effect that the petitioner had qualified only at the initial Selection Board, i.e. Services Selection Board against the vacancies of the year 1967 and that too for the appointment of Quartermaster only.
However, he was not selected for the grant of permanent commission (Special List) as Quartermaster by the Final Selection Board at the Army Headquarters as he had neither the requisite experience for the appointment nor he had qualified in the Quartermaster's course.
As far as consideration for permanent commission as Record Officer was concerned, it was noticed that the petitioner had in the personal information form only filled in his choice for Quartermaster only and not for Record Officer.
2.
The petitioner, however, persisted with representation to the respondents that in fact the respondents' factual stand was wrong, inasmuch as he had the requisite experience and had in fact applied for both Quartermaster as well as Record Officer.
The petitioner was discharged from the Military service in the year 1978.
Even after discharge from the Army, he went on making representations to the respondents to reconsider the matter and redress his grievance.
One such representation, dated 4th July, 1990 was addressed to the Chief of the Army Staff.
Since, according to the petitioner, the representation had not beep decided, he filed another writ petition in this Court, being C.W.P.
No. 14490, which came for hearing before a Division Bench on 13th December, 1990.
After noticing the fact that the petitioner's earlier writ petition had been dismissed in the year 1982, the Division Bench disposed of the writ petition by giving the following directions :-  "The respondent-Union of India (Central Government through Minister of Finance) is directed to examine the representation dated 4790 in accordance with the Army regulations and decide the same by passing detailed speaking order after hearing the petitioner preferably within three months from today.
For affording a hearing to the petitioner, a communication shall be sent at his residence H. No. 3175-C, Officers Colony, (Ropar) (Punjab).
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly."
Ultimately, the respondents decided the representation of the petitioner and rejected the same vide order dated 23rd April, 1991, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-4 with this writ petition.
The points raised by the petitioner have been dealt with by the respondents as follows :-  "The Ex JCO did not have the requisite experience for grant of PC (SL) QM and he was thus rightly rejected by the Final Selection Board for grant of the PC (SL) QM.
The Ex JCO, while filing in the personal information form, had applied only for PC(SL) QM and not for PC(SL)RO.
As such, he was not eligible to be considered for grant of PC(SL)RO.
The facts in case of Capt.
(and not Hav.
CLK as stated by the ExJCO Duli Chand Hav/CLK SD Sharma are different from that of the Ex JCO Hav/CLK SD Sharma had applied for grant of PC(SL) RO and not PC(SL)QM.
He was, therefore, considered for grant of PC(SL)RO only and found fit for the same by the Final Selection Board.
Capt.
Dulichand, an Emergency Commissioned Officer, had applied for grant of PC(SL)QM against a vacancy reserved for the Emergency Commissioned Officers.
Capt Dulichand was, thus, selected for grant of PC(SL)QM and being found fit by the Final Selection Board."
Before me, the petitioner was appearing in person and to get better assistance in the matter, I asked Mrs. Daya Chaudhary, Advocate, to assist this Court, who readily agreed and argued the case on behalf of the petitioner.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that it is factually wrong to say that the petitioner did not have requisite experience for the grant of permanent commission as Quartermaster, inasmuch as it is apparent from the record of the case that the petitioner had the requisite experience, inasmuch as in the year 1967, the petitioner had about 14 years' service.
She referred to Annexure P-2, which is a letter from the ASC, Centre (South) Bangalore to ASC, Records (Supply) Bangalore, in which it has been mentioned as under :-  "The above NCO has served in supply units and training centres for more than 14 years and has acquired considerable experience including `Q' duties.
He is smart, well disciplined hard working and dependable.
I, therefore, strongly recommend his remustering as HAV/CLK (S), in the existing vacancy as a special case.
NCO Clerk (GD) No. 6631101 Hav.
Harnek Singh who is quite anxious and over ambitious to get himself transferred to the store side.
He has been employed in this Unit since his posting and has been doing very well as `Q' clerk.
He has got the requisite qualifications for transfer to store side."
4.
From the above, the petitioner's counsel emphasises that the petitioner had the requisite experience and on the ground of lack of experience, the petitioner could not be rejected.
I, however, find that the petitioner himself has placed a letter dated 11th October, 1973, on record as Annexure P-8 with the replication which is from the Army Headquarters, Quarter Master's General Branch to Headquarter Southern Command, Pune, and reads as under :-  "The case has been examined in consultation with the MS.
It is revealed from the documents that above named JCO has qualified only for the grant of PC(SL) as Quarter Master against 1967 quota of vacancies.
His case alongwith other qualified candidates for the grant of PC(SL) as Quarter Master was submitted to the Final Selection Board.
The final selection board while examining the case of the individual for grant of PC(SL) takes into consideration various factors e.g. disciplinary record, experience of the trade for which applied and also the courses done by the individual pertaining to the trade.
So Sub Pabbla did not possess the requisite experience nor had he done the `Q' course.
He was, therefore, not recommended for the grant of PC(SL) as Quarter Master by the Final Selection Board."
5.
From the above, it would be evident that the petitioner's case was rejected by the Final Selection Board not only on the ground of lack of experience, butt on other considerations also.
The petitioner had a right to be considered but it was or the Board to find him fit and suitable.
This Court cannot substitute the opinion formed by the Selection Board.
I find nothing wrong in the rejection of the claim of the petitioner for selection as Quartermaster.
6.
The learned counsel then argued that the petitioner had applied both for Quartermaster as well as for Record Officer and it is wrong on the part of the respondents to say that the petitioner had not applied for the post of Record Officer.
The learned counsel referred to the copy of the signal from 554 ASC B to 222 Coy. ABC (Sup.)
the relevant portion of which reads as under :  "Harnek Singh Pabbla candidate PC(SL)RO and QM(,) NSC proceeding ASC (Centre(s) Bangalore on course May 17(.)
Intimate date SSB interview direct under intimation this office."
7.
The learned counsel further submitted that at the time of interview, a Personal Information Form was got filled and it was at that time that petitioner had filled in that form that he was appearing for the interview for the post of Quartermaster, but that did not mean that he had not applied for the post of Record Officer.
According to the learned counsel one interview was to be held for all the posts applied for and if a person was not selected for one post, his case had to be considered for the other post on the basis of the same interview.
She has referred to the following instructions of the respondent on the above subject :-  "If the candidate has applied for more than one category of appointment of PRC(SL) he will be assessed simultaneously for all categories based on his results of his interview for one category.
The candidate will be apprised of this.
In case the candidate has already been interviewed for one category and if you receive second call up letter for another category in respect of the above candidate, please ignore the second call and inform this centre accordingly.
8.
According to the learned counsel, from the above instructions it is clear that the petitioner had to be assessed simultaneously for all the categories based on the result of interview in one category.
9.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that since at the time of interview, the candidate had not indicated in the personal information form that he had applied for both the posts of Quartermaster and Record Officer and further that he wanted to be considered for both, he was rightly not considered for the post of Record Officer.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, on this point, I am of the view that the respondents were not correct in not considering the case of the petitioner for the post of Record Officer, inasmuch as it is quite evident from the signal, quoted above, that the petitioner had applied for both the posts, i.e. Quartermaster and Record Officer.
At the time of interview, it is only a personal information form that is filled in, but the information supplied therein would not indicate as to whether a person has or has not applied for more than one post.
According to the instructions issued by the Respondents, which have been reproduced above, it was on the basis of only one interview that the candidate had to be assessed for different posts for which one may have applied for.
From the documents produced before me, it appears that the petitioner had applied both for Quartermaster and Record Officer.
Consequently, his case had to be considered for permanent commission both as Quartermaster and Record Officer on the basis of interview held for the post of Quartermaster.
This would be in accordance with the instructions issued by the respondents themselves.
11.
I do not find any infirmity in the rest of the impugned order.
12.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is partially allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for permanent commission (Special List) as Record Officer, on the basis of the interview already held for the post of Quartermaster along with all other relevant material/consideration for the said purpose.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is found suitable for such permanent commission, from the due date, he will be entitled to the consequential benefits.
Let these directions be carried out within four months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.