Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The three petitioners are Head Constables of Police.
They have a two-fold grievance.
Firstly they are aggrieved by the order by which their date of confirmation was changed from January 6, 1989 to July 1, 1990.
Secondly, they claim that as a result of this change in the date of confirmation, their seniority was adversely affected and persons junior to them were deputed for the Intermediate School Course at the Police Training College, Phillaur.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners passed the Lower School Course in the year 1982-83.
It is averred that their names were brought on List `C' in April 1983.
They were promoted as Head Constables on August 1, 1984.
Vide order dated August 22, 1989 (Annexure P-4), the petitioners were confirmed as Head Constables with effect from January 6, 1989.
Thereafter vide orders dated October 4, 1989 (P.1), the respondents unilaterally changed the date of confirmation from January 6, 1989 to July 1, 1989.
On November 7, 1992, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jullundur passed an order inter alia observing that the Head Constables "who were placed on the year's probation w.e.f.
1789 vide this office order No. 86400-04, dated 18.9.92 are hereby confirmed w.e.f.
171990 on completion of probation period."
The petitioners challenge the alteration of the dates of confirmation primarily on the ground that it was done without any notice or the grant of any opportunity.
It is further claimed that on account of this order, the petitions seniority was affected and persons who were otherwise junior to them were deputed for the Intermediate School Course.
They have referred to the names of M/s. Sagli Ram, Balbir Singh, Buta Ram and Sukhwinder Singh in this behalf.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that according to the instructions issued by the Inspector General of Police, it has been decided that "to bring about uniformity hence forth the cases of confirmation should invariably be taken up and decided twice in a year ie in the months of January and July each year and should be dealt with strictly in accordance with the rules and instructions issued from time to time."
This decision is stated to have been taken on the ground that an official does not get undue advantage by his confirmation in a district over the persons belonging to another district, who may otherwise be senior to him.
On this basis, it is averred that the date of confirmation of the petitioner was initially changed from January 6, 1989 to July 1, 1989.
It has been further pointed out that at the time of the consideration of the cases of the petitioners along with those of various other persons for confirmation, the recommendation made by the Committee was that they be placed on probation for one year.
This recommendation was accepted by respondent No. 3.
However, instead of issuing orders for their being placed on probation, the petitioners were actually confirmed vide orders dated August 22, 1989 (Annexure P-4).
Since the recommendation of the Committee which had been accepted by the competent authority was for placing them on probation, the mistake was rectified and the petitioners were placed on probation w.e.f.
July 1, 1989.
On successful completion of the period of probation, they were deemed to have been confirmed w.e.f.
July 1, 1990.
It has further been stated that "no prejudice has been caused to the petitioners.
Head Constables Balbir singh, Sukhwinder Singh and Sagli Ram were deputed for intermediate school course before the petitioners because all of them belong to Scheduled Castes and they were sent for the said course under the reserved quota for scheduled castes as per Govt. instructions.
Head Constable Boota Ram has expressed the unwillingness to undergo the said course.
Thus no head Constable junior to the petitioners has been illegally deputed for the Intermediate School Course."
On these premises, it is claimed that the writ petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
4.
I have heard Mr. HS Mann for the petitioners and Mrs. Charu Tuli for the respondents.
5.
The conditions of service governing the personnel in Police Department are laid down in Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
Rule 12.2 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (Vol.II) inter alia provides that the seniority shall "be finally settled by dates of confirmation.
"Therefore, date of confirmation is of considerable significance to a Head Constable in the matter of further promotion and advancement of his career.
The sequence of events, as delineated above, shows that initially the petitioners were confirmed w.e.f.
January 6, 1989.
Presuming that this order of confirmation was violative of the instructions issued by the Inspector General of Police vide letter dated September 27, 1977 (R-1), respondent No. 3 changed the date of confirmation to July 1, 1989.
Thereafter on receipt of representations from certain persons, the date of confirmation has been changed to July 1, 1990.
This alteration of the date of confirmation was bound to affect the seniority of the petitioners and their further advancement in service.
It was bound to affect them adversely.
In such a situation, it would have been fair and proper for the competent authority to give an opportunity to the petitioners to explain their position.
If such an opportunity had been granted, the petitioners could have shown that they had been actually officiating as Head Constables since August 1, 1984, and that in view of the provision of Rule 1318, their period of officiation could count towards the period of probation."
Still further, the petitioners could have shown that 183 permanent posts in the rank of Head Constables had become available on January 6, 1983 and consequently, they were entitled to be considered for confirmation with effect from that date and that such a course of action would not have violated the instructions issued by the Inspector General of Police.
The petitioners may have also been able to satisfy the authorities that the instructions had no legal sanction and could not thus be binding.
Such an objection would have been certainly plausible in view of the decision of a Full Bench of this Court in Sardul Singh v. I.P.G.
Punjab, 1970 SLR 505, wherein their Lordships were pleased to inter alia observe that "we are also of the opinion that the instructions issued in the memorandum dated September 25, 1964 cannot be enforced as supplemental to the Police Rules because they were not issued by the State Government which alone had the right to make rules under the Police Act, 5 of 1861."
The failure to grant an opportunity has certainly affected the rights of the petitioners adversely.
They were wrongly denied the opportunity of being heard.
6.
So far as the petitioners' grievance that they were wrongly ignored from being deputed to the intermediate school course is concerned, it is wholly lacking in merit.
It has been averred that four persons junior to the petitioners, viz. HC Sagli Ram etc. had been deputed for the course before them.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been explained that M/s. Sagli Ram etc. have been deputed for the intermediate school course against the reserved quota for Scheduled Castes.
The petitioners admittedly do not belong to that category.
Consequently they can have no grievance against the action of the Government in deputing HC Sagli Ram etc. for the course.
Even otherwise, the four Head Constables have not been impleaded as respondents in the writ petition.
Consequently, no direction to their prejudice can be given in their absence.
7.
The petitioners pray that the order dated October 4, 1989, by which the date of confirmation was changed from January 6, 1989 to July 1, 1989 and the order dated November 7, 1992 by which the date of confirmation was changed from July 1, 1989 to July 1, 1990 be quashed.
So far as the challenge to the order dated October 4, 1989 is concerned, it is apparently belated.
In spite of the fact that this order was passed in the year 1989, the petitioners did not challenge this order in any proceedings.
Even a representation is not shown to have been filed.
Consequently, no relief can be granted to them in respect of this order.
The writ petition was filed more than three years after the passing of this order.
Even a suit challenging this order would have been barred by limitation.
It is settled that if there is a triable question involved in any case, the writ Court will not entertain a petition.
Consequently, the challenge to the order dated October 4, 1989 (P-1) is negatived.
8.
In so far as the order dated November 7, 1992 is concerned, it was passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
In view of the above finding, this order is set aside.
The respondents are directed to redecide the matter after giving an opportunity to the petitioners.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.