CL Chaudhry, J - The petitioner has approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking the writ of mandamus directing the respondents to fulfil their duties and obligations under Delhi School Education Act, 1973 and Delhi School Education Rules, 1973 and to place the case of the petitioner for extension/reemployment before the Managing Committee immediately in pursuance of letter dated 1851977 and letter dated 1911993 issued by the Directorate of Education.
Further relief is also sought for quashing the letter dated 11.3.1993 issued by the Chairman of the Managing Committee rejecting representation of the petitioner instead of placing the same before the Managing Committee.
2.
On 141987 the petitioner was appointed as Administrative Officer in the Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute, a School run by the Indian Air Force Education and Cultural Society.
It is stated that under the scheme of management which is duly approved by the Directorate of Education, Delhi Administration, the Managing Committee consists of members mentioned in the scheme.
Under the duties, functions and powers of the Managing Committee, the Joint Director of Education (Air Headquarters) shall be the ex officio Chairman of the Managing Committee of the Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute and the head of the School shall be the Manager.
It is further provided under the scheme of management that it is the duty of the Managing Committee to see that pay and allowances, medical facilities, gratuity, provident fund and other benefits of the employees of the school shall not be less than those of the employees of corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate authority.
Under Section 98 of Delhi Education Act, 1973, the appointment of every employee of a school shall be made by its Managing Committee.
The constitution of the Selection Committee is also provided under the Act.
The school is run by a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1980.
Section 20 of Delhi Education Act, 1973 contains a provision to deal with the situation wherein the Managing Committee neglects to perform its duties.
The case of the petitioner is that since he had to retire on 3041993 on attaining the age of 58 years, he made a representation to the Chairman of the Managing Committee, respondent No. 4 with the request for extension/re- employment for 2 years beyond the age of superannuation.
The Government of India issued instructions regarding Criteria and Procedure for extension/re- employment vide its Memorandum dated 1851977.
In those instructions it is mentioned that the case for extension/re-employment shall be considered if it is in public interest and the other officers are not ripe enough to take over the job or the retiring officer is of outstanding merits.
The case of the petitioner was recommended by the Principal of the School wherein he had mentioned that in the administration of recognised school they followed the guidelines prescribed for Government employees and as per Government of India's Memo, the employees could be granted extension upto 60 years in public interest.
He had recommended that the petitioner being an efficient Administrative Officer be considered for grant of extension for a period of 2 years ie w.e.f.
151993 and the proposal be put up for approval with the Managing Committee.
It is stated that the matter was not placed before the Managing Committee and the Chairman on his own did not agree with the recommendation for grant of extension to the petitioner.
Thereafter another representation was made by the petitioner on 30121992 to the Air Officer Incharge of Administration and Chairman, Board of Governors, wherein it was mentioned that case of the petitioner for extension-re-employment should be placed before the Managing Committee for reconsideration as the Chairman alone had no power to reject the same.
This representation was also forwarded by the Principal with his recommendation that the petitioner's case for extension may be considered.
It is also the case of the petitioner that since there was some confusion created by the Chairman that no extension could be granted, the matter was also referred to the Directorate of Education, Delhi Administration, by the Manager, wherein he had sought advice from the Directorate of Education wherein in such circumstances an extension could be given to the petitioner and whether that was permissible under the Rules.
The Directorate of Education by letter dated 1911993 informed the Manager, Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute that Department of Education had no objection in case the petitioner was considered for re employment/extension by the Managing Committee of the Institute, being the appointing authority under rule 98 of the Delhi School Education Rules in the light of instructions contained in Government of India's memo dated 1851977.
The grievance of the petitioner is that his representation was rejected by the Chairman of the Managing Committee and was not placed before the Managing Committee for consideration.
In these premises a writ of mandamus is claimed as stated earlier.
3.
Notice was given to the respondents to show cause as to why Rule nisi be not issued.
In reply to the show cause notice it is pleaded on behalf of the respondent that the respondents are not a state but a society registered under the Societies Registration Act and no writ can be issued against the Managing Committee of such School or Society.
It is also pleaded that extension of service/reemployment after superannuation is neither a legal right nor a condition of service of any employee, including the petitioner.
Since no legal right of the petitioner has been violated, there could be no remedy under writ jurisdiction and as such on this ground also the writ petition is not maintainable.
Under Rule 110 of Delhi School Education Rules, 1973 the retirement age of an employee of a recognised private school whether aided or not is 58 years.
Since the petitioner has completed the age of 58 years, he is not entitled to any extension as a matter of right.
It is further pleaded that the petitioner has to automatically retire at the age of superannuation and no legal right is vested in him to demand extension/re-employment after that date.
Rather there is no provision under the law whereby he can even be considered for extension/re-employment after superannuation as a matter of right it is further pleaded that the Chairman of the Managing Committee directed to initiate necessary action to select a successor to the petitioner by 3041993.
The post was advertised.
Applications were received.
Selection Committee was convened and selection has been made.
4.
Mr. Jaitley, appearing on behalf of the petitioner contended that the representation of the petitioner was rejected by the Chairman and it was not placed before the Managing Committee for consideration for extension/re- employment of the petitioner.
The petitioner had a right to be considered by the Managing Committee.
Under Rule 110 of Delhi School Education Rules there is no bar that a person cannot be employed after attaining the age of superannuation.
In support of his contention he also relied upon the instructions regarding Criteria and Procedure for extension/re-employment issued by the Government of India dated 1851977, wherein the criteria for re-employment of Government employees is laid down.
It was stressed that the case of the petitioner should have been considered by the Managing Committee as per the criteria laid down by the Government of India.
This having not been done, the petitioner had a right to approach this court seeking a mandamus directing the Chairman of the Managing Committee to place before the Managing Committee the case of the petitioner for extension/re-employment It was also pointed out that the petitioner had been discriminated as in similar circumstances the respondents have granted extension to Wg.
Cdr.
AK Dass, ex-Bursar of the Air Force School, run under the same scheme.
This was done on the basis of the instructions issued by the Government of India.
It was also contended that the doctrine of Legitimate Expectancy is applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case.
5.
On the other hand the contention of Mr. VP Singh is that the petitioner has no right to get extension as it would amount to fresh contract of employment.
It was argued by him that the sole purpose of giving extension of service is to promote the interest of the institution and not to confer any benefit on the retiring officer Incidentally the extension may benefit the retiring officials.
But it is incorrect to state that it is a confirment of benefit of privilege upon the officer.
The officer after attaining the age of superannuation or putting the required number of years of service do not earn that benefit or privilege.
The retiring person cannot demand that extension should be given to all or to none.
It was also contended by him that the Memorandum relied upon by the petitioner has not been made applicable to the employees covered under Delhi School Education Act and even otherwise these are merely executive instructions and do not have statutory force.
6.
It was also contended by Mr. VP Singh that doctrine of legitimate Expectancy has no relevance to the facts of this case.
He further pointed out that the case of Wg.
Cdr.
AK Dass, ex-Bursar of the School, who was given reemployment as Hostel Warden for 2 years was totally different and could not be equated with that of the petitioner.Wg.
Cdr.
AK Dass who was the then Administrative Officer-cum-Bursar of the Air Force School was asked to hold additional charge of Hostel Warden till its success or was appointed and a new post created thereafter.
The post of Hotel Warden was a lower post as compared to the Administrative Officer.
Wg.
Cdr.
Dass retired and he requested for re-employment in the lower post of Hostel Warden and since his experiment in this post had been successful, it was decided to re-employ him for two years to gain from his experience and before a fresh individual was inducted into this new post.
7.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the entire matter.
In our opinion the contention of Mr. Jaitley has no legal force.
Nothing has been brought on the record of this case to show that the memorandum issued by the Central Government has been made applicable to the employees of the School by way of any statutory incorporation.
Before the applicant can claim a writ of mandamus he has to show that he has a legal right to the performance of a legal duty.
Nothing has been shown to us that the petitioner has a legal right to get extension and that the respondents are under any legal duty or obligation to consider the case of the petitioner for extension.
This is purely discretionary matter within the domain of the respondents.
The petitioner has no right to get extension or to be re-employed and the respondents are under no mandatory obligations imposed by a Statute to consider his case for extension nor reemployment.
Rule 110 of Delhi School Education Rules provides that an employee of the School shall retire on attaining the age of 58 years.
This means that he has no right to continue thereafter.
The other contention of Mr. Jaitley is that the petitioner was discriminated from Wg.
Cdr.
Dass equally has no force.
In view of the circumstances explained by the respondents we are satisfied that there has been no discrimination with the petitioner.
Due to exigencies of service the respondent society exercised its discretionary power and gave extension to Mr. Dass on a lower post.
The doctrine of legitimate Expectancy is not attracted to the facts of the present case.
8.
In the result we find no merit in this petition and it is dismissed.