Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Dr Hardeep Kaur, the respondent, who belongs to the category of Scheduled Castes, was a candidate for admission to the MD Course in Obstretics ad Gynaecology.
She was not admitted.
Aggrieved by this action, she approached this Court through Civil Writ Petition No. 12525 of 1992.
The learned Single Judge following the decision in an earlier case, viz., C.W.P.
No. 11052 of 1992 (Avtar Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1993(2) S.C.T.
628) decided on December 11, 1992, allowed the writ petition.
Aggrieved by the decisions in both the cases, the State of Punjab has come up in these two Letters Patent Appeals Nos. 462 and 359 of 1993.
Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that these can be disposed of by one order.
The facts as appearing in L.P.A. No. 462 of 1993 may be briefly noticed.
2.
On January 24, 1992, the State Government issued a notification ordering that selection of students for admission to 'Three Years Post Graduate Degree Course' at the Government Medical Colleges, Patiala and Amritsar shall be made by holding an entrance test.
It was further provided that 25% of the total seats will be filled on All India basis through competitive Entrance Test.
Of the remaining seats, 60 per cent will be filled from amongst the eligible PCMS in service Doctors while 40 per cent will be filled from fresh graduates who are not in service through Post-Graduate Entrance Test."
The conditions of eligibility were prescribed.
It was further provided that 25% seats in each course shall be filled up from amongst the members of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.
The respondent, who was eligible, claims that she appeared in the entrance test and was placed at No. 11 in the merit list of the persons belonging to the reserved categories.
On her qualifying the examination, she was eligible to be admitted to the Post-Graduate, Course in Obstretics and Gynaecology.
Having not been admitted, she approached this Court.
The appellants controverted the claim made by the candidate.
3.
The learned Single Judge after consideration of the matter found that "out of total twelve number of seats in this speciality, roster points, 1, 5 and 9 had to be reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes category, and one of these three seats had to go to the fresh graduates while the other two in service candidates as per relevant instructions of the State Government.
Dr. Navdeep Singh and Dr. Beant Singh only in service category and belonging to scheduled castes have been given admission but strangely enough roster `9' meant for fresh graduates from this reserved category has not been filled up."
It was further observed that the department had not "alleged in the return that any candidate higher in merit to the Petitioner in this reserved category had applied for admission on this speciality."
In view of this position, the writ petition was allowed.
4.
Challenging the judgment, the only contention raised by Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel for the Appellants, is that in accordance with the prescribed procedure, 60% of the total seats had to be filled up from amongst the members of the Punjab from amongst the members of Scheduled Castes, who were already in the employment of the State Government.
According to the counsel, this was substantial compliance with the instructions of the department and no relief could have been granted to the respondent.
This claim was controverted by Mr. GS Sandhu, the learned counsel for the respondent.
5.
It was admitted position that there were a total of 12 seats which had to be filled up by the State Government.
It is also admitted that 25% seats were reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
It is, thus, clear that three seats, had to be filled up from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes Factually, only two have been given.
There was thus one more seat falling to the share of the members of the Scheduled Castes which was wrongly not given to them.
Resultantly, in the circumstances of this case, the seat ought to have been given to the present respondent.
6.
Mr. Aggarwal, however, contended that the 12 seats had to be divided amongst the in service candidates and the fresh graduates in the ratio of 60:40.
He is undoubtedly right.
However, this also makes no difference to the position regarding the reservation.
On this basis, 8 seats will have to be filled up from amongst the members of the Punjab Civil Medical Service and four from amongst the fresh graduates.
Even if the provision regarding reservation is applied to these categories separately, two out of eight falling to the share of in-service candidates and one out of four seats which had to be filled from amongst the fresh graduates had to be given to the members of Scheduled Castes.
While two seats out of eight filled up from amongst the in-service candidates were given to the members of Scheduled Castes, none was given out of the four filled up from amongst the fresh graduates.
Thus, viewed from any angle, the result is that one seat which should have been filled up from amongst the members of Scheduled Castes was not given to the eligible category.
7.
Similar is the position in the case of Avtar Singh.
It is the admitted position that there were a total of 11 seats in the speciality of Orthopaedics and only two were filled up from amongst the members of Scheduled Castes.
One more seat which fell to their share at roster point No. 9 was not given to them.
8.
Accordingly, we find no merit in these appeals which are dismissed.
It is directed that the appellants shall admit the two candidates to their respective courses forthwith.
In fact, Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for Mr. Avtar Singh has pointed out that after the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar had vide order dated March 2, 1993 granted admission to him, which was, however, cancelled on June 18, 1993, in view of the interim order passed by a Bench of this Court.
Since we have dismissed both the appeals, the interim order shall stand vacated.
As a result, the order admitting Dr. Avtar Singh shall stand restored.
The appellants shall also admit the other candidate Dr. Hardeep Kaur immediately.
In the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.