SS Sodhi, J - The matter here pertains to the filling up of 40 posts of Naib Tehsildars, in pursuance of an advertisement issued in this behalf by the Chairman of the Department Selection Committee on December 21, 1987.
The Chairman being the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division.
In terms of the said advertisement, candidates fulfilling the prescribed qualifications were required to take a written test, besides appearing in an interview.
There was, however, one category of candidates that was exempted from the written examination.
This being those, "who are member of a family of a person killed as a result of Terrorist action in the State or who is a member of a family which has lost its bread winner in the riots in Delhi or other places in India between October 31 and November 7, 1984."
Such candidates were merely required to appear for interview alongwith other candidates who qualified for it on the basis of the written examination.
2.
On January 15, 1988, respondent-Roshan Lal submitted his application for appointment to the post of Naib Tehsildar.
In column No. 9 of his application form, where it was asked whether the applicant belonged "SC/Tribe/ BC/Ex-servicemen/victim of Terrorists Act/1984 riots victim", he wrote, "Victim of terrorists riots."
Along with this application he submitted a photocopy of his affidavit of August 16, 1986, where it was mentioned to the effect that on May 22, 1984, their family had been attacked by terrorists.
Faqir Chand, his cousin, was killed while his real brother sustained injuries.
Compensation payable, according to rules, was given to them by the government on this account and a case was also registered at Police Station Sadar, Patiala.
3.
On September 1, 1989, memorandum was addressed to Roshan Lal from the office of the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee calling upon him to furnish two copies of the passport size photographs.
This was revealed on a perusal of the official file by the learned single Judge.
4.
Next followed the letter (Annexure P-2) from the office of the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee calling upon Roshan Lal-respondent to appear for interview in the office of the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, on March 20, 1990.
This letter also contained the statement, "on the basis of notice issued in Tribune on 21121987, and the subsequent written examination held on 22101989, you have been declared successful.
This was a patently wrong statement, as Roshan Lal had not, in fact, appeared in any written examination.
Be that as it may, Roshan Lal appeared for the interview and he was duly interviewed.
The result was declared on June 6, 1991, but the result of Roshan Lal was, however, withheld.
The direction consequently sought by him in his writ petition being that his result be declared and further that he be held entitled to appointment prior to those lower than him in merit.
5.
There can be no manner of doubt that Roshan Lal did not fall within the category of applicants for these posts of Naib Tehsildar, who were exempted from qualifying in the written examination, but he was never asked to appear in any such examination.
Not only this, he was interviewed for selection too, by being treated as one entitled to be considered on the basis of interview alone.
It would be pertinent to note that there is no suggestion of any wrong information having been given by Roshan Lal in his application or that anything was suppressed therein.
6.
Further, as mentioned earlier, it was as far back as January 5, 1988, that the petitioner had submitted his application for appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
The written examination was field till almost 21 months thereafter i.e. on October 22, 1989.
If Roshan Lal was not entitled to exemption from the written examination, it was clearly incumbent upon the departmental selection committee to have so advised him and asked him to appear in the written examination.
This they failed to do.
Not only this, they instead, in the first instance asked him to furnish two passport size photographs, and then called him for interview and that too by a letter containing the statement to the effect that he had been successful in the written examination.
Such being the circumstances no fault can be attributed to Roshan Lal and it would clearly be contrary to the interests of justice to have him be prejudicially affected by the obvious lapse and wrong doing on the part of the selection committee.
There, was ample time and opportunity with the departmental selection committee to have scrutinised his application and determined his eligibility for exemption or otherwise from the written test and to have called him foe the written examination, when it was discovered that he was not entitled to exemption from it.
The learned single Judge, therefore, in our view, rightly held that the candidature of Roshan Lal could not be allowed to be cancelled on this account.
7.
Faced with this situation, Mr. SK Bhatia, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab sought to contend that at any rate as passing of the written examination was in essential per requisite for selection to the post and Roshan Lal had not qualified in it and he was clearly not entitled to be selected.
Support was sought from the judgment of this Court in Raj Kumar Sharma v. The State of Haryana, 1993(1) RSJ 585 : 1993(1) SCT 84 (P&H).
The matter there concerned admission on the basis of a fake certificate of a non-existent institute and denial of permission to sit for the examination when this fact came to light.
It was held that the petitioner was not entitled to relief under Article 226 of the Constitution.
8.
Reference was next made, to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Distt.
Collector and Chairman v. MT Sundari Devi, 1990(4) SLR 237 which concerned appointment to the post of a teacher.
The qualification prescribed for it being MA second class.
The petitioner who was MA third class, without this fact coming to light, came to be selected and also issued an appointment letter subject to the production by her of the original certificates.
It was when these certificates were examined that it came to be noticed that she was not MA second class and appointment was consequently denied.
This denial of appointment was upheld by the Court.
9.
It will be seen that both these judicial precedents are clearly distinguishable on facts.
The present is not a case of lack of requisite qualifications but merely of an omission to take a written examination for which the respondent-Roshan Lal, is not, in any way, to blame rather, the fault lies with the departmental selection Committee.
10.
Such being the circumstances, we hold that a fair and just solution to the situation as has emerged, would be to direct the departmental selection committee to afford an opportunity to Roshan Lal-respondent to take a written examination with a view to determine his eligibility for appointment to the post of Naib Tehsildar.
If Roshan Lal qualifies in this examination his inter se seniority amongst the other candidates for these posts be then fixed according to the method as prescribed by the learned single Judge, namely, on the basis of the marks obtained by him in the written examination vis-a-vis the marks of other candidates.
The departmental selection committee is accordingly hereby directed to hold the written examination for Roshan Lal-respondent and to take necessary consequential actions in terms of this order within three months from the receipt by the Chairman thereof of a copy of this judgment.
With these directions, uphold and affirm the judgment of the learned single Judge with, of course, the modification that Roshan Lal will also be required to qualify in the written examination.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.