Sivaraman Nair, J (Oral) - This writ appeal arises from the judgment in Writ Petition 15019/86 in which the petitioner-appellant sought a declaration that proceedings of the Principal, Guntur Medical College, Guntur in Rc.
No. 3600/ME.
4/92, dated 9.10.1986 were illegal, void, without jurisdiction and opposed to the principles of natural justice, and a further declaration that the Principal had no jurisdiction to decide the issue of caste and that only designated revenue authorities could do so.
2.
A few facts which are necessary to understand the issue involved in this case are the following : Appellant was admitted to the First Year MBBS Course in the competitive examination during the academic year 1981-82.
She was selected on the basis of her claim that she belonged to the Scheduled Tribe, Konda Kapu.
Application form itself contained a caution that social status of persons who claimed admission in reserved categories would be subject to verification on a reference to Director of Social Welfare or other competent authorities.
Appellant was admitted provisionally as a student belonging to the Scheduled Tribe, Konda Kapu on October 15, 1981.
Her claim to belong to a Scheduled Tribe was referred in March, 1982 to the Director of Tribal Welfare in terms of G.O.Ms.
No. 245, Social Welfare Department Dated 30.6.1977.
She was called upon to submit answers to a questionnaire giving geneology and ethnographic information.
She gave such information stating that her father Venkateswara Rao and grandfather Ramaswamy hailed from Nalavanka Village in Ichapuram Taluk Srikaklam District, and both were Konda Kapus by caste, that her mother Arunadevi hailed from Perala in Chirala Taluk but she was Balija by caste, that her mother's brothers and sisters married in Balija Community, that her father's family also bear the surnames Vemula, Ravi Anapa, Mota and Kowasi and that she belonged to Midhuna clan.
On receipt of answers to the questionnaire, Director of Tribal Welfare conducted preliminary investigation into the above statements through an Inspector who was required to visit respective villages and to record statements of persons concerned.
On 13th April, 1983 Vemula Jayagopal son of Ramaswamy Naidu, resident of Naidupeta, Nellore District was examined.
He stated that the appellant's father and he were brothers, that they had two sisters Poludasu Padmavathi and Rangineni Krishnavani, that they were Telagas by caste, and that village of the appellant's mother Vemula Venkateswara Rao was Duddukur, Addanki Taluk, Prakasam District.
He stated that he was the eldest male member in the family and that the had also participated in the marriage of his brother Kamula Venkataraman Rao, father of the appellant.
Nalluri Subba Rao of Duddakur and Sarpanch of Duddakur village were also examined.
They stated that both belong to Telaga Community.
Report of the Inspector along with statements recorded from various persons was placed before the Director.
On an examination of the same, he ordered an open inquiry to be conducted in the Village Nelavanka.
Appellant and her father were given notice dated 23rd April, 1983 of an open inquiry to be held in the village on 12th May, 1983.
In that inquiry, statements of Durgasi Dasireddy, Village Munsif of Nelvanka, Durgasi Chalapathi Reddy, Sarpanch of the said village, and Padimi Rajaiah, Ex-Sarpanch for sixteen years of the said village, who initially gave certificate to the father of the appellant to be Konda Kapu, were recorded in the presence of the appellant and her father.
Both of them signed the statements endorsing "read".
Those statements were counter-signed by persons present at the open inquiry.
Those statements disclosed that neither the father of the appellant, nor her grandfather Ramaswamy nor her great grand-father Raghavaiah ever lived in Nelvanka Village, that there were no Konda Kapu people in that village that about ten years back Ex-village Munsif Dimmala Mahesam Achari introduced the appellant's father Venkateswara Rao to the then Sarpanch Padimi Rajaiah as Konda Kapu and requested for a certificate furnishing all the particulars regarding his father's name and grand-father's name, and that at the instance of village Munsif the Ex-Sarpanch had given the certificate in August 1977.
He also stated that in view of the facts which were disclosed subsequently, the certificate was being withdrawn.
3.
On the basis of the above materials, Director came to the conclusion that the appellant and her parents belong to Telaga and Balija communities respectively and both of them belong to Kapu caste which was admittedly a ward caste.
These conclusions were contained in the report of the Director of Tribal Welfare dated 13th February, 1986.
On receipt of the report, the Principal, Medical College, Guntur issued proceedings dated 11th April, 1986 requiring the appellant to show cause why her admission should not be cancelled for giving false information with regard to her social status, and directed her to submit explanation within ten days from the date of receipt of the notice.
4.
On 25th April 1986, the appellant requested the first respondent to supply copy of the letter dated 23rd April, 1983 of the Director and the report dated 13th February, 1986.
She also requested for copies of the statements, reports and other documents relied upon by the Director so as to enable her to submit her detailed explanations.
By letter dated 23rd May, 1986, the first respondent supplied the letter of the Director dated 23rd April, 1983 and the report dated 13th February, 1986, and called upon the appellant to submit her explanation within fifteen days.
She repeated her request for copies of the statements of the Sarpanch, Village Munsif and Ex-Sarpanch of Nelavanka Village and of Vemula Jayagopal of Chirala.
By letter dated 12th June 1986, the first respondent stated that the report dated 13th February 1986 had already been sent to the appellant on 25th April, 1986, and the statements and reports of the Inspector and of the Sarpanch etc., were available with the Director.
In reply to further communication from the appellant alleging non-receipt of material, the first respondent in his letter dated 5th September, 1986 supplied statements of the Sarpanch, Village Munsif and Ex-Sarpanch of the village and also that of Vemula Jayagopal, Maddina Venkata Subba Rao, Katta Venkatarao and Nalluri Subbarao.
Thereafter, the appellant was required to submit her explanation within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the said communication.
In her letter dated 24th September, 1986 the appellant stated that her father was away from town and she could submit her explanation only after he came back.
She, therefore, requested fifteen days time to submit her explanation which was submitted along with the letter dated 9th October, 1986.
By order dated 9th October, 1986, the first respondent held that on a consideration of the entire material on record, he was satisfied that the appellant had given fraudulent and incorrect particular in her application and, therefore, her admission was to be cancelled.
Her name was removed from the nominal rolls of the college forthwith.
Appellant filed Writ Petition 15019 of 1986 assailing the above Order.
5.
Case of the appellant is that neither the Director nor the Principal of the Medical College, Guntur was competent to inquire into her community status in view of the fact that revenue authorities had issued the certificate that she, her father and her grand-father belonged to Scheduled Tribe of Konda Kapu.
She submitted further that the proceedings were in violation of principles of natural justice and that the statements of the villagers of Nelavanka were recorded by the Inspector of the Social Welfare Department without notice to her.
She submitted further that she was not allowed to cross-examine witnesses whose statements were recorded and on which the Director, and the Principal of the College placed considerable reliance.
It is her case, therefore, that the proceedings cancelling her admission violated principles of natural justice.
She also submitted that the statement of Vemula Jayagopal, alleged to be an uncle of the appellant, could not have been utilised against her because her father had no brothers at all.
It was the further case of the appellant that she actually belongs to Konda Kapu and findings entered against her by the Director of Social Welfare in his report, and the Principal, Medical College, Guntur in the impugned order are opposed to facts and, therefore, unsustainable.
6.
We have considered the arguments raised by counsel for the appellant, who also read to us the grounds of appeal in elaborate detail.
7.
At the time of admission of the writ petition our learned brother K Ramaswamy, J gave notice to the respondents requiring them to produce the entire records.
On perusal of the same, the learned single Judge found that the submissions made by the appellant were unsustainable.
On a detailed examination of the entire record, the learned single Judge found that the inquiry was conducted by the Social Welfare Department pursuant to the authorisation contained in Column 15 of the admission form in which it was specifically stated that the social status of the applicant who claimed reservation on the basis that she belonged to a Scheduled Tribe, Konda Kapu - would be subject to investigation by Director of Social Welfare or Director of Tribal Welfare, as the case may be.
The appellant having acceded to such an investigation is not entitled to resile from the same.
Learned Judge found that the investigation and the inquiry by the Director of Social Welfare on the basis of ascertainable information which the appellant had supplied in answer to the questionnaire was more efficacious than casual inquiry which the Village Sarpanch appeared to have made before issuing the certificate way back in 1970 that the appellant's father and grand-father were Konda Kapu.
The learned Judge found that the report of the Director which was based on the investigation conducted by the Inspector of the department and statements which were recorded had been duly furnished to the appellant before final orders were passed and that finding had not been effectively controverted by the appellant in the writ petition.
Learned Judge also found that pursuant to the request made by the appellant, copies of the reports of the Director and the statements of all the witnesses who were examined at the time of investigation and open inquiry were duly furnished to the appellant.
She and her father were given notice about the inquiry which was conducted on 12th May, 1988.
Both of them were present at the inquiry.
In their presence, the Village Munsif, Village Sarpanch, Ex-Sarpanch of the Village and few others of Nelavanka Village were examined.
Learned Judge found that the appellant and her father endorsed their presence at the time of the inquiry and also made endorsement in the statements "read".
The persons whose statements were recorded had also signed the statements thereafter.
8.
On the basis of this material which was discernible from the files which were produced by the Government Pleader, the learned single Judge was right in finding that the Respondents were competent to verify the social status of the appellant and that there was no basis for the case of the appellant that the inquiry was conducted contrary to the principles of natural justice and without furnishing to her copies of reports or statements recorded in the proceedings.
We are of the opinion that learned judge was right in holding that the appellant, not having requested for opportunity to cross-examine any of the witnesses who were present and were examined in her presence in the open inquiry held on 12th May, 1986, was not entitled to complain against the inquiry report.
In this view, we are not persuaded that the respondent had no jurisdiction to verify the social status or caste/tribe to which the appellant belonged.
Nor can we agree that there was any violation of the principles of natural justice involved in the proceedings, since all the materials which were gathered were fully disclosed to the appellant and the inquiry was conducted in her presence.
We hold that the inquiry was properly conducted by competent authorities who were authorised to conduct such inquiry in terms of the conditions contained in the prospectus and the application form and on the basis of replies of the appellant to the questionnaire, which formed part of the process of admission.
9.
Learned Judge dismissed the writ petition on a detailed consideration of all the contentions raised by the appellant.
Reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in Kanungo v. Collector, Customs, Calcutta (AIR 1972 SC 2137), and the judgment in Writ Petition 15017 of 1986, which the learned single Judge had disposed of on the same day considering almost the same question.
10.
Counsel submitted that the appellant was admitted in the year 1981 in First Year MBBS course and she was in the final year when notice proposing cancellation of her admission was issued in the year 1986.
He submitted that on 24th November, 1986, a Division Bench passed orders suspending the order of the learned single Judge and the direction to cancel her admission.
He submits that as a result of that interim order, the appellant would have completed her MBBS course and there is no point now in giving effect to the impugned order cancelling her admission.
11.
There was, of course, some delay on the part of the respondents in issuing notice proposing cancellation of admission.
For the delay thereafter, the appellant was also partly responsible.
We would have considered grant of relief in ordinary cases where a student has completed her course on the basis of admission which was wrongly granted.
12.
But the present is not one such ordinary case.
The allegation against the appellant was that she obtained admission in a reserved seat claiming her to belong to a Scheduled Tribe viz., Konda Kapu and that claim was, on inquiry, found to be fraudulent.
In other words, she had snatched away admission which was due to a deserving candidate who was really belonged to that community.
We are of the definite opinion that pretenders snatching away benefits and advantages meant for the depressed and deprived communities do commit an unpardonable affront on the Constitution and do not deserve any compassion from the court in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Not only that, if the appellant is treated as a candidate belonging to Scheduled Tribe of Konda-Kapu, the result will be that she will be entitled to other advantages and preferences for entry into service and for other benefits.
All her relatives and succeeding generations of people who do not belong to Konda Kapu Caste will become entitled to claim such preferences and advantages on the basis of the fraudulent claim which the appellant had made relating to her community, and to the detriment to genuine members of that community.
We shall take judicial notice of the cancerous growth of such malpractices which has been effectively depriving genuine members of Scheduled Castes/Tribes and Backward Classes of what the Constitution and Constitutional Instruments have mandated to be due to them.
Compassion shall not be an excuse to condone such abominable conduct to deprive the deserving of constitutional safeguards.
We are, therefore, not inclined to leave the matter as the Counsel for the appellant suggests.
13.
Counsel submitted that the learned single Judge should not have entered findings of fact in the absence of counter-affidavit on behalf of the respondents.
Learned Judge had stated that he required the respondents, particularly the Government Pleader, to produce all the records relating to the report of the Director of Social Welfare and the order of the Principal of the Medical College to examine whether the contentions urged by the appellant were correct or not.
It was only on a detailed examination of all such materials which were relied upon and after hearing Counsel for the appellant in great detail, as has been specifically recorded in the judgment under appeal, that the learned Judge entered findings of fact that the inquiry was properly conducted by a person who was duly authorised and that there was no defect of jurisdiction or error of fact or law or violation of principles of natural justice involved in the impugned proceedings.
We do not find any reason why we shall disagree with the findings entered by the learned single Judge either on the point of jurisdiction or on the factual details.
We, therefore, affirm the judgment.
14.
It is now for the respondents to take such proceedings as are necessary to see that the appellant does not get any unmerited benefits as a pretender belonging to a Scheduled Tribe.
Compassion can have no place to condone a calculated attempt to snatch away constitutional safeguards meant for others.
If she has obtained any benefit on the assumption that she is a Konda Kapu during the pendency of these proceedings, it is for the State Government to take such remedial steps as are necessary.
It is also necessary that the State Government removes the appellant from the category of Scheduled Tribe candidates for all purposes so that no claim will be made hereafter by her relatives or successors on the basis of the assumption that she belongs to the Scheduled Tribe of Konda Kapu.
In the view which we take, we are supported in sufficient measure by the judgment of another Division Bench to which one of us (Sivaraman Nair, J) was a party viz., South Central Railway and another v. Veera Raju WA 592 and 593 of 1985 dated 281991 : 1991(3) ALT 252.
In the result, we dismiss the appeal with costs in affirmance of the judgment of the learned single Judge and with the observations and directions as above.
Appeal dismissed.