Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was recruited as a Sepoy in the Indian Army and was discharged on March 31, 1956 seeks the issue of an appropriate writ, direction or order directing the respondents to release his pension.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that he was recruited as Sepoy on March 5, 1941 and posted at the Rajput Regimental Centre Fatehgarh.
He rendered field service from April 1, 1942 to February 13, 1943.
Thereafter, he was transferred to the Army Ordnance Corps.
The petitioner states that in recognition of the good work done by him, he was awarded various medals etc. ultimately, after rendering meritorious service, the petitioner retired from the service on March 31, 1956.
The petitioner further avers that after his retirement he made repeated representations for the release of pension.
The claim was ultimately rejected vide order dated November 17, 1989.
The petitioner's claim fro pension was rejected on the ground that he had not completed 15 years of service and that he had been employed on a War/Short service engagement.
The petitioner contests that position and states that even according to the discharge certificate issued by the Army authorities, he had served from March 5, 1941 to March 31, 1956 and had thus completed more than 15 years of service.
It is further submitted that his employment was never shown to be on a war/short service engagement.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been averred by way if preliminary objection that the writ petition has been filed after an inordinately long delay, and this disentitles the petitioner to the grant of any relief.
On merits, the grounds stated in the order dated November 17, 1989 have been reiterated.
It has been averred that since the petitioner had not completed 15 years of service and had been engaged on war/short service, he is not entitled to the grant of any pension.
4.
I have heard Mr. PC Wadhwa for the petitioner and Mr. SK Pipat, learned Senior the respondents Mr. Wadsworth has produced before me the original certificate of service issued to the petitioner at the time of his discharge from the Army.
A perusal of the certificate shows that the petitioner's date of enrollment has been shown to be March 31, 1956.
At page 2 of this certificate, it has been categorically mentioned that the petitioner had been "transferred to Pension Establishment - after serving 15 years nil months 21 days with colours and ---".
His character at the time of discharge has been assessed to be "Very Good".
Details of stars and medals won by the petitioner have also been indicated.
A photocopy of this document has been taken on record as Mark 'A'.
5.
A perusal of certificate clearly shows that the petitioner had served for more than 15 years and had been transferred to the Pension Establishment at the time of his discharge.
There is nothing on this certificate to indicate that the petitioner was employed on a war/short service engagement.
In fact, the certificate itself indicates that he had served for 15 years and 21 days and that he had been served for 15 years and 21 days and that he had been transferred to the Pension Establishment.
In this view of the matter, the factual premises for the rejection of the petitioner's claim to the grant of pension is non-existent.
This being the position, the order rejecting the petitioner's claim to pension viz. the order dated November 17, 1989 (Annexure P-1) cannot be sustained.
6.
Mr. Pipat however contends that the petitioner is guilty of laches.
He has approached the Court after an inordinately long delay of 36 years.
He further points out that according to the consistent practice followed by the Army authorities, the records are destroyed after 25 years.
According to the learned counsel the records relating to the present case must have been destroyed in or about the year 1981.
On account of delay and the non-availability of record, the interests of the respondents are likely to be prejudicially affected.
Consequently, the learned counsel urged that the writ petition be dismissed on the ground of laches.
7.
I am unable to accept this contention.
Firstly, the certificate of service issued by the respondents is a public document.
This certificate clearly shows that the petitioner on discharge from the Army had been transferred to the Pension Establishment.
It further shows that the petitioner had served for more than 15 years.
In such a situation, the fact that the records have been destroyed, is virtually of no consequence.
Otherwise, the respondents have not suffered any loss on account of the petitioner having approached this Court after a long lapse of time.
Apparently, the petitioner was entitled to the grant of pension.
As a result of the order dated November 17, 1989 is not allowing the pension which was actually due to the petitioner, they retained the money which should have been actually disbursed to him.
They have utilised that money during the period of 36 years.
Since the respondents have suffered no prejudice on account of long lapse of time the claim for pension made by the petitioner cannot be rejected on the mere ground of laches.
In fact, if the respondents had correctly appreciated that facts at the relevant time, the petitioner would have been able to use the money which was actually due to him.
In any event this fact can be kept in view while considering the matter regarding payment of interest.
8.
Taking the totality of facts into consideration, the petition cannot be dismissed on the ground of delay.
9.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed.
The order dated November, 17, 1989 is set aside.
The respondents are directed to release the petitioner's pension.
They may compute the arrears due to the petitioner with effect from April 1, 1956 till now and pay them to him within 6 months from today.
In case the respondents fail to make the payment within the specified period of 6 months, the petitioner would be entitled to payment of arrears with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
However, if the payment is made within 6 months, then the petitioner would not be entitled to any interest.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.