Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Gehal Singh was working as a Head Constable.
Videe order dated September 28, 1984 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur ordered the forfeiture of one year's approved service.
He was also censured.
Aggrieved by this order, he filed a suit.
It was decreed primarily on the ground that Mr. Rajan Gupta, who had passed this order was working as an Additional Superintendent of Police and was not invested with the powers to take disciplinary action against the delinquent employee.
The appeal filed by the defendant-appellants having failed, they have come in the second appeal to this Court.
The only contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellants is that under the rules the action taken by the Superintendent of Police was legal and valid.
2.
No one appears for the respondent.
In fact, it appears that even actual date notice has been served.
3.
Rule 16.1(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 inter alia provides that the departmental punishments mentioned in the second column of the subjoined table may be inflicted on officers of the various ranks shown in the head Nos. 3 to 6, by the officers named below each heading in each case, or by any officer to higher rank".
The competent authority for imposing the penalty of forfeiture of approved service or for censure in the case of Head Constable is provided as under :  S.No.
InspectorSergea Head Constables Constables Departments ors nts 1 etc.
Punishment 1.
Dismissal xx xx xx xx 2.
Reduction xx xx xx xx, 3.
Stoppage of increment or forfeiture of approved service for increment xx Supdt.
of Police also Sr. Assistant Supdt.
of Police Lahor Dy Supdt.
(Admn.)
Govt. Railway Police Dy.
Supdt.
In-charge of Railway Police Sub-Division and Officer-in-charge of the Police Recruits Training Centre, Amritsar xx 4. to 10 xx xx xx 4.
A persual of the above provision shows that under the Rules, a Superintendent of Police is competent to impose the punishment.
The learned lower Appellant Court has, however, observed that Rule 16.1 of the Punjab Police Rules empowers only the Supdt.
of Police In-charge of the District to impose punishment like the one in question, upon Head Constables.
Since Shri Rajan Gupta had not authority to pass the impugned order same was without jurisdiction and as such void."
Under the Rules, any officer of the rank of Superintendent of Police is competent to pass the order.
There is nothing on record to indicate that Mr. Rajan Gupta was not in the rank of a Superintendent of Police.
In fact, even the order indicates that Mr. Rajan Gupta was the Superintendent of Police.
Consequently, it appears clearly that the order was not passed by an authority subordinate to or lower in rank to the competent authority.
5.
The plaintiff-respondent in his statement as PW.1 no doubt mentions that "at that time the District Police Officer was the SSP and not the additional S.P.
The additional S.P.
was not competent to impose punishment against me.
Since the rule only contemplates that the punishment can be imposed by the officers indicated therein, all that is required is that the order of punishment should have been passed by a Superintendent of Police."
In the present case, a bare perusal of the order shows that it had been passed by a Superintendent of Police.
Consequently, the conclusion arrived at by the Courts below is untenable in law.
6.
It is not unlikely that at a given point of time, the volume of work a particular distinct, may compel the State Government to post more than one Superintendent of Police in that district.
All of them may be in the rank of Superintendent of Police.
The rule does not contemplate that only the senior - most amongst them can impose a punishment.
The only requirement of the rule is that the officer passing the order should be in the rank of a Superintendent of Police.
There is nothing on record to show that Mr. Rajan Gupta was not in that rank.
The requirement of the rule was not that the officer should be incharge of the District or that he should be a Senior Supdt.
of Police.
Consequently, the finding recorded by the Courts below is contrary to law and cannot be sustained.
7.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed.
The judgment and decree passed by the Court below are set aside.
8.
Mr. DS Chhina, the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur while deciding the appeal had observed that it would be advisable to recover the entire costs suffered by the State in this litigation from the said officers.
In my view, the officer has not committed any error.
The order of recovery or any other order which may have been passed by the State Govt. in pursuance of the above order shall be annulled.
Since no one has appeared on behalf of the respondent to contest this appeal, I make no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.