Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondent-University to declare his result of BA Part III, Examination held in April 1991.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed his Matriculation Examination from the Board of School Education, Haryana in the year 1984.
In 1986, the petitioner passed the Intermediate Examination from the Board of Secondary Education, Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal.
In 1988, the petitioner appeared in BA Part II Examination conducted by the Kurukshetra University.
His result was declared on June 25, 1988.
He was shown to have passed examination securing 164 marks out of a total of 350.
In April 1990, the petitioner appeared privately through correspondence course in BA Part III Examination.
He failed.
In July 1990, the petitioner joined Gandhi Adarsh College, Samlakha (respondent No. 2) for BA Part III.
In December 1990, the college sent his admission form to the Kurukshetra University for appearing as a regular student in BA Part III to be held in the year 1991.
In March 1991, the University issued Roll Numbers to the various candidates including the petitioner.
He was allotted Roll Number 24040.
As a result, the petitioner took the Examination held in April 1991.
The result of the examination was declared sometimes in June or July 1991.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, his result was withheld by the University.
He represented.
Having failed to persuade the University to declare his result, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The action of the respondent-University in not declaring the result has been challenged as being arbitrary and barred by the rule of estoppel.
3.
Separate written statements have been filed by two respondents.
The case of respondent No. 1 is spelled out in paragraph 5 of the written statement.
It may be usefully reproduced as under :-  "In reply to para No. 5 of the writ petition, it is submitted that the petitioner was wrongly admitted to BA III in the college of respondent No. 2 because the Scheme which was prevalent before the Session 1990-91 came to a end from the year 1990-90 onwards.
Under the old Scheme which was prevalent till Session 1989-90 for a candidate to be graduate he had to put in studies under the pattern of 10+1+3 i.e. 14 years.
Under this old Scheme, the graduation score of a candidate was a sum total of his marks obtained in BA Part-II and BA Part-III.
However, from the Session 1990-91 the new Scheme came into force, as per which a candidate to be a graduate has to follow the pattern of 10+2+3 ie 15 years.
Under the new Scheme prevalent now, the graduation score of candidates is a sum total of BA I, BAII and BA III.
However at the time of preparation of the result of the petitioner, this came to the notice of the respondent-University authorities that the petitioner was not eligible under the new Scheme, as he had done his BA II under the old Scheme and BA III under the new Scheme in the Session 1990-91.
Hence, the petitioner is not eligible under the new Scheme, having not studied on the pattern of 10+2+3.
At any rate the petitioner has to clear BA Part - I under the new Scheme, since the old Scheme came to an end in April 1990 to maintain education standards."
4.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 2, the factual position is not disputed.
It has been inter alia averred that the college had vide its letter dated December 16, 1991 requested the University to "sympathetically consider the case of the petitioner as a mercy case.
But the University vide its letter dated 28-1-92 (Annexure R2/2) has ordered that the petitioner may appear in BA (Part-II) (New Scheme) privately and the petitioner has been conveyed the same vide letter dated 7-2-92 (Annexure R2/3) of the answering respondent-College, which the petitioner has not impugned as yet."
5.
A perusal of the letter dated December 16, 1991 sent by the College to the University shows that an effort was made to justify the admission of the petitioner to the BA Part III.
It was further pointed out that even though mistake through oversight may not be ruled out but "our action was bona fide and we acted in good faith."
The College observed that if the student had been made aware of his ineligibility well in time, he could have availed of his chance under the old Scheme during 1991 itself.
It was also pointed out that if his result is not declared, he would suffer irreparable loss and damage which cannot be made good.
On this premises, the College requested the University to find a way out so that the student did not suffer.
The request of the college was declined by the University vide its letter dated January 28, 1992 in which it was inter alia observed as under :-  "Rajinder Singh was wrongly admitted by you to BA III (General) in 1990 whereas he should have been admitted to BA II (General) as per provision under Clause-5 of the rules printed at Page 10 of the University Cal.
Vol. II-1991 as he had passed his BA II under old Scheme in April 1988.
The fault of giving wrong admission in BA III instead of BA II is entirely on the part of the College.
The College should have checked the eligibility carefully before giving him admission.
Although you have given some justification in the third para of your letter under reference, but it cannot be considered valid because the omission is very serious and it is against the provision of the clear cut rules mentioned above.
You may please, therefore, justify your position for this serious lapse immediately.
The Vice-Chancellor after looking into the above case has passed orders that the above student be allowed to appear in BA II (New Scheme) in the capacity of a private candidate."
6.
It appears that in pursuance to this communication from the University, the College sent the letter dated February 7, 1992 to the petitioner informing him that "if you are desirous of appearing in the BA II examination as per the New Scheme, then you may immediately fill in the form and send it to the University."
7.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. SC Sibal, Senior Advocate for the University and Mr. Amrit Paul, learned counsel for respondent No. 2.
8.
The sequence of events as delineated above shows that the petitioner had passed the BA Part II Examination from the Kurukshetra University in the year 1988.
He had taken the BA Part III Examination of the same University in April 1990.
Having failed he had joined a regular course of study for BA Part III at the respondent-College.
He had submitted his admission form which was duly accepted by the University and Roll Number was issued to him.
He took the Examination held in April 1991.
However, after the petitioner had taken the Examination, the University took the view that he was not eligible for admission to the BA Part III course at the college and consequently, his result was withheld.
Further, according to the University, the petitioner should have been admitted to BA Part II instead of BA Part III in the year 1990.
Accordingly, it was held that the petitioner should be allowed to appear in BA Part II (New Scheme) in the capacity of a private candidate.
This order was actually conveyed to the petitioner after he had filed the writ petition in this Court vide letter dated February 7, 1992 (Annexure R-2/3).
In the written statement, however, the position taken by the University is entirely different.
It has been stated that "the petitioner has to clear BA Part I under the New Scheme, since the old Scheme came to an end in April 1990 to maintain education standards."
Apparently, even while deciding the petitioner's case, the University was not clear as to whether he was required to appear in BA Part II or BA Part I.
So far as BA Part II Examination is concerned, it is admitted by the University that the petitioner had already passed it in the year 1988.
Consequently, he could not have been called upon to appear in that Examination again.
As a result, neither the order of the University contained in its letter dated January 28, 1992 (Annexure R-2/2) nor the communication of this decision by College to the petitioner vide letter dated February 7, 1992 (Annexure R-2/3) can be sustained in law.
9.
The plea now taken in the written statement is that the petitioner has to clear BA Part I.
This looks clearly anomalous.
The petitioner had passed the Intermediate Examination in the year 1986.
Thereafter, as already noticed, he had passed the BA Part II Examination in 1988.
After having passed the BA Part II Examination, a candidate is being asked to pass a lower examination.
No provision either from the rules or regulations of the University has been pointed out to show that a person who has already passed the higher examination can be called upon to appear in a lower examination.
Consequently, even this decision taken by the University is wholly untenable.
10.
From a perusal of the sequence of events, it appears to be clearly a case where the University is trying to take advantage of its own wrong.
The petitioner had admittedly not concealed any fact either at the time of the admission to his College or at the time of the submission of his form to the University.
He had stated the facts clearly and categorically.
The University in its turn had issued the Roll Number to the petitioner and allowed him to take the examination.
Once that had happened, in my view, it was totally arbitrary for the University to withhold the petitioner's result.
In fact, the Apex Court in Shri Krishan v. Kurukshetra University, AIR 1976 SC 376 had been pleased to observe as under :-  "Once the candidate is allowed to take the examination rightly or wrongly, then the statute which empowers the University to withdraw the candidature of the applicant has worked itself out and the candidate cannot be refused admission subsequently for any infirmity which should have been looked into before giving the candidate permission to appear."
11.
In any event, the University could have checked up the position in December 1990 and if it felt that the petitioner was not eligible, it could have informed him.
He may have saved his time or appeared in the Supplementary Examination in the year 1990 itself.
Once the University had permitted the petitioner to take the Examination, in my view, it could not withhold his result on the ground that under the New Scheme issued by it, the petitioner was not eligible to appear.
In fact, the sequence of events shows that the University itself was not clear about the correct position.
This is apparent from a perusal of the letter dated January 28, 1992 wherein the University blamed the College for having committed very serious omission and called upon it to justify its position "for the serious lapse immediately."
In fact, the University's own conduct was no better.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, it appears that the University having permitted the petitioner to take the examination is now estopped from withholding his result.
12.
Mr. SC Sibal, Sr. Advocate has vehemently contended that under the old Scheme, the result of the BA Examination was declared on the basis of the marks secured by a candidate in BA Part II as well as BA Part III Examinations.
According to the counsel, the result is how declared under the New Scheme on the basis of the marks secured by a candidate in BA Part I, BA Part II and BA Part III Examinations.
This may be so.
However, so far as the petitioner is concerned, he has admittedly passed BA Part II and appeared in BA Part III Examination.
His result can, as a special candidate, be declared in accordance with the old scheme whereunder the marks secured by the candidate in BA Part II and BA Part III can be taken into consideration.
Mr. Sibal has relied upon the decision in Sanjay Kumar v. Kurukshetra University, CWP No. 2143 of 1986 decided on June 1, 1989.
This was a case which is clearly distinguishable on facts.
Sanjay Kumar, the petitioner in this case had passed the pre-medical examination and thereafter appeared in B.Com.
Part II and B Com.
Part III Examinations.
In this case, the University had taken the view that the candidate who passed the pre- medical examination could only be admitted to medical course or to a science course but not to the B.Com.
Part II class.
The candidate lacked initial eligibility for joining B.Com.
Part II.
13.
Such is not the position in the present case.
Admittedly, the petitioner had passed the Matriculation as well as the Intermediate Examinations.
He was, thereafter, eligible to join the BA Part II class which he had admittedly passed.
There was no regulation which provided that the candidate had to pass BA Part I before he could appear in BA Part III.
Consequently, this decision is of no help to the respondents.
14.
An objection was raised that the orders issued by the University vide its letter dated January 28, 1992 and communicated by respondent No. 2 vide its letter dated February 7, 1992 having not been impugned, a challenge to that cannot be entertained in the present proceedings.
It may be noticed that the writ petition was filed in January 1992.
These communications were sent later on.
The parties have been heard on merits of the case.
The objection is wholly lacking in merit and is rejected.
15.
Before parting with the case, it deserves notice that the College by its letter dated December 16, 1991 had explored the University to show compassion.
It failed to do so.
The basis adopted was wholly unjustified.
As a result, the candidate has suffered for almost two years.
Had the University taken a reasonable view, this loss could have been avoided.
It is no doubt correct that the Courts should be slow to interfere in academic matters involving educational standards.
At the same time, autonomy of educational institutions does not apply autocracy.
Human problems should be settled in a humane way.
To say the least, the University failed to do so.
16.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The University is directed to declare the petitioner's result forthwith.
The petitioner will also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.
Petition allowed.