SS Sodhi, J - The controversy here is with regard to first professional MBBS students of Government Medical College, Patiala, being permitted to attend classes for the 2nd professional MBBS course before having passed the first professional examination in full in all subjects.
2.
All the petitioners in this bunch of writ petitions are students of Medical College, Patiala, who failed to clear in full the first professional MBBS examination held in January 1993 and as per result declared in April, 1993, they were required to clear one or more reappear papers.
The supplementary examination is expected to be held somewhere in June, 1993.
3.
To avoid shortage of lectures for the second professional examination, it is the prayer of the petitioners that a direction be issued to the Medical College and to the Punjabi University to permit them to attend the second professional course lectures pending the declaration of their result in the reappear papers in the supplementary examination.
It being clearly understood, it was asserted in this behalf, that if is only if they clear their papers that they would continue their studies in 2nd professional course, if not, they would stand debarred until, of Course, they eventually clear in full all the subjects of the first professional examination.
4.
To justify denying to the petitioners their prayer for being permitted provisionally to attend lectures for the second professional course, the respondents adverted to the letter of the Medical Council of India to the Punjabi University of March 20, 1979 (Annexure R-1) forwarding its recommendation, "The first 18 months shall be occupied in the study of the Phase I (Pre-clinical) subjects and no student shall be permitted to join the Phase II (Para-clinical/clinical) group of subjects until he has passed in all the Phase I (Pre-clinical) subjects."
It was also mentioned therein that it had been brought to the notice of the Medical Council that the Punjabi University had been allowing students who had not passed the first MBBS examination to attend the second MBBS course which was contrary to the recommendations of the Council.
5.
Further, it was pointed out that the recommendations of the Medical Council on under graduate medical examination (1977) had been approved by the Central Government as regulations under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and were, therefore, mandatory.
The Punjabi University was consequently requested to follow this recommendation strictly and no student, therefore, to be permitted to join 2nd year M.B.B.S course unless he passed 1st year M.B.B.S examination.
6.
At its meeting held on March, 19, 1981, the Medical Council of India again reiterated its recommendation that no student be permitted to join Phase II (Para-clinical/clinical) group of subjects until he has passed in all the Phase I (Pre-clinical) subjects (Annexure R-III).
7.
Next to note is the letter of the Secretary, Medical Council of India to the Registrar Marathwarda University, Aurangabad of July 20, 1991 (Annexure R-IV) regarding the decision of that University to allow failed students of the first professional MBBS examination held in November/December, 1980 to keep terms of the second term MBBS Course, it was stated there that, "the Executive Committee was strongly opposed to the 1st MBBS failed students keeping terms for the II MBBS course as it was contradictory to the mandatory recommendations of the Medical Council of India and the Secretary was directed to write immediately to the University of Marathawada and also to the Chancellor of that University and Director or Medical Education.
Such practices are likely to adversely affect the recognition of the degree."
A copy of this letter had been forwarded to the Registrars of all the Universities and this is how it came to the Punjabi University too.
8.
According to the respondents, it was keeping these recommendations and the broader interests of students in view that the Punjabi University, with which the Government Medical College, Patiala, is affiliated that the University at the meeting of its Syndicate held on May 17, 1992 (Annexure R-V), amended Ordinance 13 as under :  Existing Provision, Amendment Proposes  13.
No candidate shall be promoted to the next higher class unless he has passed the First Professional Examination.
However, candidates failing in January examination for the first time may be allowed to attend the next higher class till May next.
The concession will not be given to the candidates failing in May or any other subsequent examination."
No candidate shall be promoted to the Second Professional Course unless he had passed the first Professional Examination in full in all the subjects.
This amendment was duly conveyed to the Principal Government Medical College, Patiala, by the letter of May 24, 1982 (Annexure R-V).
It being mentioned there that this would govern admissions with effect from 1982.
9.
The amended provisions of Ordinance 13 came up for consideration before this Court in C.W.P.
No. 2559 of 1986 Amita Virdi v. Medical College, Patiala decided on July 25, 1986, where these provisions were upheld and what is more while granting relief to the petitioners in that case, who after having been permitted, by an interim order, to attend the second professional course provisionally had during the pendency of the writ petition also passed in full the first professional examination, the Court specifically clarified that this would not be taken as precedent for holding that Ordinance 13 can, in any manner, be bye-passed in future.
10.
It is also pertinent to note, as mentioned in the return, that in December 1984, students who had failed to pass all the subjects in the first professional MBBS examination had been permitted by the Punjabi University, Patiala to attend the second professional MBBS course subject to approval of the Medical Council of India.
Such approval was specifically declined and their provisional promotion was, thus, withdrawn.
It has further been categorically stated by the respondents that from March 1985 onwards, no student who has failed to pass the first year MBBS examination has been allowed to attend the second professional examination class until be passed the first professional MBBS examination in all subjects.
11.
Such being the situation, there can be no manner of doubt that the petitioners are not entitled to the relief claimed, namely, provisional permission to attend the 2nd professional course without having cleared in full all subjects of the first professional course.
12.
Faced with this situation, counsel for the petitioner sought to press in aid the judgment of this Court in Harvinder Singh v. The Principal Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, 1992(1) P.L.R.
23, where a similar prayer had been made and allowed on the reasoning that, no doubt according to the Ordinance '13, "a candidate cannot be promoted to the second professional course unless he has cleared all the subjects of first professional, however, this does not debar a candidate to be provisionally admitted to the second professional course subject to the clearing all the papers of the first professional course and in case a candidate fails to clear the re-appear papers in the supplementary examination, then he may not be allowed to continue studies in the second professional course."
13.
Reference was next made to the judgment of the Division Bench in C.W.P.
8432 of 1992 Amrik Singh v. The Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala decided on August 27, 1992, which reads as under :  "By the interim order of June 19, 1992, the petitioners were permitted to join classes of the second professional MBBS Course.
Keeping in view the judgment of this Courts in Harvinder Singh v. Principal Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot 1992(1) PLR 23, we direct the respondent University to permit the petitioners to continue attending these classes until the declaration of their result in the reappear papers.
If they are successful in clearing these papers.
They shall be deemed to be regular students of the 2nd professional MBBS Course.
If, on the other hand, they do not clear the reappear papers, they shall not be allowed to continue to attend the classes of this course any further.
This writ petition is disposed of in these terms."
It will be seen that the judgment of the Division Bench in Amrik Singh's case (supra) is founded upon and follows the earlier judgment of the single Judge in Harvinder Singh's case (supra).
14.
In the context of the factual background as narrated earlier, we are with respect constrained to hold that Harvinder Singh's case (supra) does not lay down correct law and has thus to be overruled, as also Amrik Singh's case (supra) which was decided on the basis thereof It is apparent that the recommendations of the Medical Council of India leading to the amendment in Ordinance 13 as also the judgment in Anita Virdi's case (supra) were not brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Judges.
Had this been done, a different ruling would, undoubtedly, have been followed.
15.
We, consequently, hold that unless and until all the subjects of the first professional MBBS examination have been cleared, no student is entitled to be promoted or to attend the second professional course even provisionally.
No occasion, thus, arises for granting to the petitioners the relief claimed.
Petition Dismissed.