RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioners who are four in number, are working as Constables in the Haryana Police in District Panipat.
They had not been deputed for the Lower School Training Course.
According to the averments made in Para 8 of the writ petition, they filed writ petition Nos. 17076 of 1991, 15239 of 1991 and 16801 of 1991, in this Court.
All these petitions along with a bunch of other petitions were decided by a Division Bench of this court on 1331992 and judgment was rendered in C.W.P.
No. 8097 of 1991.
The controversy which was raised before the Division Bench was the interpretation of Rule 13.7 of the Punjab Police Rules (as applicable to Haryana) (in short called `Rules') Rule 13.7 reads as under :-  "13.7(1) list B (in form 137) shall be maintained by each Superintendent of Police.
It shall include the names of all constables elected for admission of the Lower School Course to be held at the Police Training College.
Selection to the list shall be made in the month of January each year and shall be limited to the number of seats allotted to the District for the year.
For reasons to be recorded, the number of seats can be increased by twenty per cent.
Allotment of seats to each district shall be done on the basis of existing vacancies and the number of vacancies which are likely to occur during the next one year.
Names shall be entered in the list in the order of merit, determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of tests in (i) Parade (ii) Written test in general law (IPC, Cr.
PC, Indian Evidence Act and such other local and Special Laws as may be specified (iii) Interview and (iv) Examination of Service Record.
(2) xx xx xx  (3) Departmental Promotion Committee for each district shall consist of District Superintendent of Police and two Deputy Superintendents of Police to be named by the D.I.G.
concerned.
The candidates will have to obtain at least 50 per cent of the marks in each test.
The maximum marks for each test shall be prescribed by the Inspector-General through a Standing Order, which may be reviewed after every three years.
(4) The assessment of service record will be done on the basis of education, courses passed and, Commendation Certificates earned during the service.
The marks assigned to these shall be as follows, :-  (i) Education :  BA and above 5 marks Matric and above 3 marks Middle and above 2 marks (ii) Courses passed : Courses upto 1 month duration 1 mark Courses upto 3 months' duration 2 marks Courses upto 6 months' duration 3 marks Courses upto 9 months' duration 4 marks Courses exceeding 9 months' duration 5 marks (iii) Commendation Certificates : Class I 2 marks Subject to a Class II 2 marks maximum Class III 1 mark of 15 marks for both (5) xx xx xx xx"  2.
The point for determination before the Division Bench was whether assessment of service record as envisaged by Rule 137(4) constitute a `Test'.
The case of the petitioners before the Division Bench was that assessment of service record did constitute a `Test' and further Rule 13.7 was bad inasmuch as no maximum marks were provided under the said sub-rule.
The stand of the State was that assessment of service record is not a `test', therefore, the question of providing any maximum marks for the same did not arise.
According to the State, it was only for parade, written test and interview that 50% marks in each were required as it was only these three items which constituted `test'.
3.
The Division Bench held that assessment of service record under sub-rule 137(4) did constitute a `test' and consequently 50% marks were required in this test also as envisaged by Rule 137(4).
Further, it was held that maximum marks should be provided under Rule 137(4).
The operative portion of the judgment of the Division Bench dated 1331992 reads as under :-  "In our considered view, the ends of justice would be amply met if the respondents are directed to fix the maximum marks for the examination of service record and prepare the merit list afresh.
In the eventuality of any of the petitioners found entitled to admission on merit, they would be detailed for the course whenever next course commences by creating additional seats.
If any of the petitioners who has been left out and has not been sent to the course, commenced on 1121991 is later found entitled for being detailed for the course, in view of the observations made above, he would be entitled to all the consequential reliefs like seniority etc. and would be deemed to have qualified the course commencing from 1121991 along with other candidates.
Any person who has been detailed to the course but on reframing of the selection list on merit is found to be not qualified or entitled for the course, would not be sent back as no relief can be granted against him because he is not a party to the writ petition and he would be permitted to continue with the course.
In view of our above observations the judgment in CWP No. 12238 of 1991 (Zile Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SCT 614 (P&H)) decided on 20121991, is overruled to the extent it held that interview and examination of the service record is not a test.
With the above observations the writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
We hope, in future the State would first provide the maximum marks for each test and then make the selections."
4.
It is the case of the respondents that after the judgment, it provided 50 marks as maximum marks for the assessment of service record as envisaged under rule 137(4) and thereafter refrained the merit list.
The petitioners were not found to be above in merit than the person who had already been deputed for lower School Training Course from District Panipat.
Reframed seniority-list has been attached as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has not disputed that the petitioners are lower in merit than the person who had already been deputed for the lower School Training Course.
5.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that providing of 50% marks as maximum marks for assessment of service record was wholly arbitrary and has no rational basis.
6.
I do no find any merit in this submission as providing of maximum marks for a particular test is within the domain of the respondents and nothing has been pointed out as to how the same is arbitrary.
There is no doubt that some of the persons who had already been deputed may not have been deputed if the DB judgment had been rendered earlier because they were not getting 50% marks in the `test' of assessment of service record.
However, the Division Bench took care of them and had observed that they would not be recalled from the course to which they had already been deputed.
The petitioners are also getting less than 50 % marks in this `test' of assessment of service record, but that should not detain me inasmuch as in the merit, they are still lower than the constables who stood already deputed for the Lower School Course in pursuance of the B-1 test held in December, 1991.
Consequently, I find nothing wrong in fixing 50% marks as the maximum marks for the assessment of service record.
I may observe here that State of Haryana has amended Rule 237, vide notification issued in the Haryana Govt. Gazette on September 8, 1992 and nothing said above may be taken as an expression regarding the vires of the amendment of Rule 13.7.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that another test for bringing Constables on a `B-1' List for deputing them for the Lower School Course, was held on 23/24.10.1992 when the petitioners' representation which was made in pursuance of the judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 8097 of 1991 was pending consideration with the Department, the same was decided only on 30.10.1992 by issuance of fresh merit list Annexure R-1 with the written statement which was communicated to the petitioners on 5111992 (Annexure P- 6).
It was because of this reason that they did not sit in the test as they thought that till their representation was decided they need not sit in the test.
The counsel prays that the petitioners may be allowed to sit in the ensuing test which is going to be held sometime this month and if they are successful, then their result should relate lack to the examination held in the month of October, 1992.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that it was open to the petitioners to sit in the examination held in October, 1992 subject to the decision of their representation, and, therefore, the petitioners cannot be allowed to get their results of the ensuing examination related back to the examination held in October, 1992.
9.
Similar prayer was made in C.W.P.
No. 14523 of 1992, decided on January 5, 1993, which prayer was allowed.
10.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that though the petitioners should have sat in the test held in October, 1992, as there was no legal bar to the same, but in the circumstances of the case, it was not something impossible for the petitioners to think that they may not sit in the test till their representation was decided by the authorities.
It was only on 30.10.1992 that a fresh merit-list was issued and the same was made known to the petitioners on 5111992.
On peculiar facts of this case, as have been noticed above, I am of the view that if the petitioners sit in the ensuing test to be held this month or any time later, for being brought on `B-1' List, the result of the said examination qua the petitioners may deemingly be taken as if they had taken the examination which was held in October, 1992.
In case the petitioners are successful and are found higher in merit than the last candidate deputed for the Course in pursuance of the examination held in October, 1992 from the District to which the petitioners belong, then they would be deputed for the course now and if they are successful in the course, they be given benefit of the same, as given to those candidates who had been deputed in pursuance of the examination held in October, 1992.
1 may make it clear that if the petitioners' merit is lower than the last candidate deputed for the course in pursuance of the October, 1992 examination, then their result will not be deemingly taken to be of the examination held in October, 1992.
11.
Subject to the observations made above, this writ petition is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.