RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner joined the police service in the State of Haryana in the year 1984, as a constable.
He was detailed for a six months' Drill Instructors Course in the year 1985-86.
It has been averred in the petition that the petitioner was posted as Drill Instructor from district Mohindergarh to Police Training College, Madhuban, on 5th December, 1988, and remained posted as such till 30th June, 1990.
Written test etc. were held in January, 1991 for bringing the constables on `B-l' list for sending them for training to Lower School Course.
The petitioner could not make the grade for being brought on `B-1' list, as according to the respondents, he did not qualify in the parade test.
The petitioner filed a writ petition in this court (Civil Writ Petition No. 8097 of 1991) challenging his rejection for being brought on `B-1' list.
That writ petition along with a bunch of other writ petitions, came up for hearing before a Division Bench, on 13th March, 1992, and was disposed of by observing as follows :-  "In our considered view, the ends of justice would be amply met if the respondents are directed to fix and maximum marks for the examination of service record and prepare the merit list afresh.
In the eventuality of any of the petitioners found entitled to admission on merit, they would be detailed for the course whenever next course commences by creating additional seats.
If any of the petitioners who has been left out and has not been sent to the course, commenced on 1121991 is later found entitled for being detailed for the course, in view of the observations made above, he would be entitled to all the consequential reliefs like seniority etc. and would be deemed to have qualified the course commencing from 1121991 along with other candidates.
Any person who has been detailed to the course but on refraining of the selection list on merit is found to be not qualified or entitled for the course, would not be sent back as no relief can be granted against him because he is not a party to the writ petition and he would be permitted to continue with the course.
In view of our above observations the judgment in CWP No. 12238 of 1991 (Zile Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) SCT 614 (P&H)) decided on 20121991, is overruled to the extent it held that interview and examination of the service record is not a test.
With the above observation the writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
We hope, in future the State would first provide the maximum marks for each test and then make the selection."
After the said judgment, the respondent-State amended rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules (as applicable to Haryana) on 8th September, 1992.
According to the respondents, the case of the petitioner was considered afresh after allotting maximum marks for the examination of service record, but the petitioner could not make the grade even in the examination of service record.
The petitioner was informed vide letter dated 30th October, 1992 (Annexure P- 5) that after re-examining his case after fixing maximum marks for service record, he cannot be sent for the Lower School Course having failed in the parade test and examination of service record.
This order has been impugned by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that it is very unlikely and is rather strange that a person who had been deputed and acted as a Drill Instructor in the Police Training College, Madhuban could fail in the parade test.
According to the petitioner's counsel, the whole method of evaluating the person for the purpose of bringing on `B-1' list, was arbitrary and the marks were being awarded on whims and fancies of the concerned authorities.
Further, he submitted that the examination of service record had not been properly done.
3.
I am afraid, I cannot agree with the learned counsel on either of the two grounds.
It is for the authorities to see the Judge whether the petitioner had made the grade in a particular test or not.
I, sitting under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, have no jurisdiction to substitute my opinion in place of the authorities who conducted the test.
I could not be satisfied as to how the service record of the petitioner was not properly examined.
4.
Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that another test for bringing constables on `B-l' list for deputing them for the Lower School Course, was held on 23/24-10-1992, and, since the petitioner's representation, which was in pursuance of the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 8079 of 1991 was pending consideration with the department, he did not sit in the test as he rightly thought that till his representation was decided, he need not sit in the test.
The counsel prays that the petitioner should be allowed to sit in the ensuing test, which is going to be held sometime in this month and if he is successful, then his result should relate back to the examination held in the month of October, 1992.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that it was open to the petitioner to sit in the examination held in October 1992 subject to the decision of his representation and, therefore, he cannot be allowed to get his result of the ensuring examination related back to the examination held in the year 1992.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, on this point, I am of the view that though the petitioner should have sit in the test held in October 1992 as there was no legal bar to the same, but in the circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that it was not something impossible for the petitioner to think that he may not sit in the test tiff his representation is decided by the authorities.
It was only on 30th October, 1992 after the examination had been held for the `B-1' list on 23/24th October, 1992 that the petitioner was informed that his representation had been rejected.
On peculiar facts of this case, as have been noticed above, I am of the view that if the petitioner sits in the ensuing test to be held in January, 1993 for being brought on `B-1' list, the result of the said examination may deemingly be taken as if the petitioner had taken the examination which was held in October 1992.
In case the petitioner is successful and is found higher in merit than the last candidate deputed for the course in pursuance of the examination held in October, 1992 from the district of the petitioner, then he would be deputed for the course now and if he is successful in the course he be given benefit of the same, as given to those candidates who had been deputed in pursuance of the examination held in October, 1992 I may make it clear that if the petitioner's merit is lower than the list candidate deputed for the course in pursuance of the October, 1992 examination, then his result will not be deemingly taken to be of the examination held in October, 1992.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
No costs.
Writ petition allowed.