Eswara Prasad, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is the President of Andhra Pradesh Urdu Academy, Hyderabad.
He was nominated as the President of the Board of Governors of the Urdu Academy by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, the first respondent, in GOMs.
No. 294, Education (SAM) Department, dated 16111990.
Orders regarding the term, remuneration and other perks to the President were to be issued separately.
Subsequently, by GO Rt.
No. 1915, Edn., dated 19121990, the perks of the President were fixed.
With regard to the term of Office of the petitioner, it was stated that orders of the Government will be issued separately.
By the impugned order dated 3131992 in GOMs.
No. 117, the term of Office of the petitioner was fixed as one year and the petitioner was directed to hand over the charge of the Office of President, as one year had already elapsed since he assumed Office as President.
2.
The petitioner impugns GOMs.
No. 117, dated 3131992 as a arbitrary and illegal and prays for consequential directions to the first respondent to continue the petitioner as President, till the expiry of three years from the date of his appointment on 16111990.
3.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the term of office of Board of Governors of the Urdu Academy, of which the petitioner is the President, is three years as per clause 4(2) of the Rules of Urdu Academy.
He contends that the term of the petitioner cannot be fixed as one year and that the Government is bound to continue the petitioner for a period of three years from the date of his nomination.
He further contended that the petitioner had a reasonable expectation of being continued in Office for the full term of three years and that the reduction of the period to one year is arbitrary, illegal and mala fide.
4.
The AP Urdu Academy is a society, registered under the Public Societies Registration Act.
It is managed by Board of Governors consisting of seven Officers of Government, who are ex officio Members and donors who donated Rs. 10,00,000/- or more and the President and Vice-President and thirty six others, to be nominated by the Government.
As per the constitution of the Board, it may be reconstituted once in every three years.
The Memorandum of Articles or the Rules and Bye-laws do not prescribe any term for such nominated persons.
On 1281985 by GOMs.
No. 381, the Board of Governors was nominated for a period of three years.
After the expiry of three years, the Board was not to be constituted.
The petitioner alone was nominated as the President of the Board by the order dated 16111990.
5.
The learned Advocate-General appearing for the first respondent contended that the Chief Minister of the State is the President of the Academy and he nominated the petitioner as his Nominee.
No term is fixed so far as the President is concerned.
As such the petitioner was nominated without fixing any term by the order dated 16111990.
There can be no claim for fixing three years term, as contended by the petitioner.
No material to show any mala fides on the part of the Government is placed before the Court.
The Government was within its rights in fixing the term of Office of the President as one year.
The rules and Bye-laws are not statutory and are not enforceable and that no principles of natural justice are violated.
6.
The first submission of Sri V Rajagopal Reddy is that the term of Office of the President is three years, as envisaged by Clause 4(2) of the Rules of Urdu Academy, cannot be accepted.
The relevant rules are as follows :  "Constitution of the Board of Governors :  (1) The First Board of Governors shall be as specified in the Memorandum of Association.
The First President, Vice-President, Member and nominated member of the Academy shall hold Office until the Board of Governors is reconstituted under Sub-Rule (2).
(2) At the expiration of three years from the date of registration of the Academy and thereafter at the expiration of every three years, the Board of Governors shall be reconstituted".
From a reading of the above rules, it is seen that under Sub-Rule 2, the Board of Governors has to be reconstituted after the expiration of every three years.
It only shows that the term of Office of the Board of Governors has to be reconstituted with the new Board of Governors, after the expiry of three years.
In the present case, the petitioner alone was appointed as President and no Board of Governors was reconstituted in the year 1988.
Clause 4(2) is not applicable in the case where the President alone is nominated.
The petitioner cannot claim any right to be nominated for a period of three years.
As rightly contended by the learned Advocate General, the Rules and Bye-laws of the Urdu Academy are not statutory and are not enforceable.
It is also not pertinent to note that the petitioner accepted nomination on 16111990 without the term of the Office being fixed.
He did not raise any contention that the term should have been fixed as three years.
The petitioner has full knowledge that the Government may fix any term it chooses by a subsequent order.
Even by the order dated 19121990, the petitioner was informed that an order fixing his term of Office will be issued separately.
Therefore the question of a reasonable expectation to be continued in Office for a period of three years, as contended by the learned Counsel, does not arise.
7.
Sir V Rajagopal Reddy referred to several decisions of the Supreme Court in SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan, AIR 1981 SC 136., Cantonment Board, dinapore v. Taramani Devi, AIR 1992 SC 61 Sumati p. Shere v. Union of India, 1989(2) SLP 422 (SC); Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of UP, 1990(6) SLR 1 (SC); Central Inland Water Transport Corpn.
v. Brojo Nath, 1986(2) SLR 345 (SC); Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 576 (SC); Delhi Transport Corpn.
v. DTC Mazdoor Congress, 1990(5) SLR 311 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
675(SC); M/s R.B.S.D.
Pd.
& PN Das v. Settlement Commn., (IT & WT), AIR 1989 SC 1038; R Jeevaratnam v. State of Madras, 1967 SLR 57 (SC) and contended that the order terminating the Office of the petitioner without notice is illegal.
The decisions in all the aforesaid cases were in respect of service matters.
The Office of the petitioner cannot be said to be an ordinary service under the State.
The Urdu Academy is a public body registered under the Public Societies Registration Act.
The petitioner is not an employee of the Academy.
The ratio of the said decision is not applicable in the case of the petitioner.
The learned Counsel also relied on a decision in Vice-Chancellor, OU v. Chancellor, AIR 1967 SC 1305 and contended that the term of Office of the petitioner cannot be reduced.
That was a case where an enactment was made reducing the term of Office of Vice-Chancellor.
The enactment was struck down as it was made for the purpose of unseating Dr. DS Reddy, whose term was earlier fixed.
In the present case the term of Office of the petitioner was not fixed by an order by which he was appointed.
The petitioner was informed that the term will be fixed later and the Government thought it fit to fix only one year as the term of Office.
As rightly contended by the learned Advocate-General, the Government reserved its right to fix the term of Office.
The petitioner accepted his nomination without reservation and cannot now be permitted to complain that the term should have been fixed at three years.
Petitioner's right to Office flows only from the order of nomination.
The fixing up of a term of Office is not a penalty.
There is no legal right for the petitioner to continue for a larger time than fixed by the impugned order.
The impugned order is not arbitrary and needs no interference.
No grounds attributing mala fides to the first respondent are made out.
The Writ Petition is liable to be dismissed.
8.
Under the impugned GO, the term of the Office of the petitioner was fixed as one year from 16111990, which expired on 15111991.
The impugned order was dated 3131992.
The petitioner continued to be the President after the expiration of one year and he is in Office till today by virtue of interim orders of this Court dated 341992.
The learned Advocate-General fairly stated that the petitioner will not be asked to refund the honorarium paid to him and to pay back the amounts covered by the other perks, enjoyed by the petitioner after the expiry of one year and the said statement is recorded.
9.
The Writ Petition is accordingly, dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.