NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 are working as Senior Compositors in the Government Press at Patiala, whereas petitioner No. 11 is working as a Senior Machine man.
Some of them have been working since the year 1957.
While others were employed later.
Admittedly, the petitioners were governed by the provisions of the Punjab Printing Subordinate Service Rules, 1943 (for short the 1943 Rules).
It is not disputed that the next promotional post is that of Assistant Section Holder which is filled up on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Persons like the petitioners were entitled to be promoted under the 1943 Rules and it was not necessary for them to possess the minimum educational qualification of being a matriculate.
The 1943 Rules were later repealed and were replaced by the Punjab Printing and Stationery Department (Class III) Industrial Service Rules, 1964 (hereinafter called the 1964 Rules).
Under these Rules, no person can be appointed/promoted to the post of Assistant Section Holder unless he is matric pass.
This is the requirement of Rule 8 of the 1964 Rules.
All the petitioners are under matric and are not eligible under the 1964 Rules to be promoted as Assistant Section Holders whether in the Composing Section or Binding Section.
Their sole grievance is that they have been working in the Printing Press at Patiala for the last more than three decades and have no promotional avenues open to them under the 1964 Rules.
It is submitted on their behalf that persons like them who were employed in the erstwhile State of Pepsu and after its merger with the then State of Punjab in the year 1956 were also denied the promotional opportunities on the ground that they did not possess the minimum qualification of matric which was required under the 1964 Rules.
The employees of the erstwhile State of Pepsu then filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4183 of 1971 in this court which was allowed on July 23, 1973 and it was held that their conditions of service could not be varied to their disadvantage as that violated the proviso to section 115(7) of the State Re-organisation Act, 1956.
The State of Punjab and other respondents were directed to consider the cases of the petitioners therein for promotion by ignoring altogether the provisions of the 1964 Rules which debarred them from promotion.
After the decision of this Court, the State of Punjab, as per its memo dated October, 1982 sent a communication to the Controller, Printing and Stationery Department Punjab Chandigarh (Annexure P3) with the writ petition) informing the latter that all officials who joined service before the promulgation of 1964 Rules, were covered by the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4183 of 1971 and the Controller was informed to take action to promote those officials in the light of that judgment.
Despite this communication, the case of the petitioners has not been considered for promotion and the only justification shown for this is the provisions in Rule 8 which requires the promotee to possess the minimum educational qualification of matric.
2.
It is not in controversy that the Senior Compositors and Senior Machine men like the petitioners who were employed by the erstwhile State of Pepsu and after its merger with the then State of Punjab in the year 1956 are working with the respondent State of Punjab and have been given the benefit of promotion ignoring altogether the bar of the 1964 Rules, whereas the petitioners who were employed by the State of Punjab after the merger of Pepsu but before the promulgation of the 1964 Rules are being denied the same, though they all form part of one cadre and are doing the same job.
This, on the fact of it, is discriminatory and violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
All officials, who were employed prior to the promulgation of the 1964 Rules, have to be considered for promotion and the State government itself took a decision to this effect and communicated the same to the Controller as per Annexure P-3.
It, is not understood why the Controller (respondent No. 3) has not taken necessary action in this regard.
Accordingly, I allow this writ petition and issue a mandamus to the respondent to consider the case for promotion of all the officials like the petitioners who were employed in the Department prior to the promulgation of the 1964 Rules.
They should all be considered on seniority-cum-merit basis from the dates when their juniors were promoted and promotion should not be denied to them on the ground of their not being matriculates.
However, if they are promoted, they will not be entitled to any arrears of pay and allowances as they have not worked against the promoted posts.
3.
Before parting with this judgment, I may mention that even the State counsel could not justify the stand of the respondents and conceded before me that the claim of the petitioners and others like them would have to be considered in the light of the decision of the Government conveyed to the Controller as per Annexure P-3 with the petitioner.
Instead of basing myself on the concession of the learned counsel, I have thought it appropriate to dispose of the matter on merits.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.