Parvatha Rao, J (Oral) - Earlier, when the respondents did not recognize the diploma of Music awarded by the Andhra University as the requisite qualification for appointment as Music Teacher, one Ch.
Vihayalaxmi approached this court by way of Writ Petition No. 1390 of 1990 pointing out that another candidate having a diploma in Music from the Andhra University was in fact appointed as Music Teacher by the respondents.
That was not disputed by the respondents in that Writ Petition and in view of that circumstances, MN Rao, J, allowed the said Writ Petition holding as follows :-  "Whether the diploma awarded by the Andhra University is an equivalent to the diploma awarded by the other Universities is a matter which cannot be gone into by this Court; this Court has neither the power nor the expertise to enquire into such questions.
Only a body comprising experts in the fields alone is capable of examining a question of this nature.
However, as regards the second contention urged by the petitioner namely that there has been a discrimination in her case, the petitioner must succeed and the Writ Petition must be allowed.
As already mentioned supra, the assertion of the petitioner that two other teachers selected by the first respondent as music teachers also possessed the same qualification like her, namely Diploma in Music awarded by the Andhra University, is admitted in the counter affidavit.
It is, therefore, clear that in the past the first respondent has considered the diploma awarded by the Andhra University as equivalent to the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement for admission to the post of music teachers."
2.
If diploma in music awarded by the Andhra University is considered as equivalent to the qualifications mentioned for appointment as Music Teacher, there is no good reason why a Degree of Music awarded by Andhra University cannot be treated as an equivalent qualification especially when the Andhra University has given an official clarification that BA Degree with music as main of that University is equivalent to the diploma in music of that University.
In the counter affidavit of the respondents no reason whatsoever is given for not treating BA Degree with music as main in Andhra University as equivalent to diploma in music or a degree in music.
I am satisfied that the respondents are taking an unreasonable and unsustainable stand in view of the clarification given by the University itself.
Order accordingly.