GC Garg, J - The petitioner herein seeks a direction to the respondents to permit him to avail a special chance to appear in the subject of Organon, and Philosophy of the Second Year of Diploma in Homoeopathy, Medicine and Surgery Examination (for short 'DHMS') under Regulation 11(vii) of the Homoeopathy (Diploma Course) Regulations, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Regulations') framed under Section 33 of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973.
2.
The petitioner is undergoing the DHMS Course, consisting of three examinations, the course being of the duration of three and a half years.
The petitioner appeared in the Second DHMS Examination in the year 1990 but got compartment in two subjects, namely, Materia Medica and Organon and Philosophy and was required to 're-appear' in those subjects.
The petitioner could clear the examination in the compartmental subjects within four chances as permissible under the Regulations.
Though the petitioner appeared in the supplementary exanimations, but he could not pass the examination in the subject of Organon and Philosophy within the four chances.
According to the petitioner, a candidate is entitled to one `special chance' under the provise to Regulation 11(vii) of the regulations.
3.
In order to understand the controversy, it is necessary to notice the proviso to Regulation 11(vii) of the regulations which reads :  "11.
Results and Re-admission to Examination -  Provided that if a student appearing for the third DHMS Hom.
examination has only one subject to pass at the end or prescribed chances, he shall be allowed to appear at the next examination in that particular subject and shall complete the examination within this special chance."
Though it is stated in the writ petition that in the meantime, the petitioner was promoted to Third DHMS Professional Course in the year 1991-92, he appeared in the said examination and his result for the Third Year Examination has not been declared so far, but his prayer in the instant petition is confined to the relief of granting a special chance to clear the compartmental subject of the Second DHMS Exammation.
The prayer of the petitioner has been stoutly opposed by the respondents by filing a written statement.
It is the specific stand of the respondents that there is no provision in the regulations to permit a candidate to avail special chance to clear the compartment subject of second DHMS Examination and the proviso to Regulation 11(vii) on which the petitioner is relying upon, is applicable to those candidates only, who appear in the third DHMS Examination and have only one subject to pass at the end of prescribed chances.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the relevant provisions of the regulations, I am of the view that the stand of the respondents is well-founded.
As noticed earlier, the petitioner got compartment in two subjects of the Second DHMS Examination and as per the regulations, he could clear the compartmental subjects within four chances, which he failed to do.
In order to pass the second DHMS Examination a candidate must pass in all subjects of the examination.
A bare perusal of proviso to Regulation 11(vii) leaves no manner of doubt that if a candidate fails to pass in all the subjects within the prescribed four chances, he shall be required to prosecute a further course of study in all the subjects of all parts of one year to the satisfaction of the head of the collage and appear for ecamination in all the subjects and that if the candidate has appeared in the Third DHMS Examination and has only one subject to pass at the end after availing all the prescribed four chances, he shall be allowed to appear at the next examination in that particular subject only and shall complete the examination with this special chance.
Therefore, it is clear that the concession in the shape of fifth special chance is available only to those who appear in the Third DHMS Examination and have only one subject to pass even after availing the prescribed four chances.
This special chance i.e. the fifth chance over and above the four prescribed chances cannot at all be granted to the petitioner who got compartment in the Second DHMS Examination and was required to re-appear and clear the compartmental subjects in four chances permissible under the regulations.
The petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to any relief as his case is not covered by the proviso to Regulation 11(vii) of the regulations.
The writ petition must fail on this score alone, but there is another aspect of the matter also.
5.
At the time of motion hearing, the petitioner was permitted by a Division Bench of this court to sit in the examination in the subject of Organon and Philosophy of Second year DHMS to be held on Feburary 29, 1992, subject to the decision of this writ petition.
However, it was directed that his result may not be declared.
Undisputedly, the petitioner did appear in the aforesaid examination.
During the course of arguments, I have been informed that the petitioner has passed the examination in the subject of Organon and Philosophy of the Secona DHMS Examination in which earlier he had failed even after availing the final chance.
Since the petitioner has now passed the compartmental subject for which he appeared in the examination of account of orders of this court, the interest of justice demands that his result for the Second DHMS Examination be declared, in which he appeared in Feburary, 1992 the direction for declaring the result of the petitioner is being issued keeping in view the equities of the matter and the specific order of the Motion Bench permitting him to appear in the examination to which he was otherwise legally not entitled to.
The writ petition is disposed of in the terms stated above.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Before parting with the order, it is specifically stated that the result of the petitioner has been ordered to be declared keeping in view, the facts of this case alone and this be not taken as a precedent for future.