JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Joint written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 15 in Court today, is taken on record.
The petitioners, who number 712 in the instant writ petition, were engaged as guest faculty teaching staff, so as to ensure, that the ongoing academic session does not conclude without adequate teaching faculty.
There are certain documents on the record of this case suggesting, that there was a shortage of approximately of 13000 teaching staff in government teaching institutions in the State of Haryana.
The Financial Commissioner-cum-Principal Secretary to Government of Haryana in the Department of Education, therefore, evolved guidelines to engage teachers as guest faculty in order to tide over the afore-stated short fall.
The aforesaid guidelines which appeared in the 'Dainik Bhaskar' dated 17.12.2005, have been placed on the record of this case as Annexure P-4, relevant part thereof is being extracted hereunder for facility of reference:-  "CRIETIA, PROCEDURE AND REMUNERATION You are directed to follow the following guidelines while making the engagement of teachers as guest facility: CRITERIA :-  1.
The Principal/Headmaster/DDO (in case of vacancy of Headmaster and Principal and also in case of Elementary Schools) of the concerned School are authorised to assess the short fall of Teachers keeping in view the sanctioned posts of teachers and the enrollment of students.
2.
The minimum prescribed periods for lecturers/Masters/C&V Teachers are 30, 36 and 39 respectively for one week.
If in any school the post of any subject is vacant or the demand of periods exceeds full workload as per the above norms then a Guest Faculty arrangement be made.
3.
That such offers will firstly be made to Retired Teachers who had received National/State Awards or who enjoyed an excellent reputation for knowledge in the subject.
If such good retired Teachers are not available, then the Head of the Institution will engage other Teaches on Guest Faculty having prescribed qualifications as applicable to regular teachers.
For this the powers are delegated to the level of Principal/Headmaster/DDO.
4.
The application should fulfil all the qualifications prescribed for the post as laid down in the Service Rules for direct recruitment.
This offer will be made only to those who possess superior qualifications to the minimum prescribed qualifications.
PROCEDURE :-  I.
The Head of institutions would engage teachers on Guest Faculty on the basis of vacancies and the workload.
II.
The Principal/Headmaster/DDO after assessing the requirement will display the requirement on a board displayed at the Main Gate of the Institution.
In case of schools having post of Principal or Headmaster vacant, the DDO/BEO would assess the requirement and will display the same on the board.
BEO will also assess the requirement of elementary school teachers.
III.
The applications should be submitted by the applicants offering their services for engaging the Guest Faculty for the specific period, from the date of engagement till 3132006 only.
IV.
The Principal/Headmaster/DDO will process all the applications received.
If the Principal/Headmaster/DDO receives applications more than the vacancies for that academic session, then he/she shall give preference to the applicants having higher academic merit.
While appointments in the guest faculty, the preference will be given to the candidate of that very village/area.
The merit list of such candidates would be prepared.
If the candidate of that concerned area is not available then the merit list of candidates of that division will be prepared.
IInd preference will be given to the candidates of that division.
IIIrd preference will be given to the candidates of that district.
V. As and when a regular appointee is posted to that school (whether, after regular direct recruitment or after promotion or after adjustment or after transfer) the Head of the Institution will dispense with the services of the person engaged on Guest Faculty of that category of post.
It is not an appointment but job work offer on period basis on prescribed rates.
This is with view to take case of studies of students where regular teachers are not available in the school.
REMUNERATION :-  The teachers engaged on guest faculty will be paid remuneration/honorarium as the detail below:-  Sr. No. Category Honorarium for guest faculty on period basis.
1.
Hindi/Sanskrit/Punjabi teachers Rs. 50/- per period 2.
PTI/Drawing Tr./JBT Rs. 45/- per period Rs. 225/- per day 3.
Master Rs. 55/- per day 4.
School Lecturers Rs. 80/- per period i) The payment of the persons engaged on guest faculty will be drawn against the budget of vacant post lying in the school.
ii) If the person engaged for the extra load without vacancy payment will be given from remedial coaching budget.
iii) This would be done in concurrence with the Finance Department.
Other guidelines:-  1.
No teachers be engaged in following categories.
i) PTI ii) DPE iii)Drawing teacher upto Middle Schools iv) Lect.
In Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Math, Commerce & Economics (As there are already surplus Lecturers in these categories.
2.
The guest faculty should be engaged on the basis of merit.
The pick and choose method should not be adopted.
The applications be called from all the eligible candidates upto 20122005.
The teachers should be engaged on the basis of requirement as per workload and vacancy.
3.
All the terms and conditions including mode of payment should be displayed on the main gate of the institution.
Transparency to be followed in this respect.
The details of periods taken by the teachers engaged as guest faculty be maintained in a regular.
4.
Such teachers should be engaged on the basis of agreement for a specific period indicating the periods to be allotted to the teachers.
5.
The guest faculty teacher will produce his monthly bill at the end of the month as per terms and conditions laid down in the agreement."
3.
Having perused the guidelines extracted above, and having heard learned counsel for the rival parties, we are satisfied, that the afore-stated criterion adopted for inducting the staff as guest faculty was purely a-political.
All the petitioners in the instant writ petition were engaged by the procedure depicted in the guidelines/criteria extracted above.
The petitioners were engaged during the month of December, 2005.
As per the criteria, their engagement can continue only upto 3132006, and not thereafter.
It is this aspect of the matter which has bothered the petitioners and has brought them to this Court.
They seek continuation in service till regular engagement is made by the State government through a regular process of selection.
This claim of the petitioners primarily emerges from the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Hargurpartap Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others (Civil Appeal No. 8745 of 2003, decided on 7112003).
4.
During the course of hearing, learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana, informed us, that a requisition has already been made to the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) to fill up all the vacancies in the different teaching cadres.
We are informed by the Financial Commissioner-cum-Principal Secretary to Government of Haryana in the Department of Education (who is present in Court in person), that approximately 9000 vacancies will be filled up in furtherance of the aforesaid requisition.
5.
The afore-stated arrangement to induct guest faculty came to be made on 17.12.2005 to overcome the short fall in the teaching cadres.
The guidelines/criteria, under reference, allow the newly engaged staff to continue till 3132006 i.e. till the end of the present academic session.
But we are informed by Mr. RS Gujral, that the next academic session shall commence on 10.4.2006.
The action, which was fairly taken to facilitate adequate teaching in schools which are short of sanctioned strength of the teaching cadre, can not now be withdrawn till a regular process of selection is made for just the same reason.
We are, therefore of the view, that the guest faculty to which the petitioners were engaged, shall be permitted to continue till regular recruitment is made.
A Division Bench of this Court arrived at the same conclusion, as has been recorded above, in Rajwinder Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others (Civil Writ Petition No. 7882 of 2004, decided on 1142005), after making a reference to the decision rendered by the Apex Court in Hargurpartap Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others (Civil Appeal No. 8745 of 2003, decided on 7112003), wherein it was held as under:-  "Leave granted.
The appellants in these cases were employed on ad hoc basis in several colleges in the State of Punjab.
There being a threat of termination of their services, they filed writ petitions before the High Court seeking for the relief of regularisation, minimum pay scale and to continue in their present posts until regular appointments are made.
All the reliefs were rejected by the High Court and so far as the relief relating to continue them in their present posts until regular incumbents are appointed, the High Court stated that the Government will have to follow its policy decision dated 23rd July, 2001.
We have carefully looked into the judgement of the High Court and other pleadings that have been put forth before this Court.
It is clear that though the appellants may not be entitled to regular appointment as such it cannot be said that they will not be entitled to the minimum of the pay scale nor that they should not be continued till regular incumbents are appointed.
The course adopted by the High Court is to displace one ad hoc arrangement by another ad hoc arrangement which is not at all appropriate for these persons who have gained experience which will be more beneficial and useful to the colleges concerned rather than to appoint persons afresh on ad hoc basis.
Therefore, we set aside the orders made by the High Court to the extent the same deny the claim of the appellants of minimum pay scale and continuation in service till regular incumbents are appointed.
We direct that they shall be continued in service till regular appointments are made on minimum of the pay scale.
The appeals shall stand allowed in part accordingly."
We also express our hope and desire, that the State Government shall expedite the process of regular recruitment, which has already commenced by the submission of a requisition to the Commission, which shall be completed at the earliest.
Till such time, as the process is completed, the guest faculty shall remain in place.
6.
Our afore-stated direction shall be subject to the condition, that there is still work available at the institutions where the guest faculty is engaged.
In case of less admissions in an institute, in the next academic session, it will not be essential for the respondents, to continue a person originally engaged for the institute.
Be that as it may, the services of one teacher shall not be dispensed with to accommodate another one by any kind of temporary arrangement.
7.
Our afore-stated direction shall also be subject to the right of the authorities to effect transfers, in case of administrative exigency, or in case personal and public reasons require so.
This exercise of transfer shall, however, not be used as a tool to dispense with the services of the guest faculty.
We acknowledge and respect the suggestion made by Mr. RS Gujral, that while making transfer of the regular faculty, it will be open to the department to displace members of the guest faculty.
However, such transfer will not result in the culmination of the services of any such employee.
While effecting transfers of the guest faculty, we expect and hope, that the respondents will follow the original criterion laid down by them i.e. they would accommodate the guest faculty at the nearest station possible.
8.
Needless to mention, that it will be open to the State Government to seek any further clarification, as it desires in individual matters, in case it becomes essential for the State Government to dispense with the services of the guest faculty for reasons other than the reasons expressed above.
9.
The petitioners are also aggrieved, because they are not being paid emoluments equal to the minimum wages being paid to the regular teaching faculty.
It is not possible for us to accept the instant prayer of the petitioners, as they have certainly no right to make the aforesaid claim, inasmuch as, their engagement is, by and large, without following any process of selection.
Furthermore, it would also not be possible to proceed against the guest faculty departmentally in case of a misconduct in view of the nature of their employment.
The Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh 1997(1) SLR 143, declined a similar claim for minimum wages raised at the hands of the daily wagers.
The aforesaid judgement was subsequently reaffirmed by the Apex Court in State of Orissa and others v. Balram Sahu and others, 2002(6) SLR 542, wherein again it was held, that daily wagers are not entitled to minimum pay of a regular employee.
Since the petitioners have been engaged to discharge duties only for limited periods in the day, and in some cases, for limited number of days, we are of the view, that their claim for wages at the minimum of the pay scale fixed for regular employees, is misconceived.
We, therefore, hereby, decline the instant prayer made by the petitioners.
Writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.