RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 401 of 1990, 10157 and 13309 of 1990.
Brief facts in each case may be noticed :  C.W.P.
No. 401 of 1991  2.
The father of the petitioner, Shri Bant Ram, was serving as a Driver in Punjab Roadways.
Unfortunately, Shri Bant Ram, while in service' expired on 6th August, 1987.
The petitioner is a Matriculate.
The Government of Punjab have been issuing instructions from time to time to alleviate, inter alia, sufferings of unfortunate families whose bread earner happens to the while in Government service.
One set of such instructions on the subject "Priority list for various categories of persons for employment in the State Service - Rehabilitation of Disabled ex-servicemen and widows/dependents of die deceased Government employees and Defence Services Personnel killed or disabled severely in action etc. etc.," was issued on 24th April, 1986, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The petitioner applied, under these instructions to be appointed to the post of Clerk.
Before the case of the petitioner could be decided for his appointment under the instructions, the petitioner was temporarily appointed as a Ticket Verifier with the Punjab Roadways with effect from 6th August, 1987.
He filed a writ petition in this Court (C.W.P.
No. 2532 of 1990) which was disposed of on 28th February, 1990, by passing the following order :-  "The petitioner is seeking regularisation of his service in view of Piara Singh's case 1988(40 S.L.R.
739, without any representation.
He may make representation to the authority, who will pass appropriate order on the same within six months' thereof.
Status quo regarding services to continue from the date of representation.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly."
The case of the petitioner for regularisation was considered in view of the above order, by the Respondents and vide order dated 18th July, 1990 (Annexure P-8), the petitioner was informed that since there was no regular vacant post of Ticket Verifier against which.
He could be adjusted and regularised, he could not be allowed to continue.
However, as and when sanction of any regular post from the Government is received his case will be considered on merits.
For the period already spent by him on the post as daily wager, he will be paid retrenchment compensation for the said period per the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Consequently, with effect from the said date, the petitioner's services were terminated as no longer required.
According to the petitioner, 54 posts of Ticket Verifiers were created in the State of Punjab for various Depots of the Punjab Roadways, but the petitioner was not regularised inspite of the order of the Respondent dated 18th July, 1990.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
C.W.P.
No. 10157 of 1990  3.
The petitioner's father Shri Ram Saroop, who was serving as an Inspector in Punjab Roadways, unfortunately died on 10th April, 1985, while in service.
The petitioner is a Matriculate.
He had moved an application for being appointed as a Clerk on compassionate grounds under the Government instructions referred to above.
Before his case could be decided for appointment as a Clerk, he was appointed as a Ticket Verifier by respondent No. 3 with effect from 10th August, 1987.
He had also filed a writ petition (C.W.P.
No. 2523 of 1990) in this Court, for regularising hi services and a similar order as in the case of petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 401 of 1991 was passed in his case.
Vide order of the Respondent dated 18th July, 1990 (Annexure P-6), the case of regularisation of the petitioner was rejected on identical grounds as in the case of petitioner-Devinder Kumar in C.W.P.
No. 401 of 1991.
This has led the petitioner to file the present Writ Petition.
C.W.P.
No. 13309 of 1990  4.
In this case, the petitioner was appointed as Ticket Verifier on 1st September, 1987 by Respondent No. 3.
He also filed a writ petition C.W.P.
No. 9265 of 1989), which was disposed of on 22nd February, 1990 by passing the following order :-  "As per paragraph 6 of the return filed on behalf of the respondents.
It is stated that the case of the petitioner for regularisation is under consideration.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner, however, wants that this consideration be made time bound.
We therefore, direct that the respondents would complete this process of consideration within a period of four months from today and dispose of the same by passing a speaking order in accordance with law.
Till the finalisation of the consideration status quo regarding service of the petitioner to continue.
Further, the petitioner's claim for regular pay scale would also be considered by the respondents in the light of the judgment in Randhir Singh v. The State of Haryana, 1988(2) SLR 156.
This petition stand disposed of as indicated above."
The respondents considered the case of the petitioner for regularisation and vide order dated 21st June, 1990 (Annexure P-30), rejected the claim of the petitioner in the same terms as in the case of the petitioners in the above said two writ petitions.
Consequently, the present writ petition was filed by the petitioner.
5.
The stand of the respondents in the written statement is that no doubt 54 posts of Ticket Verifiers were sanctioned in the Punjab Roadways, but the same have been filled by offering the said posts to those retrenched Ticket Verifiers who had completed 240 days.
Since they were similar retrenched Ticket Verifiers as the petitioners, but were retrenched earlier than the petitioners, the petitioner's turn did not come, as they were down below in the waiting list.
6.
As far as the first two writ petitions are concerned, i.e. CWP Nos. 401 of 1991 and 10157 of 1990, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in fact when the petitioners had been appointed as Ticket Verifiers, the other retrenched Ticket Verifiers were not offered the appointment, and, therefore, they had no right of consideration for appointment on regular basis against the newly created posts of Ticket Verifiers.
He further submitted that the petitioners in these two writ petitions were and are a category apart, inasmuch as their cases for regular appointment should have been considered under the Government instructions, by which the dependents of an employee who dies during the course of service are to be given preference.
These instructions had come up for consideration in Tarsem Kumar Sehgal v. The State of Punjab, 1986(3) SLR 774, in which it was held that these instructions confer a right on such a person, whose father or mother had died during the course of employment, for preferential treatment regarding appointment.
Similar was the view taken in Daya Krishan Bhardwaj v. The Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, 1989(5) SLR 153.
The Apex Court in Smt. Sushma Gosain v. Union of India, AIR 1989 SC 1976, observed as under :-  "It can be stated unequivocally that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress, it is improper to keep such case pending for years.
If there is no suitable post for appointment, supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant."
7.
When the claim of the petitioners was considered for regularisation, the same was rejected merely on the ground that there were some other retrenched Ticket Verifiers who had earlier been retrenched than the petitioners and they had, therefore, prior claim than the petitioners for regularisation.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioners are not qualified to hold the posts of Ticket Verifiers or their work and conduct was not satisfactory for being appointed on regular basis.
The case of the petitioners had to be considered as a category apart in view of the Government instructions for giving them appointments on compassionate grounds.
No doubt they hid applied for being appointed as Clerks but that did not debar the respondents to consider their cases for regular appointment as Ticket Verifiers.
To set the matter at the learned counsel for the petitioners stated that if the petitioners are appointed on regular basis as Ticket Verifiers, they would not claim any other post for regular appointment under the Government instructions for appointment on compassionate grounds.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, the first two writ petitions, i.e. CWP Nos. 401 of 1991 and 10157 of 1990 are allowed and the respondents are directed to consider and appoint the petitioners on regular basis as Ticket Verifiers.
The petitioners would be given appointments even if some additional posts are to be created.
Let these directions be carried out within one month of the receipt of the copy of the order.
9.
Now coming to the third writ petition, i.e. C.W.P.
No. 13309 of 1990, the petitioner had only a right for consideration for regular appointment.
If there were no retrenched employees above the petitioner only then the petitioner had a right for consideration for regular appointment under the Industrial Disputes Act.
It has been stated by the respondents that petitioner's name is at Serial No. 17 on the waiting list and as and when his turn comes, his case would be considered for regular appointment as Ticket Verifier.
That being so, I do not find any infirmity with the order of the respondents in not regularising the petitioner.
Consequently, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
10.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that the petitioners in the writ petitions, have averred that they were not paid some dues/wages before they were retrenched.
In para 9 of the reply of C.W.P.
No. 13309 of 1990, it has been stated that the case for making payment of salary has been sent to the respondent and that services of the petitioner had to be retrenched for want of posts after giving the benefit of Chapter 5-A of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In my view, the interest of justice would be amply met if the petitioners in all the writ petitions make a representation to that effect to the concerned Authority within one month from today, which shall be disposed of by the respondents within a period of three months after the receipt of any such representation from the petitioners.
I make no order as to costs.