Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This is the plaintiff-appellant's appeal.
His suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated January 24, 1984 terminating his services was null and void having been dismissed by the trial Court and the appeal having met the same fate, he has come up in this second appeal.
A facts may be noticed.
2.
The appellant was appointed as a mechanic in the Field Mechanical Division.
Thein Dam Project on work-charge basis w.e.f.
August 26, 1980.
On June 1, 1983, the workers including the appellant went on strike.
The strike continued upto August 18, 1983.
The appellant claims that he reported for duty on August 191983, but was not allowed to join.
It is further claimed that he sent a letter dated October 25, 1983 (Ex. P1) to the Superintendent Engineer, which was received and acknowledged by him vide Ex. P2.
In spite of that, his services have been terminated.
On these facts, it has been claimed that the order of termination is void ab initio.
3.
The claim as made by the appellant was controverted by the defendants-respondents.
It was inter alia asserted that various workers had not reported for duty after the strike had finished.
Accordingly a notice was given in nine newspapers on September 22, 1983 calling upon the absenting workers including the appellant to join service.
Since he did not come for duty even after the strike had finished, the Superintending Engineer issued a registered notice to the plaintiff-appellant to resume duty vide letter dated September 30, 1983.
This was followed by a second registered notice vide letter dated October 12, 1983.
When the appellant still did not report for duty, a registered letter dated January 24, 1984 was sent to him by which he was informed of his having abandoned his service.
4.
On these pleadings the following issues were framed :-  1) Whether the order of termination of the plaintiff dated 24.1.84 is illegal, null and void ?
OPP  2) Whether the plaintiff has willfully abandoned his services ?
If so to what effect ?
OPP  3) Whether the plaintiff is estopped by his act and conduct to file the present suit ?
OPP  4) Whether the defendants are entitled to special costs ?
If so to what amount ?
OPP  5) Relief.
The trial Court found that the order of termination of the services of plaintiff was legal.
Accordingly a finding was recorded against the appellant on Issue No.1.
Issue Nos. 2 & 3 were decided in favour of the defendants-respondents and against the appellant.
The claim as made by the defendants-respondents for the award of Special costs under section 35-A, CPC, was negatived by recording a finding against the defendants-respondents.
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff-appellant was dismissed.
Before the learned lower Appellate Court, the finding on issue No.1 was challenged.
It was held that he had abandoned duty and the relentless efforts made by the defendants to persuade the plaintiff to resume duty having failed, no relief could be given.
It also found that the claim of the appellant that he had sent a notice dated October 25, 1983 (Ex.P1) to the Superintending Engineer, defendant No.2, indicating his desire to resume duty and that he was not allowed to do so could not be sustained as the letter Ex.P1 was actually addressed to the President.
Thein Dam Construction Workers Union and not to the Superintending Engineer Aggrieved by the judgment and decree, the appellant has come up in the second appeal.
5.
I have heard Mr. RS Mittal, learned counsel for the appellant and Mrs. Chary Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General for the defendants-respondents.
Mr. Mittal contends that the finding recorded by the Courts below is vitiated as the appellant had in fact sent a letter (Ex.P1) to the Superintending Engineer and not the President of the Union.
It has been further contended that in the facts and the circumstances of the case, the appellant had been punished for absence from duty and this could not have been done without following the procedure prescribed under the Punishment and Appeal Rules as also Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
6.
The claim made on behalf of the appellant cannot be sustained.
A persual of the letter dated October 25, 1983 (Ex.P1) shows that the letter is actually addressed to the Superintending Engineer, Mechanical Circle.
This letter purports to have been signed by a number of persons including the plaintiff-appellant.
However, the letter was sent at the following address :-  "The President,  Thein Dam Workers, Union (Regd).
Gandhi Chowk, Pathankot."
Accordingly, it is apparent that the plea raised on behalf of the appellant is contrary to a plain reading of the document.
7.
Mr. Mittal then contended that a perusal of Ex.P2 shows that the letter had in fact been sent to the Superintending Engineer.
This document is the acknowledgement receipt of a registered letter.
It appears that some letter was received in the office of the Superintending Engineer.
However, from the receipt it cannot be inferred that it was a letter sent by the appellant and that he had offered to resume duty.
There is nothing on record to show that any letter other than Ex.P1 was sent by the appellant to the Superintending Engineer.
In this situation, the first contention raised by the learned counsel cannot be sustained.
8.
There is further evidence to indicate that the respondents had given notice to the appellant to resume duty.
The first letter is dated September 30, 1983.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Ex.D.2.
Another letter dated October 12, 1983 was also sent to the appellant.
A copy thereof has been produced as Ex.D.2.
When the appellant failed to report for duty, the defendants-respondents had no alternative, but to terminate his services.
A persual of these documents clearly shows that not only that a communications was sent to the plaintiff by registered post, but even a copy thereof was forwarded to the Labour Commissioner, Punjab, Chandigarh, Chief Purchase Officer, Thein Dam Project, Shahpur Kandi, where the petitioner was posted, the Conciliation Officer-cum-Labour Inspector, Batala, the Executive Engineer, Thein Dam and a spare copy was issued for being put on the notice board.
Consequently, all possible steps were taken by the respondents for enabling the appellant to join duty.
In this situation, inference drawn by the Courts below that the appellant had abandoned the job appears to be well founded.
9.
Mr. Mittal then contends that the order of termination is in fact one of punishment.
According to the learned counsel, this order could have been passed after the grant of a due and a reasonable opportunity.
No such opportunity having been granted learned counsel submits that the action is vitiated.
10.
I am unable to accept this contention.
The claim that petitioner has been punished is belied by the sequence of events.
The defendants made every possible effort to persuade the appellant to resume duty.
When the failed to do so, they had no alternative but to convey that the appellant had abandoned his services on the project of his own will and that his name had to be struck off from the Rolls.
This is not possible to infer that any order of punishment was either intended or actually passed.
11.
Further it is not even the case made out by the appellant that he actually had been punished.
Even when he appeared in the witness box as P.W.1.
he admitted that he "did not send any leave application during strike period.
It is correct that notice was received by me to join duty."
Once the receipt of notice to join duty is admitted and it is found that the appellant had actually failed to resume duty, no inference of punishment or even any intention to visit the appellant with penal consequences of any kind can be drawn.
Accordingly there is no merit in this appeal.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.