Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Petitioner was selected and appointed as an Excise and Taxation Officer vide orders dated March 20, 1989.
He claims that on the basis of his merit, he was entitled to be appointed to the Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch).
Having failed to get the requisite relief from the respondent, he has approached this court through the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as `the Commission') advertised certain vacancies in Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) and other allied Services in the year 1986.
An extract from this advertisement has been produced on record as Annexure P-1 posts in Haryana Civil Service had been advertised besides those of Excise and Taxation Officers, Assistant Registrar Cooperative Societies etc.
The petitioner competed.
It is averred that he was at Sr. No. 8 in order of merit amongst the General category candidates.
7 persons including one Mr. Anil Kumar were placed above the petitioner.
They were appointed to the Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch).
17 persons were offered appointment to the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers.
In this list of 17 persons, the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 1.
He was consequently appointed as an Excise and Taxation Officer.
A copy of the offer of appointment has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
3.
Out of the seven candidates who were appointed to the Haryana Civil Service, Mr. Anil Kumar did not join.
As a result, only six persons accepted the appointment.
The petitioner who claims that he was at Sr. No. 8 in the merit list, stakes his claim to the vacancy which had been originally offered to Mr. Anil Kumar.
His efforts to persuade the authorities to grant him appointment through various representations having failed, he has approached this Court.
4.
It is averred that the action of the respondent is contrary to the policy instructions and suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Resultantly, the petitioner claims that the respondent has violated the guarantee under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent-State of Haryana.
It has been inter alia averred that "no combined merit list was prepared by the Haryana Public Service Commission".
On the basis of the merit, 7 candidates were offered appointment to the posts in the Civil Service.
It has, however, been averred that the petitioner's name does not figure at Sr. No. 8.
The respondent further avers that the petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 1 in the list of Excise and Taxation Officers.
The respondent admits that Mr. Anil Kumar did not join his post in the H.C.S.
However, according to the respondent, this vacancy cannot be offered to the petitioner but in view of the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated January 11, 1962, it has to be "carried forward as an additional vacancy to the next year."
With regard to the precedents cited by the petitioner, it has been averred that the cases are distinguishable.
6.
The case had come up for hearing before me originally on September 3, 1992.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, Advocate had appeared for the respondent.
He was directed to produce the merit list as prepared by the Commission in pursuance to the examination held in November 1986.
The case was accordingly adjourned to September 14, 1992.
On the said date, a list of the names as recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission vide their letter dated May 4, 1988 in accordance with the option given by the candidates, was filed.
This is taken on record as Mark A".
In this list, the names of candidates recommended against the five categories of posts have been given.
First of all are the names of 10 persons recommended for appointment to the Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch).
In this list of 10 persons, the names of three persons at Sr. Nos. 8, 9 and 10 are of persons belonging to the categories of backward classes and scheduled castes.
Next is the list of 29 persons recommended for appointment to the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers.
In this list, the petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 1.
This is followed by the names of persons recommended for appointment to the posts of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers, District Food and Supplies Controllers and Block Development and Panchayat Officers.
A perusal of this list prima facie shows that the petitioner's name appears immediately after those of the 10 persons recommended for appointment to the Haryana Civil Service.
Mr Anil Kumar's name appears at Sr. No. 6 in this list.
He having not joined, in the normal course of events, the petitioner's name would have been in the first 10 for appointment to the Service.
7.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondent to contest this petition.
However, nothing has been produced either with the written statement or otherwise to show that the petitioner's claim that he was at Sr. No. 8 in the merit list of General category candidates is incorrect.
In any event, the list as produced by the respondent itself is indicating that if a combined merit list is prepared, the petitioner's name would have been amongst the first 11 and in the event of one of the candidates dropping out, he was likely to be appointed to the Haryana Civil Service.
8.
It has been suggested in the written statement that a vacancy cannot be offered to the next candidate but has to be carried forward.
Reference has been made to some instructions said to have been issued vide letter dated January 11, 1962.
However, a copy of such instructions has not been produced.
Furthermore, a perusal of the averments in the writ petition and more particularly the instructions issued by the State Government vide its letter dated May 26,1972, a copy of which has been produced by the petitioner along with the petition as Annexure P-4 shows that the State Government had taken a decision to the following effect :-  "2.
It may also be clarified in this connection that if a letter of appointment is issued to a candidate on the basis of the recommendations made by the Commission/Board against a vacancy which was intimated by the department to the Commission/Board and the candidate refuses to join the appointment, then, in such, a case, the time limit of six months will not be applicable and, in such a contingency, vacancy can be filled up even after the expiry of a period of six months from the five additional names referred to above or from the waiting list prepared by the Commission/Board.
3.
I am to request that, in future, action may be taken in accordance with the above instructions."
9.
A perusal of the above clearly shows that if a candidate refuses to join an appointment, the vacancy can be filled up from amongst the persons whose names are borne on the waiting list prepared by the Selection Board or the Commission.
Further, even the practice followed by the respondent appears to be in consonance with these instructions.
In paragraph 15(d) of the petition, the petitioner has referred to the cases of S/Shri DP Nagpal, Lal Singh, CP Singal, Lajveer Singh, KK Sharma and MS Malik to indicate that the relief as sought by him has been granted by the State Government in the past.
It has also been averred that in the case of Rohtas Singh Kharub v. State of Haryana, 1989(6) S.L.R.
45, this Court had given similar directions.
While filing the reply, the respondent has only averred that the case of DP Nagpal is distinguishable as in his case and that of Lal Singh, no re-allocation was made.
However, nothing has been stated with regard to the other instances quoted by the petitioner.
In such a situation, when no satisfactory explanation has be offered, it is difficult to reject the claim made on behalf of the petitioner that the action of the respondent suffers from the vice of discrimination and is, thus, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
10.
It is undoubtedly correct that selection does not confer an indefeasible right to be given an appointment.
However, it appears equally clear that the State cannot deny appointment to a person duly selected without a justifiable cause.
Nothing has been pointed out to justify the action of the respondent in denying the appointment to the petitioner to a post in the Haryana Civil Service.
The action appears to be prima facie arbitrary and unfair.
11.
In view of the above, the respondent is directed to ascertain the petitioner's actual position in the merit list of candidates belonging to the General category.
Unless it is found that there are some candidates above him in the combined merit list of candidates belonging to General category, the respondent shall consider him for appointment to a post in the Haryana Civil Service.
The needful shall be done expeditiously and in any case within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
12.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
Keeping in view the fact that no one has appeared on behalf of the respondent to contest this petition, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.