HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed the Higher Secondary Examination (Three Years Course) in the year 1972 from Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi with the following subjects :  1.
English, 2.
Hindi, 3.
Arithmetic and Domestic Science, 4.
History, 5.
Civics.
After having secured a Diploma in Education from Haryana School Education Department in August, 1987, she was sponsored by the Employment Exchange for recruitment to the post of JBT Teacher, and was actually appointment to the post vide Annexure P-1 dated 2111988 and had joined duties on 4111988.
Three weeks thereafter i.e. on 25111988, the appointment was cancelled vided Annexure P-3 and on her representation, she was informed vide Annexure P-6 dated 29121989 that her services had been terminated as she did not have the subject of Mathematics in the Secondary Examination held by the Delhi Board.
It was clarified that the subject of Arithmetic which she had admittedly passed was not considered equivalent to matric standard Mathematics in Haryana and as such she was not eligible for appointment.
The petitioner having failed to convince the department of her case has filed the present writ petition.
In the body of the writ petition, the petitioner has stated that the subject of Arithmatic was in fact equivalent to that of Mathematics, and that she could not be discriminated against, on account of the fact that a number of other JBT teachers detailed in para 14 of the petition and having similar qualifications had been given appointment.
It was also stated at the bar by the learned counsel for the petitioner on the basis of a letter dated 11111991 that she has since been appointed on a regular basis after having been selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board on the basis of the same qualifications for which the department had earlier found her to be ineligible.
It has been urged by Mr. Malik on this basis that if petitioner was eligible for appointment on a regular basis, although against temporary post, she was even more entitled to appointment on an hoc basis and as such the order Annexure P-3 was not sustainable.
Copy of the letter dated 11111991 has been put on record of the case.
2.
In reply, the respondent, have contradicted the stand of the petitioner and they have stated that the petitioner did not fulfil the educational qualification for the post she had applied for and as such was not entitled to appointment.
The reply given to paras 12 to 14 of the writ petition is remarkably vague and does not meet the case set out by the petitioner.
It has been asserted that equivalence of educational qualifications is a matter for experts in their field to determine, and this Court should refrain from opining on this matter.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I find that this petition deserves to succeed.
Although it is true that the petitioner has not passed the 9th/10th class with mathematics, yet in the facts of the case this may perhaps be unnecessary.
It is true that this court should not go into the question of equivalence of qualifications for the purpose of determining eligibility for appointment to a regular post, but I find that in the facts of this case, this exercise in fact is not required.
The petitioner was admittedly appointed on an ad hoc basis vide Annexure P-1 and on the same set of qualifications, she has been given regular appointment though on a temporary post vide letter of appointment dated 11111991.
3.
It has also been argued by Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner that the education authorities in the State of Haryana have themselves treated the examination held by the Central Board of Secondary Education which the petitioner had undergone as equivalent for admission to the higher classes in the State of Haryana and as such the equivalence must also enure for purposes of securing employment.
Mr. SK Monga, learned DAG has however controverted this stand.
I, however, feel that the matter is covered in favour of the petitioner by the ratio of a judgment of this court in C.W.P.
No. 14357 of 1990 decided on 13th February, 1991 that if a particular qualification has been recognised by the State as equivalent to another qualification for purposes of employment, then it must be treated as equivalent for purposes of securing admission to an educational institution.
The basis of this decision appears to be that equivalence once determined must be maintained for all purposes.
4.
For the reasons quoted above, the cancellation of the order of appointment Annexure P-3 is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondent-State to reinstate the petitioner with effect from the date she was appointed on an ad hoc basis with continuity of service, seniority and with all other consequential benefits.
It is however clarified that in the matter of payment of back wages, the petitioner will file an affidavit with the departmental authorities adverting to the fact as to whether she was employed elsewhere during the period after Annexure P-3 was made, and if the department finds that she was in fact employed no back wages would be paid.
All the benefits including the payment of back wages, if any, will be finalised and released within four months from today.
No costs.
Petition allowed.