Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein, a Tracer in the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board (hereinafter to be referred to as the Board), is aggrieved by the promotion of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Draftsman.
A few facts relevant for the decision of this case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Tracer on May 4, 1985.
Admittedly, respondent No. 2 was appointed as a Tracer about five years prior to him in the year 1980.
In the year 1991, a post of Assistant Draftsman fell vacant.
The petitioner entered his caveat by filing a representation dated July 13, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1.
Presumably, finding no merit in this representation, the department promoted respondent No. 2 vide order dated February 26, 1991.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P-2.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
During the pendency of this petition, the petitioner was given the current duty charge of the post of Assistant Draftsman, in the Architecture Branch, vide order dated May 14, 1991 (Annexure P-3).
Later on, he was transferred to the post of Assistant Draftsman in the Civil Branch vide order at Annexure P-5.
He challenges the validity of this order as well.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, in which the claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
It has been pointed out that the respondent No. 2 is far senior to the petitioner and that tracers working in the Architecture Branch or the Civil Branch hold inter changeable posts.
It has been averred that the post of Assistant Draftsman has to be filled up on the basis of joint seniority list according to the seniority-cum-merit.
Since respondent No. 2 was senior to the petitioner, there was no infirmity in the order dated February 26, 1991 by which the respondent No. 2 was promoted to the post of Assistant Draftsman.
4.
The conditions of service governing the members of the service in the Board are laid down in the rules called the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974 (hereinafter to be referred to as the Rules).
Rule 2 of it defines `Service' to mean "the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service".
According to rule 3, the service "shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix `A' to those rules".
However, nothing in the rules "shall effect the inherent right of the Board to add to or reduce the number of such posts or create new posts, with different designations either permanently or temporarily."
In rule 6, the appointing authority has been specified.
Rule 7 relates to the qualifications which a person has to possess before becoming eligible for appointment to the service.
Rule 12 deals with the determination of seniority inter se of the members of the service.
It is inter alia provided that the inter se seniority" of members of the Service shall be determined by the length of their continuous service on a post in the service.'
5.
Besides the above provisions of the rules there are appendices A and B.
In Appendix A the constitution of the service has been given.
The posts of Assistant Draftsman are mentioned it serial No. 48 while those of Tracers are mentioned at serial No. 46.
So far as Appendix A is concerned, it appears that neither the posts of Tracers nor the posts of Assistant Draftsmen are categorized as belonging to the Architecture or the Civil wings.
In pursuance to the provisions of Rules 7 and 10 which relate to the prescription of qualification and the manner of filling of posts, Appendix U has been framed.
The posts of Assistant Draftsmen are mentioned at serial Nos. 29 and 30.
The posts of Tracers are at serial No. 31.
It is pertinent to notice the entries at serial Nos. 29 and 30.
These read as under :  Serial No.
Designation of post.
Academic qualifications & experience if any for direct recruitment.
Academic qualifications & experience if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
Method of recruitment., 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
29.
Assistant Draftsman.
Diploma in Draftsmanship (Civil).
Diploma in draftsmanship or five years experience as tracer who has qualified the test prescribed by the Board.
i) by direct recruitment., or ii) by promotion from amongst the tracer., iii) by transfer or deputation.
30.
Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) State Board diploma in Architectural Assistantship.
State Board Diploma in Architectural assistantship or matriculate with five years experience as Tracer/Ferropr-inter i) By transfer or deputation, or ii) by direct recruitment, or iii) by promotion.
A perusal of the above shows that the posts of serial Nos. 29 are in the Civil wing while those at serial No. 30 are in the Architectural Branch.
For purposes of promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman on the Civil side, a `person is required to possess the qualification of Diploma in draftsmanship or 5 years' experience as Tracer and should have also qualified the test prescribed by the Board.
In case of posts relating to the Architectural wing, a diploma in Architectural Assistantship or a matriculate with five years' experience as Tracer/Ferroprinter is eligible for appointment by way of promotion.
6.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the qualification or experience as Tracer must be read to mean as experience in a particular branch.
On the other hand, Mr. BN Aggarwal, learned counsel for the respondents contends that the Tracers have one common seniority list and any Tracer who possesses 5 years of experience is eligible for promotion as an Assistant Draftsman on the Civil or the Architectural side.
7.
Mr. Aggarwal has conceded before me that the respondents are maintaining separate seniority list for Assistant Draftsmen (Civil) and Assistant Draftsmen (Architecture).
He also states on obtaining instructions from Mr. Rakesh Jain, who is present in Court, that the nature of duties performed by Assistant Draftsmen (Civil are vitally different from those performed by the Assistant Draftsmen (Architecture) while an Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) basically deals with preparation of drawings etc. the Assistant Draftsman (Civil) is charged with the responsibility of preparation of financial estimates and the actual execution of the construction work.
It is in the background of this factual position that the respective contention of the learned counsel for the parties have to be considered.
8.
Keeping in view the fact that the nature of duties of the Assistant Draftsmen in the two branches are different, it appears reasonable to assume that at the time of promotion, the Tracer should have the experience of the particular branch in which he is being considered for promotion.
To illustrate, a Tracer for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) must possess 5 years of experience in the Architecture Branch and similarly he must possess experience of 5 years on the Civil side for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
I cannot interpret the provisions of Appendix B to mean that a Tracer who has worked for 8 years in the Architecture Branch shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil) and another Tracer who has worked for 5 years in the Civil Branch would be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
This would make the working difficult and efficient performance of duties doubtful.
Accordingly, it appears that the requisite experience has to be in the particular branch.
9.
It is the admitted position that prior to the issue of order dated February 26, 1991 respondent No. 2 Prithi Singh was working as a Tracer in the Civil branch.
He had not been posted in the Architecture Branch even for a day.
Accordingly, in my view, he did not have 5 years of experience as a Tracer which could entitle him for promotion to Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
As such, his promotion vide order dated February 26, 1991 was wholly illegal and contrary to the rules.
10.
Mr. Aggarwal points out that vide order dated May 16, 1991 Mr. Prithi Singh had been transferred from the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) to the post on the civil side, and consequently, there is no infirmity in the appointment of respondent No. 2 which may call for any interference by this Court.
In this behalf, it is pertinent to notice the sequence of events.
11.
By an order dated May 14, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure-P.3, the petitioner was given the current duty charge of the post of Assistant Draftsman in Panchkula circle which was a post on the civil side.
Further, a condition was imposed that no additional remuneration shall be given till he clears the departmental examination, and that in case of failure, he current duty charge shall be withdrawn.
The petitioner did not accept this appointment.
Thereafter, the Board issued the order dated May 16, 1991 (Annexure P-4) by which the petitioner was posted in the Architecture Branch and respondent No. 2 was posted in the Civil branch.
About 6 months later, another order was passed on November 29, 1991 (Annexure P-5).
By this order, the petitioner was transferred from the Architecture branch to the Civil branch while respondent No. 2 was sent back to the Architecture branch.
It is thus apparent that respondent No. 2 is at the moment holding the post of Assistant Draftsman in the Architecture branch.
To date he has not 5 years of experience as Tracer in the Architecture branch.
Consequently, he is ineligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
Similarly, the petitioner is also not qualified for appointment to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
Still further, respondent No. 2 is also not eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil) because he has not qualified the test mentioned in Appendix B to the rules.
In fact, it is stated on behalf of the petitioner that respondent No. 2 had taken the test more than once and failed.
It has also been stated that persons junior to respondent No. 2 who had qualified the test had been promoted as Assistant Draftsmen (Civil) prior to him vide order dated March 31 1989.
12.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration and the provisions of the rules, it is held that the promotion of respondent No. 2 to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) was contrary to rules.
It is accordingly quashed.
The respondents are directed to fill up this post in accordance with the rules by promoting a person who fulfils the qualification of 5 years experience as Tracer in the branch concerned.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.