Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the three years General Nursing Course in February 1989.
She passed the first examination in October 1991.
Her request for permission to take the second examination commencing from April 7, 1992 having been declined by respondent No. 2, she has approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner has already completed the three-year training in February 1992.
Thereafter, no useful purpose would be served if she is made, to wait for a year after she had passed the first examination.
Accordingly, the learned.
counsel for the petitioner contends that it would be a waste of time and energy serving no useful purpose.
On the other hand, Mr. Sood, learned counsel for the respondents points out that the Syllabi and Regulations for the course have been laid down in accordance with the decision of the Indian Nursing Council, which consists of experts in nursing and midwifery.
The Regulation lays down a reasonable gap of one year between the first and second examinations.
It does not suffer from any arbitrariness.
Accordingly, the learned counsel submits that the claim of the petitioner deserves to be rejected.
3.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was eligible to take the first examination after a period of 11 months from her admission.
She actually appeared in the examination held in March 1990 but failed.
Two successive attempts thereafter in December 1990 and March 1991 also did not bear any fruit.
It was in the fourth attempt in October 1991 that the petitioner was able to pass the first examination.
It is in the light of this background that one has to consider the validity of the provision contained in clause (b) of the Regulation that there should be a gap of at least one year after the passing of the first examination.
The relevant regulation reads as under :-  "Examination :  Number and Types : There shall be two written examinations :-  a) the First Examination to be held after a period of not less than eleven months from the beginning of the course.
b) the second examination may be held after 2 years and nine months from the beginning of the course, and at least one year after passing the First Examination.
The Certificate should be granted only after completion of the remaining 3 months.
There shall be practical examination in Nursing for the Second Examination."
The above regulation has been laid down by the appropriate body.
Secondly, for a three years course, the Regulation only requires that there should be a gap of one year between the passing of the first examination and the right to appear in the second examination.
This gap is neither unreasonable nor arbitrary.
Thirdly, it does not result in any unreasonable loss of opportunity given to the candidate.
It only ensures the grant of reasonable time for preparation.
Fourthly, it is a uniform rule applicable to all candidates.
If a candidate is allowed to appear at any time, the result can be that some one can even want to appear in both the examinations at one time creating an anomalous situation for the appropriate authority.
4.
The writ court is normally reluctant to interfere in academic matters.
Courts are basically not equipped to judge the propriety either of the syllabus or the conduct of the examination.
The Courts do not enter into academic thickets.
These are matters for academicians.
5.
I find no infirmity in the action or the regulation.
The writ petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.