JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was working as a Lance Naik in the Army was awarded one year rigorous imprisonment and dismissed from service.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner submitted a petition under Sections 164(2) and 179 of Army Act, 1950 to the Chief of the Army Staff.
A copy of the petition.
dated November 4, 1991 has been produced a Annexure P- 9.
The petition having not been decided by the Chief of the Army Staff, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
It is urged on behalf of the petitioner that in fact the petitioner was never tried by Summary Court Martial and that the sentence awarded to him is totally contrary to the provisions of the Act and the rules.
3.
In paragraph 16 of the petition, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner has made a petition to the Chief of the Army Staff and after having waited for considerable time the petitioner sent a reminder on December 28, 1991.
Having received no reply, the petitioner claims that he has no alternative except to approach this Court.
4.
In reply, it has been averred that the representation of the petitioner was duly considered and he was granted remission of four months RI by Officiating G.O.C.
2 MIN Div.
5.
In the replication filed on behalf of the petitioner, it has been averred that the order of remission was never conveyed to the Jail authorities and as a result, the petitioner was released after he had completed the full sentence of one year as awarded to him.
6.
I have heard Major SS Johal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SK Pipat for the respondents.
7.
I do not wish to express any opinion on the merits of the controversy raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
It is, however, admitted by Mr. Pipat that there is nothing on the file to indicate that the Chief of the Army Staff has passed any order on the petition under Section 164(2) filed by the petitioner.
In this situation, I consider it appropriate to remit this matter to the Chief of the Army Staff for consideration and decision.
It is hoped that the Chief of the Army Staff would keep in view the fact that in spite of the order of remission, the petitioner had to undergo the full sentence of one year as the order of remission was probably not conveyed to the Jail authorities.
If on consideration of the petition, the Chief of the Army Staff/Competent authority accepts the petitioner's claim, the consequential reliefs flowing from that order shall follow.
The case shall be decided by the competent authority within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
8.
With the above observations, this petition is disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.