Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a tehsildar in the State of Haryana, challenges the notification dated March 9, 1992 by which the Government has laid down that a candidate to be eligible for appointment to H.C.S.
"should not have attained the age of more than 45 years as on 1st April, 1991."
The petitioner having crossed the age of 45 years claims that this notification is illegal and deserves to be quashed.
A few facts necessary for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
On December 20, 1990, the Government notified its intention to fill up 21 posts in the Haryana Civil Service (hereinafter referred to as `the Service') by special recruitment as envisaged under the proviso to Rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
In this notification, it was inter alia provided that a candidate should not have attained the age of more than 48 years.
The petitioner avers that the claims of all eligible persons were considered and the department of Revenue in the State of Haryana recommended his name to the Chief Secretary.
Thereafter, the Chief Secretary had forwarded his name to the Haryana Public Service Commission for the final selection.
It is averred that the petitioner, had actually been called for interview by the Haryana Public Service Commission vide its letter dated January 16, 1991 and that the petitioner was actually interviewed on January 28, 1991.
While this process was in progress, the petitioner avers that the Government has issued the notification dated March 9, 1992 by which the maximum age limit of 45 years has been prescribed.
As a result, the petitioner has become ineligible.
Consequently, he challenges this condition as being totally illegal and arbitrary.
It is averred that the impugned condition cannot apply to the vacancies which had arisen prior to March 9, 1992 and especially to those regarding which the process of selection had been initiated in pursuance to the notification dated December 20, 1990.
It is further claimed that this condition is arbitrary and therefore, deserves to be struck down.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the government has framed a new policy for making special recruitment to the Service.
According to this policy, a criteria of eligibility has been laid down.
This criteria, it is averred, is better and is aimed at ensuring recruitment of more meritorious officers to the service.
It is further averred that no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed.
It has been further pointed out that the earlier notification dated December 20, 1990 had been Withdrawn by the Government vide notification dated December 30, 1991.
This action of the State Government was challenged before this Court through C.W.P.
No. 565 of 1992.
The petition was dismissed on February 7, 1992.
On merits, it has been pointed out that due to acute shortage in the cadre, the State Government had to resort to special recruitment under the proviso to Rule 5.
It is further averred that the fixation of the criteria is in strict conformity with the rules and is, therefore, legal and valid.
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that out of the 30 posts which are sought to be filled up by special recruitment in pursuance of the impugned condition, 21 had arisen prior to December 20, 1990.
He contends that recruitment to those 21 posts has to be made in strict conformity with the criteria of eligibility laid down in the notification of December 20, 1990.
According to the learned counsel, the criteria of eligibility as prescribed in the notification dated March 9, 1992 in so far as a the age is concerned, would apply in regard to the 9 vacancies which have occurred after the issue of the notification dated December 20,1990.
He further contends that the reduction of the age limit from 48 years to 45 years is wholly arbitrary and has no rational relationship with the object of selecting the best persons for recruitment to the service.
This claim is controverted on behalf of the respondents.
5.
It is no doubt correct that vide notification dated December 20, 1990, the Government had decided to fill up 21 posts in the Haryana Civil Service by special recruitment.
It is also correct that the conditions of eligibility were laid down whereunder the petitioner was within the prescribed age limit of 48 years.
However, it is an admitted position that this notification has been withdrawn by the Government vide its notification dated December 30,1991.
Consequently, the entire process that took place in pursuance to the notification dated December 20, 1990 has been actually undone.
Since the very notification has been withdrawn, it does not appear reasonable to hold that the conditions of eligibility survive even after the repeal of the notification.
Still further, the mere fact that certain candidates had been interviewed, does not confer a vested right to be appointed to the Service.
With the cancellation of the notification of December 20,1990, everything that followed stands virtually scrapped.
As a result, no right whatsoever can be based on the said notification.
In any event, a Division Bench of this Court has already upheld the notification of December 30, 1991 by which the earlier notification had been withdrawn.
Accordingly, there is no scope for the argument that the conditions of eligibility as laid down in the said notification should still govern the recruitment.
6.
Even otherwise on principle, it does not appear to be correct to say that, even in the case of special recruitment, the conditions of eligibility as existing prior to the decision of the Government to make special recruitment shall govern the consideration of the claims of various candidates.
A special recruitment in the very nature of things is an exception to the normal method of direct recruitment or promotion.
As and when the Government decides to fill up the vacancies by special recruitment, it decides upon the sources as well as the conditions of eligibility.
Unless it is shown to be that these are violative of the Rules or otherwise arbitrary, the scope for interference is limited.
It is on March 9, 1992 that the Government had decided to fill up the 30 vacancies in the Haryana Civil Service by special recruitment.
It has laid down conditions of eligibility.
Persons, who fulfil those conditions of eligibility have a right to be considered.
Those like the petitioner, who are not eligible, cannot say that merely they were eligible earlier, they have a vested right to be considered even now.
Accordingly, I find no merit in the first contention raised.
by the learned counsel.
7.
Relying, on the judgments of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah v. J Sreenivasa Rao, 1983(1) SLR 789; P Ganeshwar Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1988(4) SLR 548 and P Mahendran v. The State of Kamataka, 1990(1) SLR 307, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the criteria as it existed in December, 1990 has to be applied to the 21 vacancies which were originally notified.
This aspect of the claim has been considered in an earlier case, viz. Renu Ahuja v. State of Punjab, 1992(4) S.L.R.
263.
Learned counsel for the petitioner very fairly concedes that in view of that judgment this contention cannot be sustained.
I order accordingly.
Consequently, the second contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is rejected.
8.
Is the criteria arbitrary ?
A perusal of the Rules shows that under Rule 7, which deals with selection of candidates for Register A-I, it has been inter alia provided, that unless otherwise provided a candidate should not have "attained the age of forty-five years; on or before...".
Similarly, under Rule 8 also, a similar provision for the selection of a candidate for Register-II exists in sub-clause (ii) of clause-2.
It is thus evident that under the statutory rules, it has been provided that normally a candidate above the age of 45 years shall not be eligible to be considered for appointment to the Haryana Civil Service.
Consequently, the stipulation in the impugned notification is in conformity with the provision in the statutory rules.
As such it cannot be said that the Government while taking an executive decision has violated the legislative policy or has adopted any unfair or arbitrary criteria.
Even otherwise, nothing has been brought on record to show that the prescribed age limit is grossly unfair or absolutely arbitrary.
By and large fixation of eligibility is the prerogative of the executive.
Unless a clear case of arbitrariness or abuse of power is made out, the Courts shall be slow to interfere.
No such case has been made out in the present case.
9.
Accordingly, I find no merit in petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.