Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were employed in the Printing and Stationery Department of the State of Haryana on different dates during the period from December 12, 1983 to April 1, 1986.
These appointments were made on daily-wages.
Their services were terminated on May 31, 1989.
Aggrieved by the action, they filed CWP No. 7606 of 1989 in this Court, which is still pending.
During the pendency of this petition, the department decided to fill up 15 posts, including those which were originally held by the petitioners, on regular basis.
The selection for these posts was sought to be confined to the persons sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioners claim that they are eligible and have a right to be considered.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the "regular appointment, in the subordinate cadre can only be made through the Employment Exchange.
Since the names of the petitioners are not sponsored by the Employment Exchange .... the petitioners cannot be considered."
3.
When the matter came up before the Motion' Bench, vide order dated January 22, 1992, it was directed that "the Selection Committee shall also interview all the petitioners but their result of the selection shall not be declared until further orders."
It is stated by the learned counsel for the parties that the petitioners have been actually interviewed.
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Jaswant Singh, for the respondents.
5.
It is no doubt correct that the Parliament has enacted the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
The purpose of this Act is to provide avenues for various categories of people to have their names registered so that whenever there is an appropriate job or vacancy, their claims may be considered.
It is also a method of providing the employer, which includes the Government, with a Forum from where a list of eligible persons can be procured.
However, the provisions of the Act cannot be read to mean that the choice of suitable candidates has to be confined to the persons whose names are registered with the Employment Exchange.
It is not unlikely that a person, though fully qualified, may not get his name registered with the Employment Exchange.
It is equally possible that a person may get a temporary employment after his name has been registered with the Employment Exchange which may result in deletion of his name from the list of persons registered with the appropriate authority.
In either event, the right of a person to compete for a public service cannot be curtailed or confined to only such persons as are registered with the Employment Exchange.
If an eligible person applies for a job, the employer is bound to consider his/her claim and cannot exclude such person from consideration only on the ground that he/she is not registered with the Employment Exchange or the name has not been sponsored by the said authority.
Such a course of action would be totally violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution,  6.
This is precisely what appears to have been done by the respondents.
Their action in doing so cannot be sustained.
However, since the petitioners have been interviewed in pursuance of the orders of this Court, it is directed that their result be announced and in case they have been found suitable by the Selection Committee, their claim for appointment be considered in accordance with the relevant criteria adopted by the appropriate authority.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order, In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.