GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has challenged the order of the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana, Chandigarh dated March 6, 1977 ordering stoppage of his next two annual grade increments with cumulative effect and the appellate order dated April 15, 1980 passed by the Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Facts first :  2.
Action under Section 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 (for short, 1952 Rules) on the basis of certain charges was contemplated against the petitioner.
The charge-sheet and the statement of allegations were served upon him vide Memorandura No. 4142-EI-28/64-71(I), dated May 18, 1973.
He filed reply to the charge-sheet.
On consideration of the reply, the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana opined that all charges except charges No. 1, 5 to 13 and 25 stood established against him.
He further opined that the charges, which stood established did not warrant imposition of major punishment.
He accordingly decided to impose minor punishment and issued a show cause notice, under rule 8 of the 1952 Rules.
On consideration of the petitioner's reply to the show cause notice, the Director of Public Instruction found that only charges No. 4 and 18 had not been explained satisfactorily.
After considering the petitioner's reply to the show cause notice under rule 8 of the 1952 Rules, the Direction of Public Instruction in his order dated March 6, 1977, observed thus :-  "In view of the facts stated above it is evident that Sh. Sadhu Ram has failed to rebut the aforesaid charges.
There is no substance in his explanation in the light of which he could be absolved of the responsibility for the irregularities committed by him.
The charges regarding irregular purchase of wooden material worth Rs. 345392 from unapproved sources and tampering of quotations stand proved against him.
In view of the nature of charges substantiated against him, I order the stoppage of his next two annual grade increments with cumulative effect."
Aggrieved against this decision, the petitioner filed appeal before the State Government.
The appellate authority, after giving personal hearing to the petitioner, dismissed the appeal vide order dated April 15, 1980, observing thus :-  "I have gone through the relevant record and have also heard the appellant on 15480.
At the time of personal hearing, the appellant stated that since he was new to the job, he might have committed certain irregularities.
I brought to his notice that one of the charges related to tampering with record.
He said that the records had not been tampered with at all.
When confronted with his reply to the charge-sheet, in which he had stated that the ITI might have done some mischief, he had no answer Thus, the appellant has failed to rebut the allegations levelled against him."
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted before me that the stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect is a major punishment and the same could be imposed after holding in regular enquiry.
The Director of Public Instruction did not hold a regular enquiry before imposing the punishment and the order stands vitiated.
He referred to the provisions of rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The submission is bereft of any merit.
Action against the petitioner was taken under rule 8 of the 1952 Rules and not rule 7 ibid.
Rules 7 and 8 of the 1952 Rules read thus :-  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850 no order of dismissal, removal or reduction shall be passed against a person to whom these rules are applicable, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.
(2) The grounds on which it is proposed to take such action shall be reduced to the form of a definite charge or charges which shall be communicated in writing to the person charged, and he shall be required within a reasonable time to state in writing whether he admits the truth of all, or any, of the charges, what explanation or defence, if any, he has to offer and whether he desires to be heard in person.
If he so desires, or if the authority empowered to dismiss, remove or reduce him so directs, an oral enquiry shall be held at which all evidence shall be heard as to such of the charges as are not admitted.
The person charged shall, subject to the conditions described in sub-rule (3), be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give evidence in person and to have such witnesses, called as he may wish, provided that the officer conducting -,he enquiry may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to call any witness.
The proceedings shall contain a sufficient record of the evidence and a statement of the findings and the grounds thereof  Provided that -  (a) it shall not be necessary to frame any additional charge when it is proposed to take action in respect of any statement or allegation made by the person charged, in the course of his defence;  (b) the provisions of the foregoing sub-rule shall not apply where a person is dismissed, or removed or reduced on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove him, or reduce him in rank is satisfied that, for some reason to be recorded by him in writing, it is not reasonably practical to give him an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him, or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person such an opportunity.
(c) If any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to give to any person an opportunity to defend himself under subrule (2), the decision thereon of the punishing authority shall be final.
(4) (a) Where any person has made a statement, on oath, in evidence before any Criminal or Civil Court, in any case in which the Government servant charged was a party and had full opportunity to cross- examine such person, and where it is intended to prove the same facts as deposed to by such person in such statement in any inquiry under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850, it shall not be necessary to call such person to give oral evidence in corroboration of that statement.
The certified copy of the statement previously made by him in any such case may be read as part of the evidence :  Provided that the officer conducting the inquiry may, in the interest of justice, order the production of such witness in person either for further examination or for further cross-examination by the person charged.
(b) The Government servant charged shall not be allowed, except at the discretion of the enquiring officer, to be exercised in the interest of justice, to call as a witness in his defence any person whose statement has already been recorded and whom he has had opportunity to cross-examine, or whose previous statement has been admitted in the manner herein provided.
(5) No person in the service of the Government, who is called upon to produce his defence as to charged which form the subject of any enquiry against him, shall be allowed to engage counsel :  Provided that if the charge or charges are likely to result in the dismissal of a person in the service of the Government, such person may, with the sanction of the enquiring officer, be represented by counsel  Provided further that if in an enquiry, counsel is engaged on behalf of any department of Government, the person against whom the charges are being enquired into, shall be entitled to engage counsel.
Any person compulsorily retired from service in accordance with the procedure prescribed by this rule will be granted, such compensation, person, gratuity, or Provident Fund benefits as would have been admissible to him had he been discharged from service due to the abolition of his post without any alternative suitable employment being provided, under the rules applicable to his service or post on the date of his retirement.
(6) After the enquiry against the Government servant has been completed, and after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed, the accused officer shall, if the penalty proposed is dismissal, removal or reduction in the rank be supplied with a copy of the report of the enquiring authority and be called upon to show cause within reasonable time, not ordinarily exceeding one month, against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted upon him.
Any representation submitted by the accused in this behalf shall be taken into consideration before final orders are passed.
8.
Without prejudice to the provisions of rule 7 no order under clauses (i), (ii), or (iv) of rule 4 shall be passed imposing a penalty on a Government servant, unless he has been given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make, and such representation has been taken into consideration :  Provided that this condition shall not apply in a case where an order based on facts has led to his conviction in a criminal court or an order has been passed superseding him for promotion to a higher post on the ground of his unfitness for that post on account of the existence of unsatisfactory record :  Provided further that the requirements of this rule may, for sufficient reason to be recorded in writing, be waived where it is not practicable to observe them and there they can be waived without injustice to the officer concerned."
4.
Rule 7 of the 1952 Rules deals with cases where the major punishment of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank is proposed to be imposed and sub-rule (6) of that rule specifically provides that in such a case after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed, the accused officer shall be supplied with a copy of the report of the enquiring authority and be called upon to show cause against the particular penalty to be inflicted on him.
The provisions of rule 7 are necessitated by the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Rule 8 does not contemplate anything more than an adequate opportunity of making a representation.
Under this rule, the only requirement is that the officer/ official concerned should be given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make, against the proposed penalty mentioned in rule 4 of the 1952 Rules.
Rule 8 does not require anything more than the allegations on the basis, of which the office/official concerned is charged should be made known to him and he should be given an opportunity to make any representation with regard to them.
He need not be told the punishment which is sought to be imposed on him either at the time the charge-sheet is served on him or at any other stage.
There is no question of his being given an opportunity a second time after the enquiry is completed in respect of the punishment sought to be imposed on him.
(See in this connection, the judgment of the apex Court in Shadi Lal Gupta v. State of Punjab, 1973(1) SLR 913).
5.
In the instant case, the action was contemplated under rule 7 of the 1952 Rues against the petitioner.
On consideration of his representation, the punishing authority did not proceed under that rule and opined that a minor punishment under rule 8 would meet the ends of justice and accordingly issued a show cause notice as to why the minor penalty be not imposed.
The petitioner filed representation and.
after considering the same., the punishment as stated above was inflicted on him.
The petitioner assailed the order of the punishing authority in appeal before the State Government.
The appellate authority disposed of the appeal after affording an opportunity.
of hearing to the petitioner as indicated above.
It cannot be even remotely suggested that the principles of natural justice were violated.
The action of the respondents is under the Rules and no fault can be found against it.
6.
The writ petition is bereft of any merit and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.