RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner in the present case has staked his claim to the entitlement to pension, which has been denied to him by the State Government.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case leading to the filing of the present writ petition are that the petitioner had served as a Lance Naik in the Indian Army.
He had joined the Indian Army prior to the partition of the Country on 31st January, 1943 and had served upto 15th October, 1948.
The petitioner was discharged from the Army because of the reduction in the strength of the Armed Forces.
Though the post was pensionable, yet the petitioner was not entitled to pension as he did not have the qualifying service.
Thereafter, the petitioner was appointed as a Foreman/Mechanic in the Bhakra Main Line, Patiala, under the control of the Punjab Government, on 3rd September, 1949 and served upto 6th July, 1956, when he was retrenched from the service of the Bhakra Main Line due to the completion of the work.
According to the averments made in the petition, the petitioner was again appointed as Mechanic in the Tubewell Civil Division, Malerkotla, against a permanent post on 6th January, 1957.
However, according to the written statement, the petitioner had joined as such on 3rd December, 1957.
The petitioner was further promoted as Chargeman with effect from 17th January, 1959 and Foreman with effect from 11th September, 1967 and Special Foreman with effect from 13th August, 1969.
He was retired from service as a Special Foreman on 31st October, 1977, on attaining the age of superannuation.
As observed inthe opening paragraph, the petitioner was denied the benefit of pension, which necessitated the filing of the present writ petition.
3.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner's service right from his induction in the Army since 1943 has to be reckoned for the purpose of pension.
For this reliance was placed on Rule 4.3(a) and Notes thereunder of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II (hereinafter called the Rules).
He has further submitted that the break in service from 6th July, 1956 to 3rd December, 1957 is liable to be condoned under Rule 423 of the Rules.
4.
Even if the break in service from 15th October, 1948 (when the petitioner was discharged from the Army) and his joining the civil service on 3rd September, 1949 is liable to be condoned under Rule 4.3(a) of the Rules, yet I find that the break in service from 6th July, 1956 to 3rd December, 1957 is not liable to be condoned under Rule 423 of the Rules.
Rule 423 of the Rules is in the following terms :  "423.
Interruption in service (either between two spells of permanent or temporary or between a spell of temporary serivce and permanent service or vice-versa), may be condoned, subject to the following conditions, namely : (1) The interruptions should have been caused by reasons beyond the control of Government employee concerned.
(2) Service preceding the interruption should not be less than five years' duration.
In cases where there are two or more interruptions, the total service, pensionary benefits in respect of which shall be lost if the interruptions are not condoned should not be less than five years.
(3) The interruption should not be of more than one year's duration.
In cases where there are two or more interruptions, the total period of all interruptions to be condoned should not exceed one year.
The period of interruption condoned shall not count as qualifying service."
It would be evident from Condition No. (3) of Rule 423 of the Rules that the interruption should not be more than one year duration.
In this case, the interruption between the period 6th May, 1956 and 3rd December, 1957 is more than one year, and, therefore, is not liable to be condoned, under Rule 423 of the Rules.
5.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the respondents were not right in ignoring the period of service of the petitioner which was rendered by him on work-charged basis before he was regularised.
According to him, hjis entire serivce from 3rd December, 1957, whether work-charged or regular, has to be reckoned for purposes of seeing the entitlement of pension.
In support of his contention, he cited a Full bench judgment of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(5) SLR 27 (Punjab and Haryana).
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that when the petitioner had retired, the service rendered by him on work-charged basis was not to be counted and it was only when Kesar Chand's case (supra) was decided that the service on work-charged basis came to be counted for the purpose of pension.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The law which was declared by this Court has to be made applicable to all persons who even might have retired prior to the date of the judgment.
No doubt, the petitioner has approached this Court belatedly, but in the circumstances of the case, I do not find that this delay is fatal to the case.
After all the petitioner had rendered more than 19 years' service with from 3rd December, 1957.
If under law the petitioner was entitled to pension by counting his work-charged service, there is no reason why he should be denied this right now.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed to the extent that the petitioner would be entitled to pensionary benefits by counting the entire service from 3rd December, 1957.
Let the pensionary benefits be calculated and released to the petitioner within six months from the receipt of this judgment.
I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
9.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that the petitioner claims the benefit of leave encashment also.
Let him apply in his behalf to the concerned Authority, who would consider such a represented and pass appropriate orders thereon within six months of the receipt of such a representation.
Petition allowed.