Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who was working as Field Assistant in the Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (hereinafter referred to as "the MARKFED") and has since retired from service, is aggrieved by the show cause notice dated July 30, 1991 (Annexure P.5) calling upon him to show cause as to why the amount of Rs. 5,17960 be not recovered from him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a Field Sub Inspector in the year 1969.
In the year 1977, he was posted at the Cooperative Marketing Society, Dhariwal.
In the month of April, he had made certain purchases of wheat.
On June 28, 1977, he was served with a show cause notice in which three allegations were levelled against him.
Thereafter a regular enquiry was held into the matter and by order dated May 29, 1982 passed by the Managing Director of MARKFED a penalty of stoppage of four increments with cumulate effect was imposed on him.
The petitioner filed a civil suit challenging this order.
Vide judgment dated November 8, 1986, the Civil Court found that the Managing Director was not the punishing authority of the petitioner and that the power actually vested under the provisions of Rule 215 in the Administrative Committee.
Accordingly, it was held that the order was illegal, null and void.
The suit was thus decreed.
Aggrieved by the judgment the MARKFED filed an appeal.
The appeal having failed, Regular Second Appeal No. 2376 of 1988 was filed in this Court.
The Second Appeal was also dismissed by a learned Single Judge vide his order of April 6, 1990.
After more than a year and about two months prior to the petitioner's retirement, a show cause notice dated July 30, 1991 was served on him.
This notice reads as under :-  "You were served with charge sheet dated 28677 (copy enclosed).
Because of the unsatisfactory reply, a departmental enquiry was got conducted.
(copy enclosed).
I have seen the Inquiry report and the connected papers and have come to the conclusion that you have caused a loss of Rs. 517960 to the Markfed.
You are issued this show cause notice to explain as to why this loss may not be made good from you.
Your reply if any should reach within 15 days otherwise it will be taken that you have nothing else to defend yourself."
The validity of this notice has been challenged through this petition.
3.
In response to the notice of motion issued by us, a short reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia mentioned that a detailed enquiry was conducted against the petitioner and the report of the Enquiry Officer dated March 17, 1981 has been produced as Annexure R.2.
It has been further averred that the order of punishment passed by the Managing Director was quashed on a limited ground of jurisdiction.
As the earlier order dated May 29, 1982 had been passed by an authority which lacked jurisdiction the competent authority viz the Additional Managing Director (to whom powers have been delegated) had now decided to issue the impugned notice to the petitioner.
A supplementary affidavit was also filed to show as to how the figure of Rs. 5,17960 had been arrived at.
4.
We have heard Mr. Sumeet Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Arun Nehra for the respondents.
A perusal of the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents shows that the present show cause notice is based on the Inquiry report, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R.2.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents that the proceedings had been initiated against the petitioner by the Managing Director only.
Even the Enquiry Officer had been appointed by the Managing Director.
According to the judgment of the Civil Court the Managing Director was not the punishing authority of the petitioner.
As such, in our view, he had no jurisdiction to even initiate the proceedings against the petitioner.
No Rule has been brought to our notice to show that the power to initiate proceedings had been specifically conferred on any authority other than the punishing authority.
As such, even the initiation of proceedings was without jurisdiction.
Consequently, the Inquiry Report was totally non est and no action on the basis thereof could be initiated against the petitioner.
The show cause notice given to the petitioner is solely based on material which is not legal and valid.
It is, as such, vitiated.
5.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The purchase of wheat was made in April, 1977.
The impugned show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on July 30, 1991.
He has since retired from service on September 30, 1991.
On account of the long lapse of time and the petitioner having already retired from service, we are of the considered opinion that it would not be in the interest of justice, equity and fair-play to permit the proceedings to go on.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned show cause notice is quashed.
The respondents are further directed to release all the retirement benefits due to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, the payment is not made within the stipulated period of three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to recover the arrears along with interest @ 15 per cent per annum from the date the benefits accrued till the date of payment.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.