KB Bhandari, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 12245 and 12757 of 1991 as common question of law is involved in these petitions.
For the purposes of order, facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 12245 of 1991.
2.
This is a writ petition claiming admission to MDS course.
It has been pleaded in the writ petition that according to the criterion laid down, admissions were to be regulated on the basis of marks obtained in the BDS.
The petitioner claims that he had obtained higher marks than some other candidates who have been admitted to MDS Subsequently, the government has changed the criterion and has ordered that admission be made on the basis of the merit prepared on the basis of the competitive examination.
I need not go into the greater details of the case as this case is squarely covered by the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 18403 of 1991 Dr. Mohamad Shabir and ors. v. State of Punjab and ors., 1992(3) SCT 41 (P&H) decided on April 9, 1992.
3.
According to the first advertisement the admission should have been made on the basis of the marks obtained in the BDS examination.
Admittedly, petitioners Lalit Kapur and Munisha Sahni have obtained higher marks in the BDS.
than the order two candidates namely Dr. Anuradha Rani and Dr. Sunil Sharma who have been admitted in the MDS Accordingly, the petitioner were entitled to be admitted to MDS on the basis of the marks obtained by them in the BDS.
After obtaining the application for admission and selection, the method of a decision (admission ?)
was arbitrarily changed.
This midstream change was considered arbitrary and unreasonable by the Division Bench of this Court in Dr. Mohamad Shabir's case (supra).
The Division Bench did not quash the entire selection but ordered that the petitioner before the bench should be admitted.
Following the ratio of the aforesaid Division Bench judgment, the present writ petition deserves to be allowed and the petitions should be admitted to the MDS Course.
4.
In addition I find that there is another point for consideration.
Admission on the basis of the BDS.
marks was to be made according to the provisions of Ordinance in Chapter 1(iii) of Part B (Miscellaneous Ordinances) in Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar, Volume II 1986, pages 404-405.
This Ordinance clearly lays down that admission to the MDS course will be regulated on the basis of the marks obtained in the BDS.
For bringing about any change in the criterion it was necessary to amend the Ordinance.
I called upon the Principal of the College to state on affidavit as to why the change in the Regulations have been made and which authority of the University has made changes in the Ordinance.
He has stated on affidavit that the changes were recommended by the Academic Council.
According to Section 21 of the Guru Nanak Dev University Act, 1969 the Ordinance can only be amended by the Senate.
Admittedly, the matter was not placed before the Senate and without the decision of the Senate the Ordinance could not be amended.
The recommendations of the Academic Council are of great value but they become an Ordinance only when the Senate of the University adopts them and notify the changes in the Ordinance.
As long as the ordinance is not changed in accordance with the law the admission is to be regulated on the basis of the criterion laid down in the Ordinance i.e. on the basis of the marks obtained in the BDS.
According to the position placed before the Court, the Ordinance has not been amended in accordance with law.
In this view of the matter also writ petition deserves to be allowed.
5.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to admit the petitioners immediately in the MDS Course.
They will be allowed to pursue their studies and will not be debarred from appearing in the examination merely because their lectures are short.
The University will condone this shortage in the lectures and allow the petitioners to sit in the examination.
6.
Civil Misc. No. 3665 of 1992 moved by Arun Bhardwaj has also been moved by the applicant stating that he has obtained higher marks in the BDS.
examination.
He is also entitled to admission in the MDS examination.
I order accordingly.
7.
I had provisionally allowed admission to Vikas Jindal as he had obtained higher marks in the BDS.
than the writ petitioner.
The Civil Misc. application 3260/92 moved by Shri Vikas Jindal is also allowed and it is ordered that his admission should be regularised.
It is further clarified that the candidates referred to above should be admitted by the respondents even if additional seats are to be created.
8.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed, with no order as to costs, to the extent indicated above.
Petition allowed.