HS Bedi, J - The petitioners, 7 in number, were originally appointed as Class IV employees, in the Punjab Education Department.
The department itself finding that there were no promotional avenues for Class IV employees to Class III posts of Clerks issued the instructions Annexure P-1 that 10% of the posts of Clerks would be filled in from Class IV employees provided they fulfilled the minimum prescribed qualification.
The petitioners who were admittedly matriculates having passed the said examination in the third division were promoted to the post of Clerks on temporary basis on the dates mentioned below :-  Sr.No.
Name Date of Appoint.
as Class IV employees Date of appointment as clerks 1.
Mohan Lal 10.9.65 12.9.70.
2.
Manohar Lal 12.4.70 1.1.75.
3.
Vijay Kumar 12.2.74 18.4.77.
4.
Sharn Singh 18.12.68 22.3.77, 5.
Parma Nand - 18173.
6.
Madan Lal 9.11.72 6.12.73.
7.
Hari Om 28.12.72 6.2.75.
It will be apparent from the reading of the afore-quoted table that all the employees have not put in more than 15 years service as Clerks.
It has been also pointed out by Mr. RK Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner that this clients mentioned at Serial Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 6 have had their service regularised in the category of Clerks whereas the other petitioners continue on their posts on a temporary basis.
The only prayer made by the petitioners in this writ petition filed as back as 1980 is that their service should also be regularised as Clerks from the date it is due to them.
2.
The stand of the respondents is that the petitioners are not entitled to promotion on a regular basis as they had not passed the matriculation examination in the 1st or 2nd Division as required by the Punjab Education Department (Subordinate Offices) Clerical Services Rules, 1941.
3.
It appears that during the course of motion hearing of the case, the petitioner Mohan Lal filed an additional affidavit in which it was averred that various persons named therein had also been appointed clerks on regular basis although they had not passed the matriculation examination in the 1st or IInd Division.
In the reply the affidavit filed by Smt. K Bhola, District Education Officer, Ferozepur on 841980, it was stated by way of justification in para 2 as under :-  "The plea taken by the petitioners is not correct as all the six persons mentioned in para No. 2 were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for appointment as Clerks.
Cases mentioned at Serial No. 1 and 4 are not now in this District.
In case of Serial No. 2 relaxation has already been given vide DPI Punjab, Chandigarh Memo.
No. 9001-2/15-66, dated 771966 (Annexure R-1).
In case of Serial No. 3 relaxation has been given due to being a member of retrenched staff.
A copy of letter dated 301165 is annexed as Annexure R.2.
Case of serial No. 5 is Matric II Class and not of III Class as stated in the writ.
Record of Serial No. 6 is not readily available in this office.
A copy of letter dated 25566 annexed as Annexure R-3."
From this reply, it is apparent that the department itself even while making direct recruitment to the post of Clerk on regular basis though the Subordinate Services Selection Board had not treated the requirement of Ist or 2nd Class in Matric as an essential qualification despite the statutory requirement to that effect.
It is also clear that the benefit of regularisation has been given in the number of cases by the DPI himself, to those who did not fulfil this requirement, I am of the view that the department having made direct recruitment without insisting on a Ist of 2nd Division in the Matriculation examination, cannot deny the benefit of regularisation of service of the petitioners who had as already mentioned, put in more than 15 years of service.
Moreover as already mentioned above, the services of some of the petitioners have already been regularised though allegedly from an incorrect date although they admittedly do not have the 1st or 2nd Division in the matriculation examination.
4.
There is yet another reason whereby I feel that the claim of the petitioners is fully justified.
It has been pointed out by the Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 Supreme Court 371 that long years of service put in by employee entitles him to the benefit of regular service and confirmation as the experience on the job is perhaps the highest qualification.
It has also been held that the initial minimum educational qualification must be insisted upon at the initial stage but should not act as in impediment to future promotion or regularisation of service of an adequate number of years of service have been gained by the employee.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed and direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the service of petitioners from the date they became entitled to it without insisting on the requirement that they must hold a Ist or 2nd Division in the matriculation examination.
It is clarified that the case of petitioner Nos. 2, 4 and 6 have already been regularised will also be reconsidered and if entitled to regularisation from an earlier date, they too must also be given this benefit.
The entire service would be completed by the respondents within six months from today and all consequential benefits should also be given to the petitioners within six months thereafter.
No costs.
Petition allowed.