Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can a person who has already retired on attaining the age of superannuation be dismissed or removed under Section 19 of the Army Act, 1950 ?
The petitioner who was a Major in the Army says that after his superannuation, the relationship of employer and employee does not subsist.
He cannot thus be dismissed or removed.
The respondents says that the proceedings were pending against the petitioner.
Final order could not be passed on account of the interim orders passed by this Court.
As a result, it is claimed that the petitioner has not "duly retired".
Consequently, it is urged on behalf of the respondents that the proceedings should be allowed to continue.
2.
A brief resume of facts would suffice.
The petitioner was posted as Garrison Engineer, Jaipur on May 4, 1979.
He held this charge till December 11, 1981.
During this period, certain defects were noticed in one of the work executed under his supervision.
Vide orders, dated December 2, 1980 he was administered a warning for the alleged negligence.
Warning was also given to him verbally by Brig.
NS Surrey.
Thereafter, in pursuance to the summary of evidence etc. and the fact that the limitation for disciplinary action as postulated under Section 122 of the Army Act, 1950 had elapsed, departmental action was ordered to be taken against the petitioner vide orders dated January 22, 1987.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P13 with the writ petition.
The petitioner filed the writ petition challenging this action on various grounds, namely, that no proceedings could be maintained against the petitioner after the lapse of there years; the petitioner having been administered a warning the contemplated action suffered from the vice of double jeopardy; that the charges against the petitioner had already been dismissed by the competent authority; and that no action having been taken against the persons junior as well as senior to the petitioner, singling him out for administrative action was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
The writ petition was admitted on November 17, 1987.
Vide letter dated December 10, 1987 the petitioner was served with a copy of the show cause notice dated August 13, 1987 calling upon him to show cause as to why his services be not terminated under Section 19 of the Army Act, 19550 read with Rule 14.
The petitioner moved Civil Misc.
Petition No. 77 of 1988.
On January 6, 1988 passing of the final order was stayed.
Vide orders dated April 20, 1988 the interim order dated January 6, 1988 was made absolute.
CM Petition No. 16372 of 1988 filed on behalf of the respondents for vacation of the stay order was declined by this Court on January 9, 1989.
Consequently, no further action in pursuance to the order at Annexure P13 and the show cause notice issued vide letter dated December 10, 1987 was taken against the petitioner.
Mr. RS Radhawa, learned counsel states that the petitioner attained the age of superannuation and retired from the army on December 31, 1990.
He consequently submits that besides that grounds raised by him in the writ petition, as also at the hearing of the case, no action in pursuance to the orders at Annexure P13 and P.14 can be taken against the petitioner at this stage.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. HS Giani relying on the submissions made in the written statement states that the action initiated by the respondents was absolutely legal and valid.
He further submits that an officer continues to be subject to the Army Act till he is duly retired.
The learned counsel submits, that the authorities could not pass the final order on account of the interim directions given by this Court and as such the relief claimed in the writ petition deserves to be declined.
5.
A reference to the relevant provisions is necessary.
These are extracted below :-  "Section 2.
Persons subject to this Act.
-  1.
The following persons shall be subject this Act wherever they may be, namely :-  (a) officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers of the regular Army; (b) persons enrolled under this Act; (c) persons belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces; (d) persons belonging to the India Supplementary Reserve Forces when called out for service or when carrying out the annual test; (e) officers of the Territorial Army, when join duty as such officers, and enrolled persons of the said Army when called out or embodied or attached to any regular forces, subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be made in the application of this Act to such persons under sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (LVI of 1948); (f) persons holding commissions in the Army in India Reserve of Officers, when ordered on any duty or service for which they are liable as members of such reserve forces; (g) officers appointed to the Indian Regular Reserve of Officers, when ordered on any duty or service for which they are liable as members of such Reserve forces; 2.
Every person subject to this Act under clauses (a) to (g), sub-section (1) shall remain so subject until duty retired, discharged, released, removed, dismissed or cashiered from the service."
Section 19 of the Army Act reads as under :-  "Section 19.
Termination of service by Central Government.
-  Subject to the provisions of this Act and rules and regulations made thereunder the Central Government may dismiss, or remove from service, any person subject to this Act."
Rule 14 to which reference has been made in the impugned orders only prescribes the procedure which has to be followed before an order can be passed under Section 19.
6.
The short question that arises is as to whether or not a person who has retired on attaining the age of superannuation can be dismissed or removed from service under Section 19.
7.
The expression "dismissed" or "removed" has not been defined under the Act.
Inevitably one has to resort to the ordinary meaning assigned to these words.
According to Websters 3rd New International Dictionary dismissal means "to send or remove from employment, enrollment, position or office."
It has been described as synonymous to "discharge, cashier, drop, sack, fire or bounce".
Similar, is the meaning assigned to the word "removed".
Consequently, a person can be dismissed or removed only if he is in employment.
A person, who has retired after serving the requisite tenure or attaining the age of superannuation, ceases to be in employment.
Such a person in my view has "duly retired" and cannot be dismissed or removed from service.
8.
Even otherwise, I find that the alleged lapses relate to the year 1979-80.
The petitioner was duly warned in writing, vide Annexure P4.
Even a verbal warning was given to the petitioner by Brig.
NS Surrey as mentioned in his letter dated May 20, 1985 (Annexure P.10).
No action is being taken against persons who were senior or junior to the petitioner.
On account of the pendency of the case for a long time, the petitioner was not even promoted in spite of his having been found suitable by the Selection Board.
No case for continuance of the proposed action has been made out.
Now even a long period of 11 years has passed.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am of the view that it would be unfair and inequitable to allow the proceedings to continue.
I accordingly hold that no action in pursuance to the orders at Annexure P13 and the show cause notice issued vide letter dated December 10, 1987 can be taken against the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.