Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as Lecturer in English at the DAV College, Hoshiarpur, vide order dated August 12, 1986.
This appointment was initially against a leave vacancy.
She continued working in the College and vide dated December 27, 1989, she was appointed "permanent on probation".
The Director, Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab, on a reference from the principal of the College, wrote to the College vide letter dated 26th March, 1990 (copy annexure P.8), observing that Miss Pooja Sood does not fulfil the required qualifications."
Vide letter dated 4th April, 1990 (annexure P.9), the Principal of the College informed the Director of Public Instruction that the Panjab University, Chandigarh, had approved the petitioner's appointment as Lecturer in English and requested him to review the decision.
When nothing was heard in reply, the College terminated the petitioner's service vide order dated May 1, 1990 (annexure P10).
Thereafter the Director Public Instructions made a query from the principal of the College as to why the case for approval was sent in April, 1990, when the petitioner had been actually appointed in 1986-87.
Accordingly, it was observed that no action be taken of the time being on the letter dated 26.3.90.
As the petitioner's services were terminated in the meantime and no reply was received in response to her representation, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
Two separate written statement have been filed.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Director Public Instruction, it has only been averred that "the answering respondent has nothing to do with the matter as the College is a DAV Institute and has filed a writ in the Supreme Court and Hon'ble Court has stayed the application of grant-in-aid rules regarding approval of lecturers till the pendency of the case."
In the written statement filed on behalf of the DAV College, detailed sequence of events has been given.
However, at the hearing, Mr. SS Kang, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for the Director Public Instructions has stated before me that the Department has not disapproved the appointment of the petitioner.
Only advice has been given to the College.
Mr. Kang, in fact, points out that the Director Public Instruction had, in fact, desired the College not to take any action on the communication dated 26th March, 1990.
On behalf of the College, Mr. Tewari states that the petitioner's work and conduct was satisfactory and that the College would not have terminated her services but for the fact that letter dated March 26, 1990 had been received from the Director Public Instruction.
He, however, points out that during the pendency of the writ petition, in order to continue with the working of the College, an appointment against the post, which was originally held by the petitioner, has been made.
3.
So far as appointment made during the pendency of this writ petition is concerned, it poses no problem as vide order dated September 17, 1990, the Motion Bench, while admitting the petition, had observed that "if any appointment is made during the pendency of the writ petition, the same shall be subject to the decision of the writ petition."
In view of this, the order of appointment, if any made by the DAV College, has to abide by the final decision in his case.
4.
On merits he undisputed position is that the petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in English on August 12, 1986.
She, admittedly, fulfilled the qualifications prescribed for the post at that time.
Thereafter the College had terminated her services only on account of letter dated March 26, 1990 from the Director Public Instruction.
The Director himself had desired the Principal of the DAV College not to take any action on the letter dated March 26, 1990, vide letter dated May 11, 1990.
It is also clear that even now the Director Public Instruction is not insisting on the implementing of this letter.
It is also clear from the record that principal, DAV College, Hoshiarpur, vide letter dated June 12, 1990 wrote to the Director of Public Instruction (Colleges) that keeping in view the satisfactory work of Miss Pooja Sood and her contribution to College activities since 1986, the Managing Committee adjusted her against the said permanent vacancy with effect from December 27, 1989" and that "Miss Pooja Sood is working in our College as an efficient Lecturer for the last four years and University has been sending her approval from time to time."
On this basis of College requested the Director to "consider her case sympathetically, and grant her approval at the earliest".
In this situation, there was no justification for the termination of the petitioner's service.
5.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the order dated March 26, 1990 (Annexure P.8) and order dated May 1, 1990 (annexure P-10) are set aside.
It is the admitted position that the College has appointed some other Teacher, who must have been paid by the DAV College.
In view of this position, Mr. Sarwan Singh, Advocate, learned Counsel for the petitioner, has made a categorical statement before me that the petitioner shall not claim any arrears of salary for the period during which she remained out of employment from the respondent-College.
I order accordingly.
It is, however, clarified that in all other respects, her service will be treated to be continuous, as if the order of termination had not intervened.
No costs.
Order accordingly.