MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioners have approached this Court for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Union Territory of Chandigarh and the Director Principal of Chandigarh Medical College, to admit the petitioners to the first year of MBBS Course in the session commencing 1991 as per their merit in the waiting list against the seats which had been kept vacant by the respondents for accommodating the candidates to be sent by the Government of India on the basis of All India Entrance Examination conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education.
The principal submission of Mr. Rameshwar Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that the Chandigarh Medical College being in its infancy, that is, having been established in June/July, 1991, has not even been recognised by the Medical Council of India and as such, it is not obliged to earmark 15 per cent seats to accommodate the candidates sent by the Government of India on the basis of All India Entrance Examination conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education.
2.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondents have pleaded that 15 per cent seats in the Chandigarh Medical College have been earmarked in compliance with the judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court and, in fact, those seats have since been filled.
Not only that, the candidates who have been so admitted have since deposited their fees and started their studies.
3.
In the above situation, we do not find any infirmity in the stand taken by respondents.
However, it has been stated by the learned counsel for the petitioners that during pendency of the writ petition, petitioner No. 3 Jitender Pal, had been granted admission in the Government Medical College, Faridkot, but some difficulty is being experienced by him, as probably there is no seat for him there at present.
We are sure, the respondents shall certainly look into the matter and redress the grievance of the petitioner expeditiously.
With these observations, we dispose of this petition.
Petition disposed of.