Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This is an application for the review of the order dated July 16, 1991 by which I had allowed CWP No. 2177 of 1987.
At the hearing of the writ petition, no one had appeared on behalf of the respondent-applicant.
An effort has been made to justify the absence of the learned counsel.
Without going into that controversy, I have heard Mr. MS Jain, learned counsel for the applicant on merits of the case.
He has submitted that even though no enquiry had been held into the charge before passing the order of termination, but on the submission of an appeal by the workman, the Superintending Engineer had enquired into the matter.
He has sought to produce the original file in support of this contention.
2.
The Labour Court, while considering this matter, had inter alia, observed as under :  "At the outset it is pointed out that respondent has not been able to prove any enquiry against Mata Din since on the file proceedings of Enquiry and report if, any of Enquiry Office have not been produced.
Neither the Enquiry nor any other senior officer had come forward to depose against him.
The respondent feels satisfied by producing its clerical officials and one JE in support of the allegations.
These state of affairs would have been sufficient for Mata Din to succeed in the case and for me there would have been no difficulty in quashing the order of termination and further to reinstate him in his job with continuity and with full backwages also."
It is thus obvious that no proceedings of enquiry or the report submitted by the office had been produced before the Labour Court.
Even in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents in reply to para 11(ii), it has been inter alia stated as under :-  "The termination cannot, therefore, be held to be illegal merely on the ground that no domestic or no proper enquiry was held by the employer before ordering termination of service."
In view of this position, I am not satisfied that a case for going into record other than that produced with the written statement is made out.
In fact, it would not be fair to the workman to review the judgment on the basis of any evidence that was not originally produced.
3.
Mr. Jain has stated before me that even though no enquiry had been conducted by the Executive Engineer, but the Superintending Engineer had in fact conducted an enquiry after the workman had submitted his appeal.
After recording evidence, the Superintending Engineer had confirmed the order of termination.
Assuming this to be the factual position, it is clear that no enquiry was held prior to the passing of the order of termination.
A subsequent enquiry as a result of which the original order of termination is stated to have been affirmed, is not contemplated under the rules.
In any event, the authorities had already made up their mind.
It was wholly violative of principles of natural justice to conduct an enquiry after the punishment had been imposed.
If the appellate authority was satisfied that the order of termination is vitiated on account of a proper entry not having been held.
The proper course would have been to set aside the order of termination and to order an enquiry.
This was admittedly not done.
4.
Mr. Jain further submits that in the circumstances of the case, the order of reinstatement with back wages should not have been passed.
I am unable to agree with the learned counsel.
It is an elementary principle of natural justice that no person shall be condemned unheard.
Even a murderer is entitled to a fair trial.
The petitioner, in this case, was condemned unheard.
In the circumstances of the case, there was nothing to justify the action of the respondents.
In fact, it would have been unjust to deny the petitioner the benefit or reinstatement or arrears of salary.
However, as observed originally in order dated July 16, 1991, it is open to the Board to conduct a proper enquiry and pass appropriate orders.
In the circumstances of the case, I am of the view that instead of spending time in this court in pursuing a wholly misconceived application, it would have been more appropriate to hold an enquiry.
Be that as it may, I find no ground to decline the relief to reinstatement or arrears of salary to the workman.
5.
Accordingly, I find no ground to recall or review the order dated July 16,1991.
The application is accordingly dismissed.
The workman shall be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Appeal dismissed.