AL Bahri, J (Oral) - Present writ petition is covered by the decision of this Court in Sher Chand Chhabra v. Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 1989(2) Recent Services Judgments 328.
2.
Petitioner Kamal Prabha Sharma was allowed admission to B.Ed.
Course (One year Correspondence Course) after she had passed BA Part-III examination in 1988 Session.
Her admission was cancelled on December 26, 1988 vide order (Annexure P3) on the ground that she was not eligible to seek admission as she had obtained less than 40% marks in her qualifying BA Examination.
This order has been challenged in this writ petition.
3.
In spite of notice of motion having been issued, no reply was filed by the University and the writ petition was admitted.
Even thereafter, no reply has been filed by the University.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the petitioner.
Annexure P1 is a copy of the certificate whereby Kamal Prabha Sharma passed BA Part-III examination held in September 1974.
The marks obtained by her are shown therein she had obtained 257 marks out of 650.
The percentage of marks obtained by her is about 3954.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that in view of the note added to the Rules and Regulations of the University, while determining eligibility, fraction of the percentage of the marks 0.5 or more was to be treated as 1.
This note was under consideration of this Court in the aforesaid petition.
The note reads as under :-  "Note (1) In determining the eligibility the fraction of percentage of marks 0.5 or more shall be raised to the next percentage, while fraction of less than 05 shall be ignored."
The eligibility clause for admission to one year Correspondence Course in B.Ed provides 40% marks in the qualifying BA Examination.
In Sher Chand Chhabra's case (supra) it was held that the note aforesaid added to the regulations would also be applicable to the admission to B.Ed.
Correspondence Course.
Thus, the percentage of marks of the petitioner, as per certificate Annexure P.1, is to be taken as 40% though she had secured 257 marks out of 650 marks and on that ground the order cancelling her admission to the B.Ed.
Course is liable to be quashed.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that the University has decided to close down the correspondence course from the next year, and the petitioner who had completed the course, should be allowed to take examination commencing from 20th May, 1992.
There is force in the contention of the learned counsel.
While allowing the writ petition, quashing the order (Annexure P3) whereby admission of the petitioner was cancelled, a direction is given to the Maharshi Dayanand University to allow the petitioner to take the examination to be conducted in May, 1992.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.