Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioner who is working as Vocational Teacher in Punjab Education Department, is seeking a direction to the respondent-State to grant him the pay-scale as admissible to JST, Masters from the date he acquired the qualification of Prabhakar which is higher than the requisite qualification prescribed for the post of Primary Teacher.
2.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contends that in view of the Government instructions contained in Circular Letter dated 23.7.1957, a copy of which is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, which envisage that the Teachers working in Education Department are entitled to the pay-scales according to their qualifications possessed by them irrespective of the post they are holding, the petitioner is entitled to the pay-scale as per his qualification.
The learned Counsel further contends that now the matter is squarely covered by this Court's decision in Nasib Kaur etc. v. State of Punjab, 1988(4) SLR 301, Rajinder Kumari v. State of Punjab, 1988(4) SLR 297 and the Supreme Court's decision rendered in Punjab Higher Qualified Teachers Union (Non-petitioners) v. State of Punjab, 1988(1) SVLR(L) 12.
3.
The learned counsel for the State contends that the Punjab Government in view of the ratio of Supreme Court decision had decided vide its letter dated 1361990 to make payment of arrears on account of JST grade to the petitioner and other similarly situated non-petitioner for 38 months prior to the issuance of Government instructions dated 1921979.
In order to avoid discrimination, the arrears have been paid to all the Teachers including the petitioner/non-petitioners who had improved their qualifications.
4.
In view of the stand of the respondents, this writ petition has become infructuous.
In case the petitioner has not been paid the arrears, he may represent to the Government and the Government on receiving the same shall release the arrears within three months from its receipt.
5.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.