RS Mongia, J - This case raises a seemingly unending dispute of seniority between a promotee and a direct recruit.
This time, the dispute has been raised by the promotees regarding their seniority, vis-a-vis Shri ML Gupta, a direct recruit, who are all members of Haryana Service of Engineers, Class I, Irrigation Department.
Facts leading to the filing of the present writ petition may now be noticed.
2.
The petitioners were recruited in the erstwhile state of Punjab as Temporary Engineers in the Irrigation Department (Class II Post) on various dates between the years 1961 of 1963.
On the re-organisation of the State of Punjab on 1st November, 1966, petitioners were allocated to the successor State of Haryana.
The next avenue for promotion for Temporary Engineers is to the Senior Scale Class I Post of Executive Engineer.
The promotion to Class I service and the conditions of service of the members of the Class I service are governed by the Statutory Rules, called the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class-I, P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964, as applicable to the State of Haryana (hereinafter these Rules would be referred to as the Rules) .
Petitioners Nos. 1 to 4 were promoted as officiating Executive Engineers in October, 1971; petitioner Nos. 5 to 9 were so promoted between 7th February, 1972 to 17th April, 1972 and rest of the petitioners were promoted as such on 27th November, 1973.
The petitioners were confirmed as Executive Engineers by the order issued in the year 1982, vide which some of the petitioners were confirmed with effect from 1st January, 1975 and the others with effect from 1st January, 1976.
3.
It may be observed here that under Rule 5 of the Rules, recruitment of class I Service is by three methods : (a) direct appointment, (b) by transfer of an Officer already in Class I service of the Government of India or of a State Government and (c) by promotion from Class II Service.
A person is directly recruited as an Assistant Executive Engineer, which is a Class I post and is eligible for consideration for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer after he has rendered five years service as an Assistant Executive Engineer, as per Rule 9(3)(a) of the Rules; whereas a member of the Class II service who works as an Assistant Engineer is to have 8 years' service in Class II as Assistant Engineer before he can be considered for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer under Rule 6(b) of the Rules.
4.
Respondent No. 2, Shri ML Gupta, is a direct recruit to Class I Service as an Assistant Executive Engineer-Class I Junior Scale.
He was recruited as such on 28th July, 1971.
He was promoted as Officiating Executive Engineer on 17th September, 1976.
To appreciate the controversy, which has been raised in the present writ petition, it would be appropriate at this stage to notice some of the provisions of the Rules.
Rule 2(1) of the Rules defines appointment to the Service, Rule 2(12) defines the Member of the Service whereas Rule 2(14) defines the 'Service'.
For ready reference, these Rules are quoted below :  2(1) 'appointment to the Service' includes an appointment made according to the terms and provisions of these rules, to an officiating vacancy or an ex-cadre post;  Provided that an officer so appointed shall not be deemed to have become a "Member of the service" as defined in Clause (12) of this rule;  2(12) " Member of the Service" means an Officer appointed, substantively to a cadre post, and includes :  (a) in the case of a direct appointment an officer on probation, or such an officer who, having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post; (b) in the case of an appointment by transfer, an officer who is on probation or who having successfully completed his probation awaits appointment to a cadre post provided such officer does not have a lien on a substantive post in any Government Department; (c) in the case of an appointment by promotion an officer on probation or such an officer who having successfully completed his probation awaits appointment to a Cadre post.
Explanation :- It is not necessary that member of the service shall at any given time be actually doing the work of a cadre post.
He may be working in an ex-cadre post for reasons of administrative convenience.
Conversely, an officer officiating against an ex-cadre post may in fact perform the duties of a cadre post;  2(14) "Service" means the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I P.W.D.
Irrigation Branch; and,"  Rule 5 of the Rules provides as to how recruitment to the service is to be made; from what sources and in what ratio.
The said Rule (relevant extract) is reproduced below :  "5.
Recruitment to Service :  (1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made by Government by any one or more of the following methods :-  (a) by direct appointment; (b) by transfer of an officer already in Class-I Service of the Government of India or of a State Government; (c) by promotion from Class-II Service : Rule 5(2).
Recruitment to the Service shall be so regulated that the number of posts filled by promotion from Class-II Service shall not exceed seventy-five per cent of the number of posts in the service, excluding the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers for the first ten years from the date of commencement of these rules and thereafter shall not exceed fifty per cent of the number of posts in the service excluding the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers :  Provided that in case an adequate number of Assistant Executive Engineers, who are eligible and considered fit for promotion, are not available, the actual percentage of officers promoted from Class-II Service, may be larger than seventy-five per cent or of fifty per cent, as the case may be.
Rule 11 deals with "Probation"; whereas Rule 12 deals with the determination of 'seniority'.
Rule 11 and Rule 12 (relevant extract) are reproduced below :  11.
Probation.
- (1) Officer appointed to the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if recruited by direct appointment and one year if recruited otherwise;  Provided that :  (a) any period, after appointment to the Service spent on deputation on a corresponding or a higher post shall count towards the period of probation fixed under this rule; (b) in the case of an appointment by transfer, any period of work in the rank of Executive Engineer or above, prior to appointment to the Service may, at the discretion of Government, be allowed to count towards the period of probation fixed under this rule, and, (c) an officiating appointment in the Service shall be reckoned as a period spent on probation but no member who has thus officiated shall, on the completion of the prescribed period of probation, be entitled to be confirmed, unless he is appointed against a cadre post.
(2) If the work or conduct of an officer appointed to the Service during the period of probation is, in the opinion of Government not satisfactory it may -  (a) dispense with his services, if recruited by directed appointment; or (b) if recruited otherwise - (i) revert him to his former post; or (ii) deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of his previous appointment permit.
(3) On the completion of the period of probation of an officer the Government may -  (a) confirm such officer in his appointment, or (b) if no cadre post is vacant for him, declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily; or (c) if his work or conduct has, in its opinion, not been satisfactory dispense with his services, if recruited by direct appointment; or (d) if recruited otherwise - (i) revert him to his former post; or (ii) deal with him within the terms and conditions of his previous appointment; or (e) extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such orders as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation; Provided that the total period of probation including, extension, if any, shall not exceed three years.
(4) On the satisfactory completion of the period of probation, Government shall confirm such officer in a cadre post, if one is available for him.
12.
Seniority.
(1) Except as provided in sub-rules 8 and 10 of this rule relating to officers appointed by transfer, and except to the extent provided in these rules, no member of the service shall, for purposes of determining seniority in the Service, enjoy the benefit of any period of service rendered by him in any other employment prior to his appointment to the service.
(2) The seniority of a member of the Service shall be determined by the "year of allotment" of officers with an earlier year of allotment being senior to those of a later year;  Provided that if under the provisions of the proviso to sub-rule (3) below a member of the Service has had added to his year of allotment the figure half, he shall be considered junior to all members who do not have such an addition to their year of allotment.
12(5).
Executive Engineers and above : The year of allotment of a member of the Service promoted to the post of Executive Engineer from that of Assistant Executive Engineer in the Service shall continue to be the year allotted to him as Assistant Executive Engineer under the Provisions of Sub-rule (3) above.
12(6).
Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (7) and (8) below the year of allotment of an officer who is initially appointed to the service as Executive Engineer, shall be the same as that of the junior most officer in the Service whether officiating or confirmed as Executive Engineer before the former's appointment."
5.
In the gradation list, which was corrected up to 1st January, 1984, all the petitioners had been shown above respondent Shri ML Gupta.
Respondent Shri ML Gupta, was shown at Serial No. 92 whereas petitioners were shown between serial Nos. 45 to 82.
Respondent No. 2 filed C.W.P.
No. 433 of 1984 seeking a Writ of Mandamus against the State of Haryana, which was the only Respondent in that case, to finalise the inter-se seniority in Class I Service of the Irrigation Branch in Haryana.
This Writ petition was disposed of by the Motion Bench on 7th February, 1985, by passing the following order :-  "Mr. Duhan has given an undertaking on behalf of the Respondent-State that the seniority list shall be finalised on or before July 31, 1985.
The view of this, the petition is not pressed and is disposed of as such."
6.
Ultimately, vide Memo dated 28th April, 1986, Respondent No. 1 re-framed a tentative seniority list, which was duly circulated by the Engineer-in-Chief.
This tentative seniority list has been attached as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
In this seniority list, respondent Shri ML Gupta has been shown at Serial No. 72; whereas petitioners have been shown between Serial Nos. 73 to 112.
In the said seniority list, the year of allotment has also been mentioned as 1971 qua all the petitioners as well as Respondent No. 2.
Date of promotion of Respondent No. 2 as Executive Engineer is mentioned as 17th September, 1976 and that of the petitioners between 13th October, 1971 to 22nd November, 1973.
After hearing objections from all quarters, an order was issued by the State Government on 29th September, 1986 that the tenantive seniority list, which was already issued, was being confirmed meaning thereby that the objections to the seniority list had been turned down.
The order of the State Government dated 29th September, 1986, was challenged by the aggrieved parties in C.W.P.
No, 5802 of 1986.
One of the grounds of challenge was that the order dated 29th September, 1980 was a non-speaking order and liable to be quashed.
That writ petition was disposed of on 25th May, 1987 and the impugned order dated 29th September, 1986 was quashed as being a non- speaking one and the State was directed to pass a fresh speaking order while disposing of the objections to the tentative seniority list.
It was further directed that the order should be passed within a period of two months from that date.
Thereafter, the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Irrigation Department, passed an order on 23rd July, 1987 (annexure P5) by which respondent No. 2 as well as the petitioners were assigned 1971 as the year of allotment, but the petitioners were kept junior to Respondent No. 2.
The reasons given in the order, dated 23rd July, 1987 for keeping the petitioner junior to Respondent No. 2 may be noticed here :-  "Apparently, because adequate number of Assistant Executive Engineers eligible and considered fit for promotion were not available, the officers from class-II service were promoted in excess of 50% quota as per proviso under clause 2 of rule 5.
The year of allotment of the officers, who are promoted from Class-II Service, determined under clause 6 of rule 12 is to be the same as that of the junior-most officer in the service, whether officiating or confirmed as Executive Engineer, before he is appointed.
Thus determined, all those promoted officers who had started officiating as Executive Engineers after Sh. Vithal Ram, who was appointed by direct recruitment as Assistant Executive Engineer on 27.5.70 and upto 4.12.73, are to be allotted 1971 as the year of allotment.
9.
Reconciling Rule 5 and Rule 12 of the Rules ibid it appears that direct recruit to Class I, junior-scale cannot be placed senior to those Executive Engineer Class I who were so promoted as Executive Engineer from Class II on or before the direct recruit joined service.
To put it conversely, looking to the purport of recruitment and seniority Rules together, the Executive Engineers promoted from Class-II cannot be placed senior to the directly recruited members of the service, if they had not been promoted before the day on which a particular direct recruit joins the service.
Thus all those promoted officers, who had started officiating as Executive Engineer Class I on or before 27871, when Sh. ML Gupta had joined as Assistant Executive Engineers of Class-I junior-scale and continued to officiate as Xens thereafter without break, would rank senior to Sh. ML Gupta and those who were promoted as Xens after 27871 would be placed junior to him."
It is this order of the Secretary to Government, Haryana, dated 23rd July, 1987, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-6 to the writ petition that has been challenged by the petitioners in the present writ petition.
7 .
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners had become the members of the Service under Rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules the moment they were appointed on probation and in any case under the said Rule they had become the members of the Service on successful completion of the period of probation and were awaiting appointment to a cadre post.
He further submitted that even if the worst case was to be taken against the petitioners even then they had become the members of the Service when the order of confirmation was passed in the year 1982, confirming them with effect from some dates in the years 1975 and 1976.
At that time respondent Shri ML Gupta had not even started officiating as Executive Engineer and was still working as Assistant Executive Engineer.
On becoming the members of the Service, they were entitled to assignment of a year of allotment under Rule 12 of the rules and under Rule 12(6) the moment the petitioners became members of the Class I Service, they would get the same year of allotment as of the junior-most member in the Service whether officiating or confirmed as Executive Engineer.
Admittedly, when the petitioners had become the members of the Service one Shri Vithal Ram was the junior-most officiating Executive Engineer, who had year 1970 as the year of allotment, and, consequently, the petitioner's counsel submitted that all the petitioners were entitled to 1970 as the year of allotment.
8.
It was further argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that Rule 2(12) (a) of the Rules is exactly similar of Rule 2(12)(a) of the Building & Roads Branch Rules.
However, in the Buildings & Roads Branch Rules, there is no parallel, rule to Rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules.
In a case before the Supreme Court, reported as AN Sehgal and others v. Raja Ram Sheoram and others, A.I.R. 1991 SC 1406 : 1991(3) SCT 234, Supreme Court, while interpreting Rule 2(12)(a) of the Buildings and Roads Rules, came to the conclusion that a direct recruit even if he is appointed to an ex-cadre post, would be deemed to be a member of the service as on successfully completion of the period of probation, a direct recruit awaits appointment to the cadre post, and, consequently, would be a member under second part of Rule 2(12)(a) of the Buildings & Roads Rules.
The learned counsel submitted that on parity of reasoning in AN Sehgal's case (supra), a promotee would be a member of the service under Rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules, even if he is appointed to an ex-cadre post, but on successful completion of the probation period, await appointment.
To buttress his argument, he submitted that under Rule 11 of the Rules, a period spent on ex-cadre post is reckoned towards period of probation.
He submitted that appointment to an ex-cadre post is an appointment to the service under Rule 2(1) of the Rules and under Rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules, the petitioners would be members of the service on being put on probation or in any case on successfully completing the period of probation, when they would be awaiting appointments to the cadre posts.
9.
The learned counsel for the private respondent Shri ML Gupta, however, submitted that if the appointment of the petitioners by way of promotion to the posts of Executive Engineers was beyond their quota then they would not become the members of the service till a post is available in their own quota.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioners when appointed as Executive Engineers, were beyond their quota an envisaged by Rule 5(2) of the Rules.
The learned counsel submitted that if a person is appointed beyond his quota, such service which is rendered on a post beyond the quota, is just fortuitous and cannot be considered for any purpose.
Learned counsel further submitted that the confirmations of the petitioners in 1982 with effect from 1975/1976 were beyond the quota of promotees as there were no posts available for them.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in fact the petitioners had become members of the service on their initial appointment as Executive Engineers under Rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules, but he submitted that in any case, they would be held to be in their quota when they were confirmed in the year 1982 with effect from the years 1975-76 and it would be too late in the day to allow the respondents to raise a point that the petitioners' confirmation was beyond their quota in the years 1975-76.
11.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
In view of the decisions of the Supreme Court in AN Sehgal's case (supra), the petitioners would be deemed to be the members of the service under Rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules, even if it is held that their initial appointment was beyond their quota if under Rule 2(12)(a) of the Building and Roads Rules (which is equivalent to Rule 2(12)(a) of the present Rules), a direct recruit even though appointed on ex-cadre post can be a member of the service, then on the same parity of reasoning, a promotee under rule 2(12)(c) of the Rules (which Rule is not there in the Buildings & Roads Rules) would be member of the Service even though appointed on an ex-cadre post.
In any case, petitioners were confirmed with effect from the years 1975-76, which would mean that they were within their quota from those dates and, therefore, would be members of the service from such dates in the years 1975-76.
The respondent cannot be permitted at this stage now to say or challenge that the confirmations of the petitioners with effect from 1975-76 as Executive Engineers was beyond their quota.
It may be observed here that in a writ petition filed by respondent ML Gupta, (C.W.P.
No. 6812 of 1986), in which he had also challenged the seniority of some of the Executive Engineers (the same seniority list which is challenging the present case), I have held that Shri ML Gupta cannot be allowed to challenge the confirmation at such a belated stage.
Consequently, once it is held that petitioners were the members of the service at the latest with effect from the years 1975/1976, then they were entitled under Rule 12(6) of the Rules, to the same year of allotment as that of the junior-most Executive Engineer, officiating or confirmed.
Admittedly, Shri Vithal Ram was the one, who was the Junior-most Executive Engineer at that time, who had the year 1970 as the year of allotment.
So the petitioners would be entitled to the same year of allotment, i.e. 1970.
The reasoning adopted in the impugned order (annexure P-6) that the persons who started officiating as Executive Engineers after the appointment of Respondent No. 2 as Assistant Executive Engineer, would rank junior to him and the others who had started officiating as Executive Engineers prior to the appointment of Respondent No. 2 as Assistant Executive Engineer, would rank senior to him, is on the face of it fallacious and against the Rules.
The moment a person become a member of the service, he is entitled to assignment of year of allotment.
As already observed, the petitioners are entitled to 1970 as the year of allotment and since Respondent No. 2 has year of allotment 1971, all the petitioners would rank senior to him.
12.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and order, Annexure P-6, dated 23rd July, 1987 and the seniority based thereon is quashed to the extent it makes the petitioners junior to Respondent No. 2.
There will be no order as to costs.