AL Bahri, J - Ram Narain Yadav was working as Deputy Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, Chandigarh.
He has been reverted to the post of Secretary to the Speaker vide order dated November 8, 1991 Annexure P.6 which is impugned in this writ petition filed by him under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
He joined Haryana Vidhan Sabha in 1979 as Personal Assistant to the Speaker, in 1984 he was promoted as Senior Personal Assistant.
In 1985 he was further promoted as Private Secretary to the Speaker and finally promoted as Secretary to the Speaker with effect from March 23, 1989.
His promotion as Deputy Secretary was made on January 15, 1991 vide order Annexure P2.
He was placed under probation for a period of one year as per the Rules governing the service, i.e. the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service Rules 1981 (for short called 'the Rules').
He was promoted by relaxing Rule 15 with the prior approval of the Government, i.e. by relaxing the condition of experience.
His promotion as Deputy Secretary was under challenge in another Civil Writ Petition ( No. 4102 of 1991).
Particulars of that writ petition were given in this writ petition.
According to the petitioner his work and conduct during his entire service had been 'outstanding' and `very good'.
Former Speaker Shri SS Chatha on July 3, 1991 had issued a commendation certificate Annexure P 4 His work was also appreciated by the House Committee headed by the Deputy Speaker.
Earlier on June 19, 1987 the then Speaker had also commended his job by issuing a certificate-Annexure P.5.
Even after his promotion as aforesaid his work had been appreciated.
According to the petitioner only on the ground of unsatisfactory work he could be reverted under Rule 10(2)(b)(i) of the Rules.
The impugned order did not purport to have been passed under the aforesaid rule as the aforesaid ground was not mentioned.
According to the petitioner the order of reversion was passed mala fide at the instance of respondent No. 3 Shri Ishwar Singh, Speaker, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, taking into consideration the following facts :  (i) that respondent No. 3 wanted to take action against 10 Clerks and Peons of Haryana Vidhan Sabha whose names are mentioned in para 10(i) of the petition.
He wanted the petitioner to make a report that the aforesaid persons had left office without accepting their orders.
Since the petitioner refused to oblige the Speaker, as factually the aforesaid persons had left the office respondent No. 3 was annoyed with him for not making report favourable; (ii) Smt. Kamlesh, Junior Scale Stenographer was appointed after qualifying the Short-hand and typing test.
She was to complete the probation period in November 1991.
Suddenly she was asked to give another test.
The Speaker wanted to appoint Mrs. Raj Junior Scale Stenographer to the post of Senior Scale Stenographer without taking any test; (iii) There were two Hindi Reporters who could not qualify the Hindi Reporters test and were appointed by the Speaker-respondent No. 3 by reverting Roop Ram Giri and Umesh Singh, Assistants; (iv) Certain disciplinary proceedings were ending against Shri SS Ahlawat, Addl.
Secretary, who was appointed along with the petitioner on probation.
He was allowed to continue whereas the petitioner was discriminated and reverted.
The latest annual confidential report of Shri Ahlawat was stated to be bad.
In the writ Petition further allegations were made that after reverting the petitioner, respondent No. 3 wanted to promote one of the two Under Secretaries, namely, Kuldip Singh and Ashok Kumar.
They were junior to the petitioner and not eligible for promotion.
Although vide order Annexure P.6 the petitioner was reverted, however, he was asked to do the same work which he was earlier doing.
2.
The writ petition has been contested by the State as well as by respondent No. 3 Ishwar Singh.
All the allegations of the petitioner have been denied.
It is asserted that the order reverting the petitioner was passed in accordance with Rule 10 aforesaid as his work and conduct as Deputy Secretary was not found to be satisfactory, The order was passed on the basis of report-Annexure R.1 attached with the written statement of the State.
Earlier also some work was withdrawn from the petitioner as he could not come upto the mark.
Respondent No. 3-Ishwar Singh denied the allegations of mala fide alleged against him.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and we find that there is no merit in this writ petition.
Rule 10 of the Rules provides that persons appointed to any post in the service to remain on probation for one year in the case of promotion and if in the opinion of the appointing authority the work or conduct of the person during the period of probation is not satisfactory he could be reverted to his former post.
Order-Annexure 1.6 mentions that the same was passed under rule 10(2)(b)(i) of the Rules as the petitioner Ram Narain Yadav temporarily was officiating Deputy Secretary and was reverted to the substantive post of Secretary to the Speaker.
Specifically it was not mentioned in this order that the same was passed as the work and conduct of Ram Narain Yadav was not satisfactory.
It was in the written statement that the stand has been taken up by the respondent-State that the basis for passing the order was the report of the Speaker Annexure R-1 attached therewith.
Since the reversion has been ordered during the period of probation on the ground that work and conduct of the petitioner during the period of probation was not satisfactory, the order did not leave any stigma.
It is further mentioned that in June 1991 the petitioner was found wanting in respect of work of MLAs hostel, Anti-Defection Law, Privileges Committee and conference work which was allocated to other officers vide order dated September 3, 1991-Annexure R3.
The order of reversion was thus passed on administrative ground.
The stand of the respondents, as briefly stated above, is supported by a judicial pronouncement of the Supreme Court of which brief reference is being made.
Ranendra Chandra Banerjee v. The Union of India and another, A.I.R. 1963 Supreme Court 1552, was a case under the Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1930.
The order of termination of services of the probation was passed during the period of probation and the same was held to be in accordance with the rules and not punitive.
The official was found to be unsuitable for retention in service.
The letter of appointment indicated that the services could terminated during the probation period without any notice and without any reasons.
Union of India & Ors. v. RS Dhaba, 1969 S.L.R.
442, was a case where a Government Servant was found to be unsuitable and was reverted from officiating post.
It was held that Article 311(2) of the Constitution was not attracted as the same did not amount to punishment it was observed as under :-  "It is well established that a Government servant who is officiating in a post has no right to hold it for all time and the Government servant who is given an officiating post holds it on the implied term that he will have to be reverted if his work was found unsuitable.
In a case of this description a reversion on the ground of unsuitability is an action in accordance with the terms of which the officiating post is held and not a reduction in rank by way of punishment to which Article 311 of the Constitution could be attracted, It is of course well settled that temporary Government servants are also entitled to the protection of Article 311(2) of the Constitution in the same manner as permanent Government servant if the Government takes action against them meeting out one of the three punishments, namely, dismissal, removal or reduction in rank."
While referring to the merits of the case it was held as under :-  "In the present case, however, the order of reversion does not contain any express words of stigma attributed to the conduct of the respondent and therefore, it cannot be held that the order of the reversion was made by way of punishment and the provisions of Article 311 of Constitution are consequently attracted."
This Court also considered the question of reversion during the period of probation in Deepak Bhandari v. DAV College Management Committee, New Delhi and another, 1991(3) RSJ 146.
It was held that such an order did not attach any stigma and was innocuous in nature and could not be any stretch of imagination be termed to have been passed by way of punishment.
4.
In the present case as already stated above it has been demonstrated from the written statement that the order of reversion has been passed on the basis of report-Annexure R.1 made by the Speaker during the period of probation.
Such an order does not leave any stigma on the petitioner as the basis or reversion is his unsatisfactory work on the post of Deputy Secretary.
Learned counsel, for the petitioner has argued on the basis of commendation certificates issued by the former Speakers commending his work.
In my view no importance can be attached to such certificates in the matter considering record of the petitioner's working during the period of probation.
It is to be taken for granted that when the petitioner was promoted, his entire record, must have been taken into consideration including such certificates on which now reliance is sought to be placed.
Such certificates pertained to the working of the petitioner prior to his promotion and have relevance for the purposes of consideration for his retention in service or to rebut the report of the Speaker Annexure R1.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further argued that the Speaker is not supposed to sit in Chandigarh in his office and more often he remains out of Chandigarh.
When there was no basis or material for the office of the Secretriat of the Speaker to initiate any report, the Speaker was not in a position to record any report against the petitioner's working.
This contention again cannot be accepted.
The Speaker is the appointing authority of the petitioner and he is supposed to watch working of all the officers working in the Secretariat of the Vidhan Sabha.
If he has formed any opinion with respect to the working of the petitioner during the period of probation, the same cannot be questioned on merits.
6.
It has been argued on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned order of reversion was passed mala fide at the instance of respondent No. 3 Ishwar Singh, Speaker of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
The matters briefly noticed above have been pressed into service.
Since the allegations levelled by the petitioner have been refuted by respondent No. 3 in his written statement, the allegation made in the petition are not taken as proved to hold that the order of reversion has been passed as mala fide.
As to whether respondent No. 3 has acted arbitrarily in his working as Speaker against the interest of other employees or not is not germane hold that the Speaker has acted mala fide against the petitioner.
While working as Speaker it was expected of respondent dent No. 3 to pass several administrative orders against several employees.
Some of such employees have challenged such orders on the judicial side.
However, the petitioner cannot take benefit of any such action of respondent No. 3.
It is, therefore, considered not necessary to deal specifically with allegations.
Suffice it to say mala fides alleged against respondent No. 3 have not been substantiated.
7.
Since, the order of reversion has been passed in accordance the rules and we, find no ground to interfere therewith, the writ petition is dismissed leaving the parties to beat their own cost.
Petition dismissed.