HS Bedi, J - The respondent No. 1, Gurdip Singh Chandi (hereinafter called the respondent) was appointed as Director of Physical Education in the petitioners' College (hereinafter called the College) vide appointment letter Annexure P-1 dated 8th August, 1973.
In this letter it was provided that the services of the respondent would be governed by the University Services Rules for teachers of the affiliated colleges as laid down in the University calendar and that he would remain on probation for a period of one year from the date he assumed charge of his duties and further that the period of probation could be extended if his work and conduct was found satisfactory.
It has been pointed out that the respondent actually assumed charge of his duties on 18th August, 1973.
It has been averred in the petition that it was found necessary to extend the period of probation for another one year and this matter was conveyed to the respondent vide order Annexure P-2 dated 14th August, 1974.
It has also been averred that during the continuance of the probationary period, the petitioners decided to terminate the services of the respondent and a decision to that effect was conveyed to him vide letter dated 2nd May, 1975, copy Annexure P-3 to the petition.
The respondent thereafter made a representation against the order Annexure P-3 alleging that his service had been wrongly terminated as his probationary period had never been extended.
In response to a notice from respondent No. 3 i.e. the Director Public Instructions (Colleges) Punjab, petitioner No. 2 sent a requisite reply in which the entire position was set out and it was pleaded that the respondent was not governed by the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Services of Teachers) Act, 1974 thereinafter referred to as the 'Act').
After examining the records of the case, respondent No. 3 dismissed the representation of the respondent.
Aggrieved thereby the respondent filed an appeal in the Court of the District Judge, Kapurthala, under Section 4(4) of the Act which was allowed vide judgment Annexure P-6 dated 29th January, 1980 and a direction was issued to the Director, Public Instructions to hold an enquiry and to give a firm finding as to whether the petitioners had extended the period of probation of the respondent and whether this fact had been conveyed to him in writing before the expiry of one year as contemplated by the rules.
It has also been averred that in pursuance of the order Annexure P-6 the matter was taken up by the Director of Public Instructions but the aforesaid officer decided the matter ex parte against the respondent vide Annexure P-7 dated 29101981 and gave a finding that as his period of probation had, in fact, been extended vide letter dated 14th August, 1974, his representation was without force.
The aforesaid order though purported to have been signed on 29th October, 1981, was conveyed to the parties to the litigation vide endorsement dated 18th November, 1981.
Aggrieved by the ex parte order Annexure P-7 the respondent once again filed a representation before the new Director of Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab, Mrs. K Atma Ram for re-consideration of the case and this representation was allowed vide Annexure P-8A dated 2nd December, 1981, and the respondent was directed to present himself before the DPI on 8th December, 1981, at 11.00 A.M. for re-consideration of his case.
The petitioner thereafter filed a reply Annexure P-9 to the petition, but before any final order could be taken on the order Annexure P-8/A, the present writ petition was filed impugning the aforesaid annexure, and an order staying further proceedings was made on 17th December, 1981, when it was contended by the counsel for the petitioner that there was no inherent power of review with the Director of Public Instructions to reconsider the earlier order Annexure P-7.
The interim stay granted on 17th December, 1981, was thereafter confirmed in the presence of the parties on 17th May, 1982.
2.
The case of the petitioners basically is that as the period of probation of the respondent had been extended vide letter No. 256 dated 14th August, 1974 (within a period of one year of 18th August, 1973 when he assumed charge of his office) he being on probation, was not covered by the provisions of the Act and, as such, his service could be terminated in terms of his letter of appointment.
It has also been urged that there was no inherent power with the Director of Public Instructions to review an order already passed under the provisions of the Act.
3.
The respondent has filed an elaborate reply in which the broad facts have been admitted but it has been pointed out that the probationary period of the respondent could have been extended only in case his work and conduct was found to be unsatisfactory but the petitioners had, in fact, vide Annexures R-1 to R-4 dated 22nd May, 1974, 3rd September, 1974, 7th September, 1974 and 16th April, 1975, respectively (certificates issued by the Principal of the petitioners' College) found his work to be very satisfactory.
Pointed attention has been brought to Annexure R-1 in which it is stated that his contribution in extra-curricular activities was excellent and had brought three shields in debates, declamation contests and poetic recitation, and his work and conduct was assessed as good.
Annexure R-2 is a communication from the petitioners to the Secretary Sports, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, requesting him to accommodate the respondent in the sports committee, Annexure R-3 is a letter of congratulation to the sportsmen of the College and to the respondent on account of success in the game of Kabbadi.
Annexure R-4 dated 16th April, 1975 certified the work and of the respondent to be satisfactory.
It is significant that Annexure R-4 was issued to the respondent only about three weeks prior to the order terminating his services.
It has also been pointed out by Dr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel for the respondent, that the letter extending the period of probation was never conveyed to him and has been created subsequently.
It has also been urged that the order Annexure P-7 made by Shri Gursewak Singh, DPI was non est as it was signed on the 18th November, 1981, and pre-dated to 29th October, 1981 and he had in fact retired on superannuation on 31st October, 1981.
4.
An elaborate reply has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 by Mrs. K Atma Ram, DPI(C), Punjab, in which virtually the entire case of the respondent has been admitted.
It has been stated that the respondent had met her on 17th November, 1981 and requested that his case pending before her be finalised.
It has been asserted that she immediately called for the file from the office but the concerned Superintendent instead of submitting the file to her left the office and turned up the next day at 11.30 A.M. and got the order Annexure P-7 with the endorsement dated 18th November, 1981, issued under the signatures of the retired Director, Prof. Gursewak Singh.
On these serious allegations, an enquiry was got conducted through Shri Swami Ram Bharti, Joint Director (Administration), who vide his report Annexure R-2 with the reply found that the order Annexure P-7 was in fact made between 17th and 18th November, 1981 and ante dated 29th October, 1981 through the active connivance of Gurcharan Singh Duggal, Superintendent, and former DPI Professor Gursewak Singh.
It has also been asserted on the above facts that the order dated 18th November, 1981 (Annexure P-7) was non est in the eye of law.
It has also been asserted in the reply that the order Annexure P-7 was made against the respondent ex parte on the basis that no medical certificate had been appended to show that the respondent was in fact unwell and could not present himself before the DPI but this aspect was found to be wrong as a medical certificate which was on the file had been ignored by Prof. Gursewak Singh.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the present writ petition.
The fate of the case would hinge on the fact as to whether the period of probation of the respondent had been extended as provided by Ordinance 3, Chapter XIII of the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar Calendar Vol. II-1977 which reads as under :  "The employee will ordinarily be appointed on one year's probation after which he will normally be confirmed if his work is found satisfactory.
It would be obligatory on the part of a Managing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended and in the absence of such a notice the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period, in no case, will be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment."
It is also significant that the protection of the Act would be available to the respondent only if it can be shown that the period of employment was not in the nature of probation, as provided by section 6 thereof.
It is also the admitted case that the petitioners have treated the respondent to be on probation and have admittedly not followed the procedure given in sections 3 to 5 of the Act in making the order Annexure P-3 terminating his service.
6.
Dr. Balram Gupta has pointed out that as per Annexure P-1, the letter of appointment as also Ordinance 3 quoted above, it had been provided that the period of probation could be extended if the work and conduct of the respondent was not found satisfactory.
He has once again pointed out that vide Annexure R-1 to R-4 the work and conduct of the respondent was uniformly throughout his period of service found to be satisfactory to excellent.
He has urged that in view of this fact, the order Annexure P-2 purporting to extend his period of probation, had no basis and was obviously created later in order to meet the legal objections which could be raised.
He has also urged that the aforesaid letter was sent to the respondent under certificate of posting and it had not been received by him.
He has also urged that no presumption could be raised in favour of the petitioners that the letter had in fact been delivered in view of the fact that it was not registered.
He has also brought to my notice, Annexure R-5 which is a communication addressed by the Deputy Registrar, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar in which it has been stated that the case of the respondent had been examined from all aspects and on a consideration of the evidence on record, it had been found that he was a confirmed employee of the Guru Nanak Khalsa College, Sultanpur Lodhi.
I find merit in the argument raised by the counsel for the respondent.
It is clear to me that the sine quo non for extending the period of probation of the respondent was sadly lacking in his case as his work and conduct had been found to be satisfactory and in view of this admitted fact, Ordinance 3, referred to above, required that the respondent be confirmed.
As a matter of fact no material has been supplied by the petitioners to show that the work and conducted of this respondent had been unsatisfactory.
It also appears to me that in the absence of any conclusive evidence to the contrary the period of probation had in fact not been extended as is sought to be made out by the petitioners.
I am fortified in this view by Annexure R-5, referred to above that in the facts and circumstances of his case, he was deemed to be a confirmed employee of the petitioner-College.
In view of what has been held above, I am of the view that the respondent was entitled to the protection of sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Act which required that before his services could be terminated a regular procedure set out therein was to be followed and that the needful admittedly not having been done, the order Annexure P-3 cannot be sustained.
7.
It has been urged by the counsel for the petitioners that there is no inherent power with the Director of Public Instructions to review the order Annexure P-7 as it sought to be done vide Annexure P-8/A For this purpose reliance has been placed on Patel Narshi Thakershi and others v. Pradyuman Singhji Arjun Singji, AIR 1970 SC 1273.
This argument has been countered by the counsel for the respondent by saying that the order Annexure P-7 which was an ex parte one, was non est in the eye of law as the facts and circumstances have shown that it was signed on 18th November, 1981 and pre-dated to 29th October, 1981, although Prof. Gursewak Singh, the former DPI had retired on 31st October, 1981, as has been admitted in the reply filed by respondent No. 3, the argument of the petitioners' counsel therefore has no basis.
An order which is made by a person not authorised has no status in the eye of law and the facts and circumstances make it very clear that the order Annexure P-7 was made by Prof. Gursewak Singh after his retirement.
The question therefore of the exercise of inherent power of review would not arise on the facts and circumstances of the case.
8.
Faced with the above situation, learned counsel for the petitioners, has argued that as the matter has not been finally decided by the DPI(C) in terms of the notice Annexure P-8/A and as the proceedings before that officer had been stayed by this Court, the matter should now be referred to that officer for final decision.
I find no merit in this argument.
The services of the respondent were terminated in the year 1975 and he has undergone a tortuous litigations for the last 17 years.
The petitioners themselves came to this Court against an interim order only and did not wait for the decision of the Director Public Instructions.
I would be perpetuating an injustice on the respondent should the matter be remanded to the Director for re-decision.
9.
For the reason recorded above, the writ petition is dismissed and a direction is issued to the petitioners to reinstate the respondent in his service forthwith.
The respondent will be allowed all consequential benefits except back wages in full as if his service had not been terminated.
It has been conceded before me that the respondent has been working as a teacher in some school on a paltry wage and in view of this fact he will be paid, insofar as back wages are concerned, a sum calculated keeping in view the wages drawn by him before his services were terminated.
All the dues to be given to the respondent shall be paid within a period of two months from today.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.