Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Senior Engineer (Optics) with the Punjab Electro Optics Systems Ltd (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation") in January, 1986.
He was confirmed as such vide orders dated June 10, 1987.
On February 27, 1989 the Corporation passed an order, annexure P.3, by which the services of the petitioner were terminated.
In this order it was mentioned that a cheque for an amount of Rs. 10,84280 was enclosed towards the salary and other dues for the notice as contemplated under condition No. 4 in the letter of appointment.
This order has been challenged inter alia on the ground that it is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as a number of persons junior to the petitioner are still continuing in the service of the Corporation.
It has also been challenged on the ground that in fact the post of Senior Engineer (Optics) held by the petitioner has not been actually abolished.
Petitioner has further claimed that the payment tendered with the impugned order is not adequate and, therefore, the order does not conform to the terms of appointment.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Punjab Electro Optics Systems Lid.
(respondent No. 1).
It has been inter alia averred that the respondent is not an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution as such it is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner had been employed to look after the production work in optical workshop where the optical components are manufactured.
Two orders which had been received by the Company from the Defence Ministry had been reduced sizably.
On account of the reduction in work, the Company had no alternative except to terminate the services of such staff as had been rendered surplus, Furthermore, a copy of the legal notice received by the Company from the bank has been produced to show that it has huge financial liabilities and is not in a position to utilise the services of the petitioner.
It has been further pointed out that every subsidiary company is an independent body having a separate legal identity.
Retention of persons different subsidiary companies did not entitle the petitioner to continue in service with respondent No. 1 and it could not be said that persons junior to him had been retained in service.
2.
The petitioner filed an additional affidavit with CM Application No. 5082 of 1991 to show that the company had advertised certain posts on May 14, 1990.
It has also been averred that various persons/members of staff have been granted promotions.
On behalf of the respondents also an additional affidavit has been filed to show that the Company had incurred a loss of approximately Rs. 6860 lacs till March 31, 1991.
It has been further averred that in February, 1989 the Company had eleven persons on the staff which strength has now been reduced to two upto August, 1991.
It has also been pointed out that the Company has liabilities of more than 3000 lacs to the Bank.
3.
Mr. Inderjit Malhotra, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the condition in the letter of appointment permitting the Company to terminate the service with one month's notice was absolutely arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He has further contended that even if the condition is considered to be legal, the payment made was less than the actual amount due to the petitioner.
It has also been argued that in fact there was no abolition of the post of Senior Engineer (Optics) and consequently the termination of service was wholly illegal.
On the other hand, Mr. RK Malik, appear for respondent No. 1 has contended that the financial position of the Company was absolutely precarious and as a result it has no alternative but to terminate the services of the staff for whom there was not work.
He has contended that the Company was engaged in a purely commercial activity and its action in terminating the service was not only in strict conformity with the terms of appointment but was even otherwise legal and valid.
He has further contended that the petitioner had been actually paid more than the amount due to him.
However, if there was still any arrears, the account could be settled.
4.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties shows that the two orders which had been received by the company from the Defence Ministry had been considerably reduced.
One of the works was reduced to 50 per cent and the second by 92 per cent.
The evidence on record further shows that the company had suffered huge financial loses.
In such a situation it had no alternative except to economics on its expenses.
Accordingly it had become imperative for the company to terminate the services of a number of employees.
The very fact that it has now only two persons on its staff shows that it is virtually closed.
In such a situation, I cannot persuade myself to hold that the action of the company in terminating the services of the petitioner was either arbitrary or violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
There is no rule or law prescribing a definite form or procedure for abolition of a post.
The sequence of events clearly shows that the Company had decided to reduce the strength of the staff.
Its action in terminating the services of various employees including the petitioner was a step in that direction.
In such a situation when the termination occurred on account of the reduction in staff, it cannot be said that the condition No. 4 in the letter of appointment was arbitrary or violative of the rules of law laid down by the Apex Court in Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, AIR 1986 SC 1517.
Termination of service in the present case was only resorted to as a measure of economy and it can be safely presumed that the post of Senior Engineer (Optics) was abolished.
This was in accordance with the terms of appointment.
I am unable to hold that the condition in the circumstances of the case has operated arbitrarily against the petitioner.
5.
Nor am I satisfied that the company had in fact made fresh recruitments after the termination of the services of the petitioner.
Mr. Malik appears to be right in stating that in anticipation of an order certain posts had been advertised, but in fact no recruitment had been made to the post of Engineer (Optics).
In any event the number of employees now working on the staff of the Company is only two.
This staff has been retained, according to the counsel, to finally wind up the Company.
In such a situation, I cannot hold that the action in terminating the services of the petitioner was either arbitrary or unfair.
Nor can it be said that the action was violative of Article 16 of the Constitution as persons junior to the petitioner had been retained in service.
If certain persons continue to work in various other concerns, which are the subsidiaries of respondent No. 2, it cannot be said that they are junior to the petitioner or that respondent No. 1 has violated Article 14 of the Constitution.
Each of the subsidiary of respondent No. 2 has a separate cadre and the persons working in one unit do not have any inter se seniority with those working in another unit.
All subsidiary companies have separate cadres and have no inter se connection so far as the employees are concerned.
6.
Equally lacking in merit is the contention that the petitioner had not been paid three months salary as stipulated in condition No. 4 of the letter of appointment.
On his own showing, the petitioner was drawing the salary of Rs. 2753/-per mensum.
Assuming that the petitioner was entitled not only to his pay but allowances for the periods of three months as averred by him, his wages for three months would amount to Rs. 8259/-.
He was admittedly paid Rs. 10,84280, according to the letter dated February 27, 1989, by which the services of the petitioner were terminated, even the advance given to the petitioner had to be adjusted.
It has not been shown that the petitioner did not owe any money to the respondent-company.
Accordingly, I do not find that the amount paid was less than that required under the terms of appointment.
In any case if the petitioner has any more claim of money, he would be entitled to settle the account with the respondents.
7.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition which is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.