Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The suit of the plaintiff-respondent Chanan Singh for being granted the scale of Rs. 800-1400 having been decreed by the trial Court, the Board filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Patiala.
So far as the main issue regarding the entitlement of the plaintiff-respondent to be placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400 is concerned, the learned Additional District Judge upheld the claim of the plaintiff-respondent and dismissed the appeal.
However, the claim with regard to interest was declined by the learned appellate court.
Aggrieved by the judgment declining the claim for interest, the plaintiff has come up in this appeal.
The Board has filed cross-objections and disputed the claim of the plaintiff with regard to his claim for being placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant had joined the service of the Board as Lower Divisional Clerk in the year 1969.
On September 22, 1973 he was promoted to the post of Head Office Assistant.
This post was originally in the scale of Rs. 225-500 which has since been revised and raised to Rs. 800-1400 with effect from January 1, 1978.
In the year 1977, the appellant passed Part-I of the S.A.S.
examination.
On February 22, 1977 he was promoted from the post of Head Office Assistant which was in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500 to the post of Divisional Accountant which was in the pay scale of Rs. 250-535.
By order of August 6, 1981 the Board revised the pay scales of the posts of Head Office Assistants and Divisional Accountants with effect from January 1, 1978.
By this order 50% of the posts of Head Office Assistants were placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400 and the remaining 50% were placed in the scale of Rs. 620- 1100.
The post of Divisional Accountant was placed in the scale of Rs. 750- 1300.
By an order of July 5, 1983, various persons junior to the appellant like Mr. Gopal Dutt were placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400 with effect from the year 1978.
The appellant having not been granted the similar scale, he filed the suit out of which the present appeal has arisen.
3.
Mr. Ajay Tiwari, learned counsel appearing for the appellant contends that the appellant on his promotion as Divisional Accountant, had retained his lien on the post of Head Office Assistant.
Accordingly, he was entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400 especially because various persons junior to him in that cadre had been granted the scale of Rs. 800-1400.
He further submits that factum of his having passed the S.A.S.
examination and promotion to the post of Divisional Accountant does not stand in his way in the matter of getting the higher scale especially when persons junior to him had been granted the said scale.
4.
On an examination of the entire matter, I find that the appellant had retained his lien on the post of Head Office Assistant in February, 1977 when he was promoted to the post of Divisional Accountant.
It is many years later that the Board revised the pay scale of the post of Head Office Assistant with effect from January 1, 1978.
The scale having been revised retrospectively, the appellant had a right to be placed in that scale before any one junior to him could be granted the benefit of a higher pay.
Admittedly, various persons junior to the appellant were placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400 with effect from January 1, 1978 while the appellant was sought to be restricted to the scale of Rs. 750-1300 in spite of the fact that he was senior to such persons and had been promoted to the post of Divisional Accountant.
If the claim of the Board is upheld, the result would be anomalous and unfair.
Mr. Goyal admitted that various persons who were junior to the appellant as Head Office Assistants and were promoted as Divisional Accountants later than him were granted the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400.
Their pay in the post of Divisional Accountant has been fixed on the hypothesis that they were in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400 at the time of their appointment as Divisional Accountants.
In this situation, I am of the view that the action of the Board was wholly unfair.
A senior person who has proved his merit vis-a-vis the others in the same cadre would be placed in the lower scale of pay while the juniors who were either not qualified or had been found unsuitable for promotion would be placed in higher scale of pay.
Such a course of action would be arbitrary, unfair and, would even amount to denial of equality of opportunity in promotion.
I am reluctant to accept any interpretation of the order of revision of pay scales which would deny the benefit of higher scale to a senior and result in grant of a higher scale to a junior.
Mr. Goyal points out that the grant of a higher scale to the extent of 50% of the posts of Head Office Assistants is not promotion.
Even if it is assumed to be so, the getting of higher scale carries with it the pecuniary benefits.
A senior person is entitled to all those benefits which a junior in the cadre is getting.
The pay of a senior, in this case, cannot be less than that of his junior.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the finding recorded by the two courts below upholding the right of the appellant to be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400 is legal and valid.
I accordingly affirm it.
The cross-objections of the Board in this behalf are rejected.
5.
The appellant has claimed interest on the amount of dues which have accrued to him.
As a normal rule, the appellant was entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1400.
It was illegally denied to him.
Consequently, the normal rule of payment of interest on the wages which were illegally denied to the appellant deserves to be upheld.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it is held that the appellant shall be paid interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date the wages accrued till the date of actual payment.
6.
Mr. Goyal contends that the appellant was called upon to give his option to come back to the post of Head Office Assistant.
He having failed to come back, is not entitled to the payment of any interest.
Admittedly, the appellant had been promoted from the post of Head Office Assistant to that of Divisional Accountant.
At the relevant time, the post of Divisional Accountant was in a scale of pay higher than that of Head Office Assistant.
It carried the pay scale of Rs. 250-535 while that of Head Office Assistant was in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500.
The appellant sought certain clarification.
The Board chose to maintain silence and did not send any reply.
In this situation, I am unable to find any fault with the conduct of the appellant or to hold that he has disentitled himself to the payment of interest.
7.
Mr. Goyal has further contended that since the appellant was working in a different cadre and no promotion was involved, the principle of next-below-rule cannot be invoked.
This principle has not been invoked either at the stage of the trial of the suit at any stage thereafter.
Even now, no reliance has been placed on the principle of next-below-rule.
The action of the Board in denying the higher scale of pay to a senior while it has been granted to the juniors in spite of the fact that the appellant had retained his lien on the post of Head Office Assistant was, in my view, wholly unfair.
Accordingly, his claim was rightly decreed by the trial Court.
8.
Accordingly, I accept this appeal and hold that the plaintiff- appellant would be entitled to the payment of interest @ 12% per annum on the difference of wages.
The cross-objections filed by the Board are dismissed.
Decree be prepared accordingly.
Appeal accepted.