RS Mongia, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 5093/91 7504/91, 8636/91, 8828/91, 9059/91, 9060/91, 9714/91, 9715/91, 9717/91, 11132/91, 11212/91, 12225/90, 12233/91, 11425/91, 13027/91, 14559/91, 11308/91, 12624/91, 16003/91, 16002/91, 17177/91, 14393/91, 10714/91 and 17840/1991 as common questions of law and facts are involved.
2.
Briefly the facts are that the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter called the Board) issued an advertisement in the Daily Tribune on 22.1.1988 inviting applications for filling up 40 posts of Assistant Sub Inspectors in the Haryana Police.
Out of these 40 posts, 8 posts were reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates 4 posts for Backward candidates, 7 posts for Ex-servicemen and I post for National Sportsman of Haryana.
It was mentioned in the advertisement that the number of posts could be varied to any extent.
3.
For the purpose of selection, a candidate was required to qualify two written papers in General English & Hindi (BA level) and General Knowledge, General Studies, and only those candidates who obtained 50% marks or above were to be called for physical test and interview.
The minimum qualification for appointment as Assistant Sub-Inspector had been fixed as BA In response to the advertisement, the petitioners, in these cases had applied for being considered for the post of Assistant Sub Inspectors.
They all had qualified in the written test and were called for interview, which were held between 25th to 29th August, 1989.
4.
Before the recommendations were made by the Board, supplementary requisition was sent by the Government to the Board on 121990 whereby the number of posts was raised from 40 to 80.
Still further on 1041990, requisition for another 18 posts was sent raising the number of posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors to 98.
The Board, however, sent recommendations for appointment only of 62 candidates against the requisition of 98 candidates.
It may be observed here that the recommendations by the Board to the Government were sent in driblets.
The petitioners remained unsuccessfully in getting appointments, which led to the filing of the present writ petitions.
It may be observed here that after appointment, an Assistant Sub-Inspector is required to undergo training at Police Training College Madhuban.
In some of the writ petitions, the Motion Bench, by way of interim order had directed that the petitioners be deputed for undergoing the training at Police Training College, Madhuban, which is required to be undergone by those Assistant Sub- Inspectors, who are appointed to the said posts.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the whole selection is arbitrary and mala fide and there were no norms set for selecting the candidates.
It has further been argued that there was no reason not to recommend candidates beyond 62 inasmuch as the Government had requisitioned candidates for 98 posts.
5.
I had sent for the marks sheets containing the marks for the written test as well as for the interview.
Learned Counsel for the respondents has produced the original marks sheet duly signed by members of the Board.
He has also produced before me the criteria of marks allotted for interview etc.
It may be noticed here that 50 marks which were allocated for viva-voce, experience etc. were divided as under :-  Qualifications 8 marks BA Ist 1 mark, MA III 2 marks MA II 3 marks MA Ist 4 marks MPhil/LL.B.
6 marks Ph.D 8 marks Sports 8 marks District Level 1 mark State Level 3 marks Inter State Level 5 marks International Level 8 marks Experience 4 marks Experience in the line as Constable marks Experience in the line as Head Constable 4 marks Viva-Voce 30 marks TOTAL : 50 marks.
It has further been stated by the learned counsel for the respondents that no candidate in the general category who had obtained less than 133 marks in all out of 250 had been recommended by the Board.
Similarly the last scheduled caste candidate who had been recommended by the Board had obtained 126 marks, whereas the last candidate belonging to Backward Class had obtained 130.
6.
Learned Counsel for the petitioners have made identical submission that just to accommodate some of their favourities the Board Members had given more marks in the interview to them as compared to some candidates including the petitioners who had obtained more marks in the written examination.
I am afraid that there is no basis for this argument at all.
I have seen the mark sheet and this submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners is not well-founded on facts also.
Moreover, if there was any effect on the part of the members of the Board to push-in-their favourities they had all the opportunity inasmuch as the requisition was of 98 candidates, whereas they stopped short at 62, inasmuch as they thought that a candidate who had obtained lesser marks than 133 in the general category is not good enough or suitable to make a good Assistant Sub-Inspector.
Similarly they drew a line at 130 marks for a backward class candidate and 126 marks for a scheduled caste candidate.
As to why the Board chose these figures to draw a line between a suitable candidate and an unsuitable candidate, it is not for this Court to go into.
It is for the Board itself to lay down as to up to what particular figure of marks they would consider a candidate to be suitable or not.
Further in an interview, where no criteria is laid down, the Board can as well say that a particular candidate is suitable or unsuitable and that would be the end of the matter.
In this case, after taking into consideration the total marks in the written examination and viva-voce etc. the Board found that candidates below a particular figure were not suitable, I find nothing wrong in the same.
7.
As far as argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is concerned that since posts were available, the Board was bound to send as many recommendees as the vacancies, has also no merit.
It is not necessary for the Selection Committee to recommend as many candidates as the vacancies.
It is open to the Selecting Body to see that though the posts are there yet it does not find as many candidates suitable for the posts and in that eventuality can recommend candidates lesser in number than the vacancies available.
8.
I may deal with an additional point in CWP No. 5093 of 1991.
It is submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is MA but no credit has been given for the same to the petitioner.
Moreover, according to the Counsel, the petitioner had also experience as a Head Constable.
According to the petitioners Counsel, if 4 marks are given to the petitioner for experience and 3 marks for being MA IInd class, it would be more than what has been given to the petitioner in viva-voce etc. from the original marks sheet, I find that this candidate has been given 5 marks for viva-voce etc.
I had also sent for the original application form of the petitioner in this case and I find that nowhere it has been mentioned that the petitioner is MA in Hindi and even no certificate has been attached showing that the petitioner is MA in Hindi.
Therefore, the respondents have not given any marks to the petitioner for his having done MA Even if 3 marks are added in favour of the petitioner for having done MA IInd class, still I find that his marks would be less than the last candidate who has been recommended in the category of backward class candidates.
Consequently I find that no injustice has been done to the petitioner for not considering him to be MA  9.
There is an additional point in C.W.P.
No. 7504 of 1991 also.
The petitioner, in this case belongs to sports category for which category one seat was reserved.
I am told the candidate who had been selected in this category has resigned and is no more holding the post.
The petitioner in this case and some other petitioners in other writ petitions belonging to this category were deputed for the training by virtue of ad interim orders of this Court.
If it is a fact that the one post which is reserved for the sports category is lying vacant then that may be offered to one of the petitioners belonging to this category on the basis of merit.
10.
Subject to the observations made above, these writ petitions fails and are hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
11.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that by Virtue of ad interim orders of the Motion Bench in many of these writ petitions, the petitioners were deputed for training, which is required to be undergone by a person, who is appointed as Assistant Sub Inspector, The training is at the fag end.
It will be open to the State Government to regularise the appointments of such persons as also give appointments to the other petitioners on the basis of merit, if the State Govt. wishes to fill up the posts beyond 62 in accordance with the requisition already made.
In case the State Govt does not wish to appoint the persons beyond 62, then it is clarified that those petitioners who are undergoing training by virtue of ad interim order of this Court would be allowed to complete the training as they have almost completed the training and if in a later selection, such petitioners are selected, then there will be no necessity for them to undergo the training again.