Harjeet Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner is a Union of employees working with the Steel Authority of India Limited, Faridabad.
On March 2, 1988, the petitioner Union vide Annexure P-1 signed a memorandum of settlement under Section 12(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act).
Clause 4(2) of the settlement which pertained to the working hours of the employees provided that non-executive employees would henceforth work for a period of eight hours excluding half-an-hour for lunch as compared to six-and-half-hours excluding half-an-hour of lunch which was the previous working time.
The settlement in question was to be operative for a period of three years effective from March 2, 1988 unless it was terminated by either party in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
On February 20, 1991 the petitioner Union vide annexure P-2 annexed to the petition, served a notice under Section 19(2) of the Act, of its intention to terminate the settlement annexure P-1 and this matter was reiterated vide annexure P-4 dated May 6, 1991.
The matter was thereafter taken up by the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, Ballabhgarh, who informed the management that as a notice under Section 19(2) of the Act had been given, the settlement of March 3, 1998 was no longer operative.
The Labour Commissioner, Haryana thereafter, addressed a communication annexure P-6 dated June 14, 1991 to the petitioner union in which it was stated that "even on termination the terms and conditions as contained in the settlement dated March 2, 1988, would remain in force and bind the parties till the parties come to an amicable settlement."
Annexure P-6 has been impugned before me by the petitioner union on the ground that the settlement annexure P-1 having come to an end two months after service of Notice P-2 as required by Section 19(2) of the Act, the direction quoted above could not be given by the Labour Commissioner.
2.
Mr. Harsh Aggarwal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has urged that the settlement annexure P-1 having been duly terminated, the petitioners were liable to work for only six and half hours per day as they had been doing earlier to the signing of the settlement of 1988.
He has also urged that the settlement in question pertained only to the payment of some additional amounts towards over time work put in by the employees and as such was not a settlement which would bind the workers to continue to work for a period of eight hours a day till a new settlement was singed between the parties.
3.
Mr. TS Doabia, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-management has relied on the Life Insurance Corporation of India v. DJ Bahadur and others, A.I.R. 1980 Supreme Court 2181, to contend that even if a settlement between the employees and the employer is terminated under section 19(2) of the Act, the parties would be governed by the aforesaid settlement till a new settlement was arrived or some award of the Labour Court rendered.
In paragraph 33, it was observed that "Like nature, Law abhors a vacuum and even on the notice of termination under Section 19(2) or (6) the sequence and consequence cannot be just void but a continuance of the earlier terms, but with liberty to both sides to raise dispute, negotiate settlements or seek a reference and award.
Until such a new contract or award replaces the previous one, the former settlement or award will regulate the relations between the parties."
It will be seen in the light of the portion quoted above that the direction issued by the Labour Commissioner vide annexure P-6 which has already been reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment was perfectly in accordance with the law.
Mr. Aggarwal's contention that as the judgment mentioned above pertained to a dispute between the parties with regard to payment of bonus, it would not apply to the facts of the present case as this dispute relates to the period of working hours of the employees has no force as the matter before me was pointedly in issue before the Supreme Court.
4.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
However, as the petitioners have expressed an apprehension that the respondent-management is deliberately trying to delay matters with regard to the signing of a fresh settlement, a direction is issued to the parties through counsel to appear before the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, Faridabad on February 12, 1992 to make their respective claims and the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer is directed to furnish his report to the appropriate government within a fortnight thereafter.
Petition dismissed.