VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner passed MBBS Examination from the Government Medical College, Patiala and thereafter he completed his house job in Ophthalmology from Daya Nand Medical College, Ludhiana.
Petitioner applied to the College for being admitted to the Post-graduate Degree of Master of Surgery in the speciality of Ophthalmology in November, 1989 for the Session 1990.
As per the prospectus, there were only two seats in the Post-graduate Course in the Speciality of Ophthalmology as sanctioned by the management of the College.
The grievance of the petitioner in the writ petition is that though respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were not eligible for being admitted to the Post-graduate Course in the Speciality of Ophthalmology but still they were admitted.
He is seeking a direction from this Court for quashing their selection and a direction to the College that he be admitted to the Postgraduate Course in Ophthalmology.
2.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, I find no merit in the writ petition.
3.
Admittedly, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were admitted to the Post-graduate Course in the Speciality of Ophthalmology after the Admission Committee relaxed the eligibility condition in their cases which, of course, the Admission Committee was competent to do so in view of clause 2(g) of the Prospectus.
Even otherwise, this Court cannot issue a writ of certiorari granting admission to respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in view of Full Bench judgment of this Court of Gurpreet Singh Sidhu v. Panjab University, AIR 1983 Punjab and Haryana 70 wherein it was held as under :-  "A writ of cortiorari lies stricto seensu only against a body of persons enjoined to act judicially, therefore, a privately owned and privately managed non-statutory institution is outside the range of the writ of certiorari."
So far as the petitioner is concerned, admittedly, he was not eligible to apply for admission because as per clause (c) of Section 3 of the Prospectus only those candidates who have passed their MBBS and have done one year's house job from Daya Nand College were eligible for admission to the College.
No doubt, when the petitioner applied for being admitted to the Post-graduates Course, his form was entertained but subsequently the Admission Committee did not grant admission to the petitioner because he was not eligible as per clause (c) of Section 3 of the Prospectus.
4.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that once the College had granted admission to the petitioner in Diploma Course, then there was no bar to give him admission in a Degree Course.
I need not go into this matter as I find that the petitioner was not eligible for being admitted to the Post-graduate degree, course as per Prospectus of the College.
From the record, I find that the petitioner is a brilliant student having an outstanding record throughout.
He has passed his MBBS Examination in first attempt and has also successfully passed the Diploma course in Ophthalmology.
I hope in case the petitioner applies to the College for being admitted to the Degree Course in the speciality of Ophthalmology, the College, shall consider his application sympathetically and favourably for 1991-1992 Session.
Consequently, this writ petition is dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.