AL Bahri, J - This petition is fully covered by decision of the Supreme Court in Chaman Lal and others v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1987 SC 1621, which is to the effect that J.B.T.
teachers on acquiring higher qualifications of BA, BEd.
would be placed in the higher pay-scale.
The petitioner Saraswati Devi who is a JBT teacher acquired the qualification BA, BEd.
on December 30, 1989, copy of the certificate being Annexure P.1.
Since she was not being given higher pay-scale as per instructions of the Government, Annexures P2 and P.3, she has approached this Court for the grant of relief.
2.
The stand of the respondents is two-fold.
Firstly, that as per latest instructions issued on March 9,1990, Annexure R1, on acquiring higher educational qualifications, higher pay scale is not to be given and secondly, reliance has been placed on the decision of this Court in CWP 770 of 1989, Bachan Lal Lahori v. The State of Haryana, decided on June 5, 1990.
3.
After hearing counsel for the parties we are of the view that this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The instructions of March 9, 1990-R1 cannot be pressed into service to deprive the petitioner of his right to be placed in the higher pay-scale which accrued earlier.
The State of Haryana has allowed higher pay-scales to persons who had acquired higher qualifications and there is no cause for creating discrimination while denying the same relief to the petitioner.
4.
We have perused the judgment in Bachan Lal Lahori's case (supra).
The ratio of this decision again cannot be applied to the case of teachers.
That was a case where Masters wanted to take the pay-scales of Lecturers.
The Division Bench categorically held that there was no reference to Lecturers in the instructions of 1957 or in the order of 1968 which was circulated.
Otherwise the view expressed was that the claim of such petitioners to higher pay-scale on acquisition of B.T./BEd.
qualification from the date of acquiring such qualifications was affirmed.
5.
For the reasons recorded above this writ petition is allowed with the direction to the respondents to allow higher pay-scale to the petitioner from the date she acquired BEd.
degree, as per instructions.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.