Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioner herein, who belongs to the category of Scheduled Castes was a candidate for the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer advertised by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
In the merit list prepared by the Board, the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 21.
In the merit list for the category of Scheduled Castes, the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 4.
When the State did not give him any offer of appointment in spite of his selection he filed a C.W.P.
No. 694 of 1983.
2.
In reply to this writ petition, it was averred on behalf of the respondents that no person below the petitioner in the selection list of Scheduled Caste has been appointed".
On this premises the petition was dismissed.
Subsequently, the persons whose names appeared at Sr. Nos. 24 and 25 of the merit list, i.e. below the petitioner, have been appointed without making any offer to the petitioner.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner represented.
Having failed to get any favourable reply, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia mentioned that vide letter dated May 6, 1987, the Subordinate Services Selection Board advised that "Shri Ramesh Singh, whose name appeared at Sr. No. 25 in the said Selection list, be treated, with retrospective effect, as a candidate belonging to the Ex-Servicemen category.
Under this advice the said Shri Ramesh Singh became retrospectively eligible for appointment as Asistant Food and Supplies Officer against the 12th vacancy of Ex-Servicemen category and was appointed in November, 1987 after the Government revalidated the waiting list of the SSS Board, which was revalidated only to the extent of offering appointment to Shri Ramesh Singh."
With regard to Mr. Krishan Kumar Mehlan, respondent No. 3, it has been mentioned that he was the dependent of an ex-serviceman and the appointment order was passed in his favour in pursuance to the directions given by this Court in CWP No. 9682 of 1987.
On this premises, the action in appointing persons below the petitioner in order of merit is sought to be justified.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Admittedly in the merit list forwarded by the Board vide its letter dated August 16, 1982, the petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 21 while that of Shri Krishan Kumar Mehlan (respondent No. 3) at Sr. No 24 and Mr. Ramesh Singh at Sr. No. 25.
Both the latter candidates are shown to belong to the General category.
In the merit list there is no indication that they belong to the category of or are the dependents of the Ex-servicemen.
If in the combined merit list, the names of these two persons appear below that of the petitioner, it is not understood as to how they could be preferred to the petitioner while making offer of appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers.
Since the persons below the petitioner were appointed without making any offer to the petitioner, there was a clear denial of equality of opportunity to the petitioner.
His rights under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution were violated without any basis whatsoever.
5.
However, the respondents seek to justify the action on the twin grounds that the appointment of respondent No. 3 has been made in pursuance to the directions of this Court while Ramesh Singh has been appointed by conversion from General category to that of Ex-servicemen.
This appointment of Sh. Ramesh Singh had fallen for consideration in CWP No. 3504 of 1988, wherein he was impleaded as respondent No. 3.
Amarjeet Chaudhary, J while considering the matter had inter alia observed that "the explanation put forward by the State that these vacancies were converted into reserved category is not at all convincing.
It appears that it is only an after thought simply to accommodate the said respondents who are junior to the petitioner in the merit list prepared by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board."
Apparently, the petitioner was above respondent No. 3 and Mr. Ramesh Singh in the merit list.
He had a prior right to be appointed.
The action of the respondents in not appointing him before Shri Ramesh Singh was arbitrary, illegal and violative of Article 14 to 16 of the Constitution.
Keeping in view the fact that a person at Sr. No. 25 had been appointed even before appointing respondent No. 3, Krishan Kumar, I cannot hold that the appointment of respondent No. 3 was illegal.
In any case, that matter is pending for adjudication in CWP No. 9682 of 1987.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner for appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer with effect from the date Mr. Singh was appointed.
If the petitioner's antecedents are found to be in order and he is medically fit, the appointment shall be given to him within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
However, since the petitioner has not physically worked on the post, he will not entitled to any arrears of salary etc.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.