RS Mongia, J - The petitioner started his service career as a patwari in the Revenue Department of the Punjab Government in the year 1957.
He was promoted as Kanungo by an order of Collector, Ludhiana on 20101980 and further promoted as a Sadar Kanungo on 15101986.
2.
While working as Kanungo Agrarian, Samrala, the petitioner was placed under suspension on 3101988 as a departmental inquiry was contemplated against him.
Four different charge-sheets were served on the petitioner, copies of which have been attached as annexure P7 to P10 with the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted his replies to the said charge-sheets and the same were found not to be satisfactory and an inquiry officer was appointed.
One Kishan Chand, PCS, an Executive Magistrate at Ludhiana, was appointed as the inquiry officer to conduct the inquiries against the petitioner.
It may be observed that in three charge-sheets, the allegations were that the petitioner has caused delays in dealing with some cases whereas in the fourth case, the charge was that the petitioner did not defend a corruption case against a Patwari in a Court and that Patwari was acquitted by a Court.
In all the four inquiries, the petitioner was exonerated.
The inquiry reports have been annexed as annexures P11 to P14 with the writ petition.
The Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, did not agree with the reports and proposed that all the four inquiries be entrusted to the District Officer for Removal of Grievances or the General Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner for conducting the same afresh.
The file was marked to the Deputy Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner vide his order dated 631990 ordered General Assistant to inquire.
The petitioner got a letter dated 1931990 which was addressed from the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, to General Assistant to the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana (with a copy to the petitioner) informing that the General Assistant to DC had been appointed as inquiry officer again to go into the charge-sheets already served on the petitioner.
The petitioner came up in the present writ petition challenging the order by which de novo inquiries had been ordered against him.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no power with the Deputy Commissioner (the appointing authority of the petitioner) to order de novo inquiry against the petitioner.
He further argued that under rule 9 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter called the `Punishment and Appeal Rules'), the punishing authority can for the reasons to be recorded by it in writing remit the case to the inquiry authority for further inquiry or it has the power to record a finding itself when it disagrees with the finding of the inquiry officer and that too after recording reasons.
The case of the petitioner is that even if the punishing authority had the power to order de novo inquiry, no reasons have been recorded for doing the same by the punishing authority.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel has cited KR Deb v Collector of Central Excise, Shillong, 1971(1) SLR 29 (SC).
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that in fact benefit of doubt had been given to the petitioner by the inquiry officer to exonerate the petitioner and this was a sufficient reason, which was recorded by the Additional Deputy Commissioner, to order de novo inquiry into the same charges.
5.
I find force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Rule 9 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules is in the following terms :-  (Relevant extract)  "9.
Action on the inquiry report - (1) The punishing authority if it is not itself the inquiry authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the enquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of rule 8 as far as may be.
(2) The punishing authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) If the punishing authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv) of rule 5 should be imposed on the Government, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in rule 10 make an order imposing such penalty."
6.
From the above rule, it will be evident that the only power which the punishing authority has is to remit the case to the same inquiry officer for further inquiry and that too after recording reasons.
In the present case, the case has not been remitted for further inquiry.
Rather a de novo inquiry has been ordered and that too by a different inquiry officer.
The rule does not envisage ordering of a de novo enquiry into the same charges but enables the punishing authority to remit the case for further inquiry by the same inquiring authority.
I may not be understood to hold that in no case further inquiry can be held by another inquiring authority but that would be under very special circumstances where the previous inquiring authority is unable for any reason to hold further inquiry.
Further in the present case, I find that the punishing authority itself has not recorded any reasons whatsoever even for holding de novo inquiry.
It is only the Additional Deputy Commissioner who has recorded the reason that the petitioner was given the benefit of doubt by the inquiring authority.
He, therefore, suggested that de novo inquiry should be held.
The punishing authority has not even recorded that he is agreeing with the reasons record by the Additional Deputy Commissioner.
I have already held that rule 9 does not envisage ordering of a de novo inquiry on the same charges.
If such a power is held to be there, then it would be left to the whims of the punishing authority that if he does not agree with the findings of the inquiry authority, he may depute another inquiry officer to go into the same charges and even if the second inquiry officer exonerates the delinquent officer, yet the third inquiry officer may be appointed.
The Supreme Court in the case supra while dealing with similar rule observed as under :-  "It seems to us that Rule 15, on the face of it, really provides for the inquiry but it may be possible if in a particular case there has been no proper inquiry because some serious defect that crept into the inquiry or some important witnesses were not available at the time of the inquiry or were not examined for some other reason, the Disciplinary Authority may ask the inquiry officer to record further evidence.
But there is no provision in rule 15 for completely setting aside previous inquiries on the ground that the report of the Inquiring Officer or Officers does not appeal to the Disciplinary Authority.
The Disciplinary Authority has enough powers to reconsider the evidence itself and come to its own conclusion under rule 9."
7.
Apart from the fact that there is no provision to order de novo inquiry into the same charges, I also find that even the reasons given by Additional Deputy Commissioner that benefit of doubt had been given to the petitioner by the inquiring authority has no legs to stand.
Firstly, even if the inquiring authority has given benefit of doubt, it is no ground to order de novo inquiry or even further inquiry into the matter.
Factually also I find that it was only in one inquiry that benefit of doubt was given to the petitioner and not in the other enquiries.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and the order initiating de novo inquiry against the petitioner is quashed so also annexure P15 attached to the writ petition.
As a consequence of allowing the writ petition, the suspension order against the petitioner would also be quashed which was passed because of the pendency of the inquiry.
The petitioner would be entitled to all consequential benefits including his consideration for promotion to the higher post from due dates when his juniors were promoted.
The arrears of pay and other consequential benefits be given to the petitioner within four months from the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.