RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner while working as a Medical Officer in (PCMS Class II) at Rural Family Planning Unit, Ramdas District Amritsar was placed under suspension by the order of the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department, dated 23rd of July, 1975 (copy Annexure P-1).
It was mentioned in this order that the petitioner would be entitled to subsistence allowance admissible under Rule 72. of the CSR Volume I Part 1.
A charge-sheet dated 3rd of February, 1976 (copy Annexure P-3) is said to have been served on the petitioner.
The charges were to the following effect :  "1.
You were absent from your place of duty i.e. P.H.C.
Ramdas, from 18775 to 21775 (FN) at time of grave emergency caused due to floods in the area of the PHC.
2.
You disregarded specific instructions to carry out flood relief operations in the flood affected area as conveyed to you vide letter No. H-75/1911 dated 18775 from Civil Surgeon, Amritsar.
3.
You failed to supply 4th legible copy of Medicolegal Report conducted by you on 21275 of Sh. Khajan Singh son of Sh. Sucha Singh of Amritsar in spite of repeated reminders from Civil Surgeon, Amritsar.
You failed to indicate the kind of weapon used, thus showing irresponsibility in discharge of your duties."
The petitioner is said to have given reply to the said charge-sheet but according to the averments of the petitioner, he did not hear anything in the matter, though he appeared before any Enquiry Officer in the year 1979.
2.
On the other hand, it is the case of the respondents that during the course of suspension of the petitioner another charge-sheet was served on him through Civil Surgeon, Amritsar vide letter dated 14th August, 1978.
The following were the charges which are said to have been served on the petitioner vide above said letter.
(These charges have been taken from the original record as they do not form part of the pleadings of the parties)  i) You were placed under suspension vide Punjab Government No. 8295-6H81-75/16096, dated 23775 and your headquarter while under suspension was fixed in the office of Civil Surgeon, Amritsar.
ii) The Civil Surgeon, Amritsar vide his letter No. Estt-2-76/6868 dated 15676, reported that you are absent from headquarter at Amritsar and doing private practice at Moga.
iii) You have been evading the attendance in the court of Executive Magistrate, Amritsar.
iv) Since then you are practising privately at Moga and this fact has been confirmed by Civil Surgeon, Faridkot.
As such wilfully absent from headquarter while placed under suspension.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that this charge-sheet was never served on him.
4.
It is admitted on behalf of the petitioner, as observed above, that he did appear before the Enquiry Officer and had denied that he was absent from duty as alleged in the charge-sheet dated 3rd February, 1976.
The learned counsel further says on instructions from his client that when he was asked by the Enquiry Officer as to whether the petitioner was having his private practice at Moga, he had stated before the Enquiry Officer that since the Government had failed to disburse the petitioner the subsistence allowance under Rule 72 of the Punjab CSR Volume I Part 1 for more than six months, he was left with no option but to do something to make his both ends meet.
It may be, observed here that the statement which is said to have been made by the petitioner before the Enquiry Officer (to which reference has been made by the Enquiry Officer) is not traceable at the moment in the files of the respondents.
5.
It has been further stated in the written statement that on the basis of the enquiry report, a show cause notice was sent to the petitioner on 781979 alongwith a copy of the enquiry report for giving an opportunity to the petitioner to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
According to the respondents, since no reply had been received to the show cause notice, a decision was taken by the Government to dismiss the petitioner on June, 1982 and for the said purpose, the matter was referred by the Government to the Punjab Public Service Commission on 11th August, 1982.
According to the petitioner no such show cause notice dated 781979 was ever received by him.
6.
Since, according to the petitioner's counsel, nothing was being heard from the Government regarding the fate of the enquiry against the petitioner, he went on making representations to the respondent-State to finalise the matter.
It was on 18th March, 1986 that an order was passed by the State of Punjab reinstating the petitioner with immediate effect without prejudice to the disciplinary action that may be taken against him.
When this order was passed, petitioner came up in the present writ petition inter alia praying that respondents could not continue with the disciplinary action as a very long period had elapsed and petitioner had been kept under suspension since July, 1975 and if the respondents could not complete the enquiry and take any action thereon he should have been reinstated without taking any further action.
On 16121987, notice of motion was issued for February 10, 1988 and the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner were stayed.
During, the pendency of the writ petition, petitioner received an order dated 15th, December, 1987 endorsed on 4th January, 1988 (copy Annexure P-8) by which the petitioner had been dismissed from service.
The petitioner amended the writ petition accordingly and the motion bench stayed the operation of the dismissal order on 10th February, 1988.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner has retired from service with effect from 31st March, 1991.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has assailed the order of dismissal Annexure P-8 on the following grounds :  i) That the whole proceedings culminating in the impugned order Annexure P-8 are against rules of natural justice by sheer lapse of time.
ii) That the impugned order is based on wrong presumption of facts regarding service of the charge-sheet, show cause notice etc.
There has been non-compliance with the rules of natural Justice.
iii) That the findings of the Enquiry Officer are based on no evidence and no proper opportunity was given by the Enquiry Officer to the petitioner.
The enquiry proceedings before the Enquiry Officer are against the provisions of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
8.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that from the bare reading of the enquiry report, it is evident that the petitioner had been served with both the charge-sheets and if the petitioner failed to give any reply to the second charge-sheet, the respondents were fully justified in going ahead with the matter in absence of any reply.
It was further submitted that in fact the petitioner had admitted his guilt before the Enquiry Officer and there has been no delay on the part of the Government inasmuch as immediately after deciding to punish the petitioner, approval of the Punjab public Service Commission was sought in the year 1982 and it was only in November, 1987 that Punjab Public Service Commission sent the approval and thereafter the order was passed on the file to dismiss the petition on 15th December, 1987, which was endorsed to the petitioner on 4th January, 1988.
Further, according to the counsel, there was no violation of Punishment and Appeal Rules.
9.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find force in the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The enquiry report dated 31.5.1979 reads as under :-  "I am to invite a reference to Punjab Government Endorsement No. 1/21(a)-78-6HBI/3495, dated 18.4.1979 on the subject cited above and to state that I held enquiry into the case on 10th May, 1979.
Dr. Harbhajan Singh duly participated in the enquiry and gave his statement in writing.
Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was served with two charge-sheets one for wilful absence from duty and disregard to carry out orders of higher officer for flood relief operation etc. and the other for wilful absence from headquarter while under suspension and starting private practice at Moga while his headquarters were fixed at Amritsar for suspension period.
In reply to first charge-sheet Dr. Greasy has denied that he was absent from duty when put on flood relief work.
The Civil Surgeon, in his letter No. FPE/11893, dated 81075.
(copy enclosed) had intimated the Director, Health Services, Punjab about his absence from place of duty.
Dr. Greasy, though denied the charge, could not produce any evidence in support of his claim that he was present on duty, the day he was declared absent from duty by the Civil Surgeon.
With regard to other charge about not maintaining his headquarters while under suspension as fixed by government and starting private practice at Moga, Dr. Greasy has agreed that he had started private practice at Moga which he still continues to do.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that all the charges framed against Dr. Greasy stand proved and propose disciplinary action against him under the rules.
The statements of Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy (under suspension) and Sh. Chandan Singh, Presenting Officer was enclosed for perusal of government."
10.
There is nothing on the record to show that the second charge-sheet which is said to have been served on the petitioner after his suspension was ever served on the petitioner.
It has been brought to my notice that the charge-sheet which had been sent to the Civil Surgeon, Amritsar for onward transmission to the petitioner was sent by the Civil Surgeon to the petitioner by a registered letter.
However, there is nothing on the record to show that the said registered letter was ever received by the petitioner.
Otherwise also, I find that the petitioner was put under suspension in the year 1975 and without any delay caused by him in the conduct of the enquiry, the Government took its own time to decide the matter in the year 1982, though the enquiry concluded in 1979.
The petitioner was kept under suspension, till the year 1986 when he was reinstated on 21st March, 1986.
It is no ground to say that the Punjab Public Service Commission had not sent its approval and that is why the delay occurred.
Right from 1975 to 1982, the ball was in the court of the Government and thereafter it was thrown in the court of the Punjab Public Service Commission which also took its own time in corresponding with the Government and decided the matter after more than 5 years of the first reference.
Under such circumstances, I am of the opinion that delay which is not attributable to the delinquent officer is one of the major considerations that should be taken note of while concluding disciplinary proceedings against a delinquent officer.
Taking disciplinary action after a lapse of a long time, apart from having demoralising effect on a Government servant also gives rise to the feeling that the disciplinary proceedings are prolonged just to keep Government servant under suspension and humiliate him and to keep the sword of Democles hanging over his head.
11.
Coming to the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Punishment and Appeal Rules and the rules of natural justice have been violated by the Enquiry Officer, it may be noticed that Rule 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules envisage that alongwith the charge-sheet list of documents and the list of witnesses to be relied upon by the prosecution are to be supplied to the delinquent officer.
Further the rules require that the prosecution shall first lead evidence and after an opportunity of cross- examining has been given to the delinquent officer he would be given an opportunity to lead defence evidence after the close of the evidence of the prosecution.
There is no indication on the files nor in the pleadings that any list of witnesses or list of documents was supplied to the petitioner.
No prosecution witness was examined by the Enquiry Officer as is clear from the inquiry report.
He was not asked by the Inquiry Officer if he wanted to lead any defence.
From the inquiry report, I find that onus was put on the petitioner to disprove the charge rather than on the prosecution to prove the charge.
Reliance has, been placed by the Inquiry Officer on a report of the Civil Surgeon, Amritsar that the petitioner was absent from duty for some time.
Neither that report was proved by the Civil Surgeon nor the Civil Surgeon was ever produced by the prosecution before the Enquiry Officer so that petitioner could cross-examine him in the matter.
Moreover, the petitioner was also not asked if he required the assistance of any other Government employee to defend him as required under Rule 8(8) of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
From above, it is evident that the procedure envisaged under Rule 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules and the Rules of the natural justice were thrown to the winds by the Inquiry Officer.
12.
So far as the admission of the petitioner himself before the Inquiry Officer, is concerned that he had been practising at Moga during the period of suspension, it may be observed that statement is not available on the files of the Government.
It is not the case of the respondents that from day one of his suspension, the petitioner had started his private practice at Moga and was absent from the Headquarters from the very first day and it was for this reason that he was not paid subsistence allowance.
It is not necessary for me to go into the point whether the payment of subsistence allowance can be made dependent upon the delinquent.
officer being present at the headquarters or only a disciplinary action can be taken against him for not being present at the headquarters, and for that reason the subsistence allowance cannot be denied to him.
The fact remains that according to the petitioner his admission before the Enquiry Officer was only that since for quite a number of months after suspension, he had not received subsistence allowance, he had no option, but to do some private practice somewhere for his survival.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner had admitted the charge that he was doing private practice.
Moreover, as would be evident from reading of both the charge-sheets, the charges were more than two.
However, the Inquiry Officer after discussing two charges regarding absence from duty and doing private practice during the period of suspension, has held that the petitioner is guilty of all the charges.
There is nothing on the record to show as to how the Inquiry Officer had come to the finding that the other charges also stood proved.
In fact, there is no legal evidence on the record even to come to the finding regarding the two charges of absence and doing private practice.
The inquiry report has been made the basis for punishment against the petitioner.
Since I am holding that the inquiry proceedings were vitiated because of violation of Punishment and Appeal Rules and Rules of natural justice and findings are not supported by any evidence, no further action could be taken on such an inquiry report.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, I allow this petition and quash the order dated 15121987 (endorsed on 411988), Annexure P-8, by which the petitioner was dismissed from service.
14.
Needless to mention that by virtue of quashing of this order, the petitioner would be entitled to all consequential reliefs flowing therefrom.
The respondents are directed to grant consequential reliefs to the petitioner within a period of three months from the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.