Jawahar Lal, Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Sectional Officer under the first proviso to Rule 5(2) of the Punjab Municipal Services (Recruitment and Conditions of Service Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules') vide orders dated December 2, 1988.
Vide letter dated June 22, 1990, the petitioner was served with a notice to show cause as to why the order dated December 2, 1988 be not rescinded.
Finally, vide order dated February 8, 1991, the Government has rescinded the order of December 2, 1988.
Aggrieved by this order the petitioner has approached this court through the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Draftsman in the Improvement Trust, Ropar on April 27, 1976.
On January 31, 1983, he was given the additional charge of the post of Sectional Officer in the Trust.
On July 15, 1983, he was given the additional charge of the post of Sectional Officer in the Municipal Committee, Ropar.
Vide orders dated June 27, 1986, the petitioner was transferred from the post of Sectional Officer in the Improvement Trust, Ropar to that of Sectional Officer in the Notified Area Committee, Nangal.
These orders were passed by the then Secretary to Government Punjab in the Local Government department.
It is averred that while working as Sectional Officer in the Notified Area Committee, Nangal, the petitioner represented for his permanent absorption in the Punjab Municipal Service of Sectional Officers.
According to the petitioner, the representation was accepted and vide orders dated December 2, 1988 (Annexure P5) the petitioner was absorbed in accordance with the provisions of the rules.
As a consequence in the seniority list of Draftsmen issued by the State of Punjab the name of the petitioner was deleted.
This, the petitioner submits, was on account of his permanent absorption in the Municipal Service of Sectional Officers.
Vide letter dated June 22, 1990, the petitioner was served with a notice to show cause as to why the order dated December 2, 1988 be not, rescinded.
He submitted his reply vide letter dated June 27, 1990.
He sought personal interview.
It appears that at the time of personal hearing, the petitioner submitted a detailed reply dated July 24, 1990, copies of which are at Annexures P.7 and P.8 with the writ petition.
Vide orders dated February 8, 1991, the order of the petitioner's absorption in the Municipal Service of Sectional Officers (Annexure P5) was rescinded.
Consequently this petition.
3.
The Motion Bench while admitting the petition stayed the operation of this order on March 14, 1991.
As a result, the petitioner has continued to hold the post of Section Officer.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the written statement certain preliminary objections regarding the failure of the petitioner to exhaust the alternative remedies of appeal to the Governor and the competence of the petition especially in the absence of having not impleaded Mr. JS, Kesar, IAS, the former Director Local Government as the necessary party, have been raised.
It has also been averred that the writ petition had been drawn up on January 31, 1991, while the impugned order had been issued on February 8, 1991.
It is claimed that the tendency to rush to the Court deserves to be curbed by dismissing the writ petition at the very threshold.
On merits it has been stated that the petitioner never "requested to be sent back to his original cadre and relieved of the additional charge but with ulterior motive continued to cling to the post of Sectional Officer which was only an interim arrangement and wilfully dodged time with a view to establish his right to the post of Sectional Officer in the cadre of provincialised municipal service."
It has been further averred that "the petitioner hobnobbed with the then Director, Local Government, Punjab, Mr. JS Kesar, IAS.
The said Director in order to cause wrongful gain to the petitioner had not played the role of guardian of rules and regulations but in utter disregard, sheer negligence and wilful distorted misconstruction of the 1975 Rules, erroneous interpretation of law and rules, passed an order of appointment of the petitioner on the promotional post of provincialised Municipal Sectional Officer, a copy whereof is Annexure P5 with this petition."
Various infirmities in the matter have been mentioned in paragraph 5 of the written statement.
It has been further averred that "both Sectional Officer and draftsman are in the same scale of pay which is all the more good reason that there will be no injustice consequent upon his reversion from Municipal Sectional Officer to Trust Draftsman."
In reply to paragraph 7(i) it has been inter alia stated that "the former Director Local Government who passed order, Annexure P5, never arrived honestly at a certain decision but gravely erred in facts and law.
The role played in this case by the petitioner himself is dubious and the then Director who passed order, Annexure P5.
failed to correctly interpret the statutory provisions and has not played the role of guardian of rules and regulations."
It has been further stated that the petitioner "should thank his stars that the Government has taken his illegal appointment as an error and shown a gesture of goodwill and humane attitude by reverting him rather than dispensing with his services."
4.
With the help of the learned counsel for the parties I have gone through the record of the case and, in particular the impugned order.
A perusal of this order shows that after quoting the rule and giving the sequence of events it was observed as under :-  "And whereas the case was further considered and the contentions put forth by Sh. Bharat Bhushan were found without any merit and force in view of the legal position that since Sh. Bharat Bhushan, was a member of Punjab Service of Trust Draftsman and as such he could not be appointed by transfer to the Punjab Municipal Service of Sectional Officers - Sectional Officer and Draftsman being two different posts and that too on two different cadres of service constituted under different statutes and governed by different service rule.
Now, therefore, I, SK Naik, IAS, Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Local Government in exercise of powers vested in me under section 17 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922 and Rules made thereunder read with Section 19 of the Punjab General Clauses Act, 1898, rescind the order No. DLG (TSC)-88/49637-39 dated 2121988 whereby Sh. Bharat Bhushan, a member of Punjab Service of Trust Draftsman, was appointed by transfer to the Punjab Service of Municipal Sectional Officers under the order of the then Director, Local Government, Punjab which was beyond jurisdiction without authority and void ab initio.
As a consequence Sh. Bharat Bhushan will stand reverted to the Punjab Service of Trust Draftsman and he is hereby posted in Improvement Trust, Sangrur as Draftsman."
5.
It appears that :-  (i) the contentions put forth by the petitioner were found to be without any merit on the ground that a member of the Punjab Service of Trust Draftsman could not be appointed by transfer to the Punjab Municipal Service of Sectional Officers; (ii) It has been observed that the order was beyond jurisdiction, without authority and void ab initio.
It is the validity of this ground that has been challenged before me.
6.
Rule 5 of the Rules reads as under :-  "5.
Method of Recruitment.
(1) Recruitment to various categories of posts in a Service at the time of its initial constitution shall be made by the appointing authority by absorption of persons already in the service of Municipal Committee in a corresponding post in appropriate category at the time of the constitution of the service, provided that they are found fit by an Authority appointed by the Government in this behalf for becoming member of the Service after taking into consideration their qualifications and service record.
(2) After filling in the vacancies under sub-rule (1), the remaining vacancies and the vacancies which may occur thereafter shall be filled up in the following manner :- (i) Fifty per cent by direct recruitment; and ii) Fifty per cent by promotion on seniority-cum-merit basis :  Provided that if no suitable candidate is available for appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion, the vacancy may be filled by transfer or on deputations :  Provided further that if no qualifications have been specified in Appendix 'B' for the purpose of filling up the same by promotion, that post shall be filled up by direct recruitment.
(3) The recruitment under sub-rule (2)(i) shall be made by the appointing authority on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted under sub-rule (4).
(4) The Government may, from time to time, by notification, constitute a Selection Committee, consisting of at least three officers of the Government and two non-officials who have sufficient experience in the functioning of urban local bodies and different Selection Committees may be constituted for different categories of posts in a Service : Provided that at least one of the members of a Selection Committee shall belong to the Scheduled Castes.
(5) The Selection Committee referred to in sub-rule (4) may associate any person or persons not exceeding two who are specialists or experienced professionals of eminence keeping in view the nature and duties of the posts required to be filled.
The specialists to be associated shall not be less than the rank of a Superintending Engineer in the case of selection to the cadre of Engineers and not below the rank of a Joint Director of Health Service in the case of Selection of medical staff.
(6) While making recruitment under sub-rule (2), the policy of the Government regarding reservation of appointments or posts for members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes and for any other category in relation to the services under it shall be applicable to the services."
7.
A perusal of clause (2) shows that the vacancy in the Service can be filled up by direct recruitment and by promotion.
In case, no suitable candidate is available for appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion the vacancy can be filled tip by transfer or by way of deputation.
Transfer or appointment on deputation has not to be within the service.
A person can be appointed by transfer from a different department, a different Service and even from a different State.
The rule does not envisage any appointment from within the Service.
It does not envisage any transfer from a particular departmental service only.
It permits the authority to fill up the post by transfer from anywhere.
Just as a person can be brought on deputation from a different department, similarly, appointment by transfer can be from any source.
In such a situation, the observation that a member of the Punjab Trust Draftsman could not be appointed by transfer to the Municipal Service of Sectional Officers as they were different posts borne on different cadres cannot be sustained.
Equally lacking in merit is the finding that the order of the Director was "beyond jurisdiction, without authority and void ab initio."
It has not been disputed before me that the power to appoint vests in the Director.
In fact, rule 2(c) defines the 'appointing authority' to mean the authority indicated as the appointing authority against each category of Service in Appendix 'C' in respect of that category of Service."
A reference to Appendix 'C' shows that in case of Sectional Officers, the Director Local Government is the appointing authority.
Since the power to appoint vests in the Director, he had the jurisdiction to pass the order at Annexure P5.
That being so, the observation that the order was "beyond jurisdiction without authority and void ab initio" cannot be sustained.
8.
Though for the purpose of adjudging the validity of the impugned order, it is only the reasons stated in the order that have to be examined and those reasons cannot be supplemented by any affidavit filed subsequently, yet in the interest of justice, I am inclined to examine the reasons mentioned in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been mentioned in paragraph 5 that the order of petitioner's appointment (Annexure P5) suffers from the following legal infirmities :-  (a) The petitioner belonged to the service of Trust Draftsman and could not be "promoted and appointed as Municipal Sectional Officer, which is higher and altogether distinct and different post governed by different statute and statutory rules made thereunder."
(b) Order, Annexure P5 could not have been passed unless it was found that "no suitable candidate is available for appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion .....
The petitioner has been absorbed in altogether different promotional post by transfer."
(c) The petitioner, who is a Trust Draftsman, can be appointed by transfer as a draftsman, but not as Sectional Officer.
(d) The petitioner holds a diploma in draftsmanship and he did not possess the qualification of Diploma in Civil Engineering.
As such he was ineligible for being considered for the post of Sectional Officer.
9.
So far as ground (a) is concerned, as observed earlier, the power to appoint by transfer authorises the competent authority to appoint anybody in accordance with law.
Its choice was not confined to the members of the Municipal Service alone.
So far as ground (b) is concerned, I find it equally untenable.
Firstly, the fact that the competent authority had passed the order of the petitioner's appointment by transfer is itself an indication of its having formed the opinion that there was no person who could be appointed by promotion or by direct recruitment.
Secondly, even in the impugned order as also in the written statement no finding has been recorded or otherwise suggested that in fact persons were available for appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion.
The respondents have not improved upon the position that existed at the time of passing of the order at Annexure P5.
If it had been found that certain persons suitable for appointment by promotion were available and their names were wrongly ignored or that even persons selected for appointment by direct recruitment were available but they were wilfully kept out, probably the action of the then Director who passed the order at Annexure P5 could have been successfully assailed.
However, in the absence of any finding to that effect or even an averment in that behalf.
I am unable to sustain the plea that the order was violative of the provisions contained in the proviso to Rule 5(2).
It has been further observed that the petitioner could only be appointed by transfer as a Draftsman, but not a Sectional Officer.
I find no basis for this averment either in the rules or otherwise in principle.
No rule has been brought to my notice to show that transfer can be only on the same post.
In fact, such a suggestion has already been negatived by a Division Bench of this Court in Roshan Lal Anand & others v. State of Punjab & others, 1978 PLR 596, wherein while upholding the appointment by transfer of the Prosecuting Inspectors in the Police Department to the post of Assistant District Attorneys it was observed that "the use of the word 'transfer' occurring in sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) does not prohibit an appointment which may also operate as a promotion.
If a lower category officer is transferred to higher post in another department, he would no doubt get promotion, but then it cannot be said that his appointment to the higher post is not by way of transfer.
So long as the appointment satisfies the requirement that it amounts to a transfer it would within the ambit of sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) even though it may also partake of the character of promotion or may have other characteristics."
Accordingly, even if the transfer amounted to appointment to another post or promotion, it cannot be said to be illegal and contrary to the rules.
10.
So far as the averment that the petitioner holds a diploma in Draftsman and is not qualified for appointment to the post of Sectional Officer is concerned, I find from a perusal of Appendix 'B' to the rules that only qualifications for direct recruitment have been prescribed.
Qualifications have not been prescribed for appointment by transfer or promotion.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner was ineligible for appointment by transfer.
11.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It appears that Mr. Manmohan Singh, Joint Secretary, while filing the affidavit has mentioned the above four grounds, and apparently these grounds may have influenced the decision of the Government, but none of these grounds had been mentioned in the present form in the show cause notice which had been issued to the petitioner.
The notice was primarily issued on the ground that the transfer was irregular and illegal as a draftsman could not be appointed by transfer as Sectional Officer.
Most of the grounds now enumerated were not mentioned in the show cause notice.
I am of the view that the action of the authority in taking these grounds into consideration without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner in that behalf was wholly unfair and inequitable.
If the authority was of the view that the order of his appointment, Annexure P 5, was illegal for more than one ground, it was incumbent on it to mention them in the show cause notice so that he could have effectively submitted his reply.
This was not done.
12.
On a scrutiny of the affidavit I further find that the averments are self-contradictory.
In paragraph 7, it has been inter alia stated that "the petitioner has been absorbed in altogether different promotional post by transfer."
In paragraph 6 of the written statement it has been stated that "both Sectional Officer and Draftsman are in the same scale of pay which is all the more good reason that there will be no injustice consequent upon the reversion from Municipal Sectional Officer to Trust Draftsman."
13.
Apparently, the averments are contradictory.
Even otherwise, it has been averred in the written statement that Mr. Kesar had passed the order "to cause wrongful gain to the petitioner ......" It has been further stated that "this provision was wilfully overlooked by the then Director..." It has also been averred that "the former Director Local Government who passed order, Annexure P5, never arrived honestly at a certain decision but gravely erred in facts and law... " It has also been stated that "the role played in this case by the petitioner himself is dubious and the then Director who passed order, Annexure P5, failed to correctly interpret the statutory provisions and has not played the role of guardian of rules and regulations."
'Hard words seldom break bones.'
However, the use of such epithets with regard to an officer or the petitioner was wholly unwarranted by the circumstances of this case.
In the absence of a positive finding in the order regarding the personal bona fides of Mr. JS Kesar, it does not appear to be appropriate for the officer to aver that the order had been passed wilfully or to cause wrongful gain to the petitioner.
Nor do I find any basis for the averment that the former Director did not arrive at the decision honestly.
Since the petitioner has not levelled allegations of personal bias etc., I do not wish to make any further comments in this behalf.
14.
Accordingly, I allow this writ petition and quash the order dated February 8, 1991 (Annexure P.9).
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.