BC Varma, C.J.
- The short question for decision in this petition is whether the disciplinary enquiry initiated against the petitioner can be allowed to continue or should be quashed, being inordinately delayed.
2.
The petitioner is a Sub Divisional Officer and at the relevant time in the year 1977, was posted at National Highway Division, Amritsar, in the Public Works Department of the State of Punjab.
It appears that certain embezzlements in the department were detected and, therefore, an F.I.R. was registered on 18.12.1972.
The petitioner, however, was not named therein.
However, later as a consequence of preliminary enquiry report was submitted on 1171974 and it transpired that the petitioner for the first time was sought to be implicated therein.
The notice is Annexure P-5.
For no good reasons the Department waited for 14 long years before a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on 171988.
To this charge-sheet, the petitioner replied immediately, as soon as on 16.8.1988.
In spite of it, the Enquiry Officer waited for further period of about a year when the petitioner was served a notice to appear before him on 3101989.
The petitioner alleges that because of this undue delay in proceeding against him, he was denied the promotions, which were otherwise due to him.
He is now due to retire at the end of year 1998.
The petitioner adds that right from the year 1972 till date no fault has been found with the petitioner's conduct relating to his service nor has any adverse report been communicated to him.
Relying on the authority of the Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Bani Singh and another, 1990(2) S.L.R.
798, the departmental proceedings are sought to be quashed.
3.
In defence, the stand taken is that the enquiry has now reached at the stage of evidence and may soon see its end.
Consequently, says learned Additional Advocate General, appearing for the State of Punjab, that the enquiry should be allowed to be completed.
Regarding Bani Singh's case (supra), it is submitted that the Central Administrative Tribunal (whose judgment was before the Supreme Court in appeal), quashed the departmental enquiry because of unexplained long delay and the Supreme Court only observed that there was no reason to interfere with the view so taken by the Tribunal.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the dicta in Bani Singh's case (supra) fully supports the petitioner and the departmental enquiry set up against him must be quashed.
The facts narrated above clearly show that the incident is of the year 1972 and the department had the report of the preliminary enquiry as back as in July, 1974.
There appears to be no reason and none has been put in the return filed by the respondents which did not permit the department to issue the charge-sheet upto July, 1988.
This delay of 14 years has remained completely unexplained.
The return filed does not even show an attempt to explain this delay.
There again had been a year's delay in further proceedings, after the petitioner filed his reply to the charge-sheet.
It a pears quite unreasonable to think that a period of about 14 years was required to issue the charge-sheet.
I, therefore, think, as in Bani Singh's case (supra), it will be unfair to permit the departmental enquiry to proceed at this stage.
The delay has already deprived the petitioner of his legitimate right to earn promotions.
Since he is now due to retire at the end of the year 1998, and that he had a spotless career all through after the year 1974, I feel that it will be unjust to allow the enquiry to proceed any further.
5.
For the aforesaid reasons, I allow this petition and quash the charge-sheet dated 171988, and all consequential departmental proceedings on that charge-sheet against the petitioner.
Under the circumstances, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.