MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of three C.W.P.
Nos. 14000 and 12085 of 1989 and C.W.P.
No. 1223 of 1990, as common questions of fact and law are involved.
However, for appreciating the controversy involved, facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 14000 of 1989 (Ram Rattan NDSI and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(1) S.C.T.
186).
2.
The petitioners are Physical Training Instructors (NDSI) working in the Directorate of School Education, Haryana.
Before their absorption in the Haryana Education Department, they were working as Instructors (N.D.S.)
under the Central Government and it was after decentralization of the development programme of the Government of India that they came to be appointed in the Haryana Education Service.
At the time of their absorption in the State service, their existing pay and allowances had been protected by the Director of Public Instruction, Haryana, vide communication dated 15th October, 1976 (Annexure P.1).
However, later on, on some audit objection that the petitioner had been drawing D.A.
in the sum of Rs. 18/- P.M. in excess, the amount was ordered to be deducted from the monthly salary of the petitioners.
A number of petitioners, including one Amar Nath Bhatia represented against the arbitrary action but ultimately Amar Nath Bhatia filed C.W.P.
No. 676 of 1987 in this Court which was disposed of by the Division Bench consisting of SS Kang and MM Punchhi, JJ.
(as their Lordships then were) on 21st July, 1987, by passing the order which runs as under :-  "Mr. Sandhu, learned counsel for the respondents, states that the impugned orders Annexures P.10 and P11 have been withdrawn and that the amount recovered from the petitioner from February, 1984 to March, 1986 has been paid back.
In this situation, this writ petition has become infructuous and is dismissed as such.
However, if more money is due to the petitioner from the respondents, he shall be at liberty to recover the same in accordance with law.
Sd/-  SS Kang Sd/-  MM Punchhi Judges.
July 21, 1987."
3.
Thereafter, other petitioners also represented to the respondents by placing reliance on 'the aforesaid order of the Court, inter alia pleading that no order effecting any recovery or imposing any cut in the salary of the petitioners could be passed without affording an opportunity to the petitioners or without disclosing proper reasons therefor.
However, the Director, School Education, Haryana, by order dated 9th/10th March, 1988, declined the representations made by the petitioners.
Aggrieved against that, the petitioners have approached this Court for the same relief which had been granted by the respondents to Amar Nath Bhatia in C.W.P.
No. 676 of 1987 (supra).
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the impugned order of effecting recovery from the salary of the petitioners and the order dated 9th/10th March, 1988 (Annexure P4), rejecting the representations of the petitioners are not tenable in law.
Both the orders deserve to be quashed on the short grounds that firstly, no opportunity of hearing was afforded to the petitioners before passing the impugned orders, and hence they are violative of the principles of natural justice; and secondly, they are cryptic and non-speaking.
No reasons whatsoever have been discussed in the orders as to on what ground or on what legal justification the recovery has been ordered to be effected.
5.
Consequently, the writ petitions are allowed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.