Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners herein are aggrieved by the seniority assigned to them as Grading Assistants.
They have challenged the order dated March 29, 1985 by which a tentative seniority list was issued as also the order dated December 17, 1986 by which the final seniority list was circulated.
The petitioners have also impugned the order dated January 16, 1987 by which certain persons alleged to be junior to petitioners were placed in the grade.
These orders are at Annexures P-9, P-11 and P-12 to the writ petition.
2.
A few facts which are relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
The petitioners were appointed as Grading Assistants on ad hoc basis in 1973-74.
Vide orders dated September 25, 1978 services of the petitioners were regularised with effect from April 1, 1977.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P-1.
In the meantime, certain posts of Grading Assistants had been advertised for making direct recruitment.
In pursuance of the recommendations made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') 55 persons were appointed as Grading Assistants vide orders dated April 14, 1977.
Another batch of 25 persons was appointed out of the persons recommended by the Board vide orders dated May 17, 1977.
Three more batches consisting of 19 candidates, 9 candidates and 11 candidates were appointed thereafter by order dated July 21, 1977, September 26, 1977 and March 23, 1978.
Copies of these orders have been placed on record as Annexures P-3 to P-7.
The recommendations of the Board had been made on March 31, 1977.
3.
On March 29, 1985, a tentative seniority list showing the position as on January 1, 1985 was issued.
In this list all the 119 candidates who had been appointed vide orders at Annexures P-3 to P-7 were assigned seniority with effect from March 31, 1977.
As a result, the petitioners were shown junior to the 119 direct recruits.
Objections were invited against the tentative seniority fist.
Certain persons filed the objections.
These objections were decided vide orders dated October 29, 1986.
A copy of the order has been placed on record as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition.
Vide orders dated December 17, 1986, the seniority list was finalised.
The petitioners were shown junior to the 119 candidates mentioned above.
On January 16, 1987, the department granted senior grade to 47 persons with effect from February 4, 1975.
The petitioners were aggrieved by the seniority list as well as the order granting senior grade.
They got issued a notice dated February 20, 1987 under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Having failed to get any reply, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
In the writ petition as originally filed, the State of Punjab, Development Commissioner and the Director of Agriculture had been impleaded as respondents.
Six persons had moved CM No. 5110 of 1987 for being impleaded as respondents.
This application was allowed by orders dated November 19, 1987.
5.
Two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
A written statement has been filed by Mr. Kulwant Singh Grewal, Deputy Director of Agriculture.
A separate written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 4 to 9.
On behalf of the respondents, a preliminary objection that necessary parties have not been impleaded has been raised.
On merits, it has been averred that the seniority has been fixed in view of the decision of the Govt. to the effect that the recommendees of the Board of April 1, 1977 or of a date prior to that shall rank senior to those whose services were regularised with effect from April 1, 1977.
This decision was taken in terms of the Punjab Govt. letter dated May 3, 1977 read with a circular letter dated March 15, 1962.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure 'A' with the written statement, filed on behalf of the official respondents.
It has also been averred that the Board had recommended the 119 candidates vide letter dated March 31, 1977.
The seniority had to be determined in accordance with the circular letter dated March 15, 1962.
Vide this order, the Govt. had decided that the seniority of the candidates recommended by the Board should be determined with reference to the date of issue of the Board's letter and not from the receipt of the recommendations as in the latter case, the letters are liable to be delayed in transit or mis-sent and diarised very late at destination thereby causing undue hardship to the candidates concerned.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out with reference to the letter dated May 3, 1977 vide which the Govt. had decided to regularise the services of the ad hoc employees that the seniority of the ad hoc employees had to be determined with effect from April 1, 1977 from which date their services have been regularised.
6.
I have heard Mr. RK Chopra for the petitioners and Mr. Arihant Jain for the respondents.
Mr. Jain raised the preliminary objection that the seniority list at Annexure P-11 could not be quashed since all persons who were likely to be affected had not been impleaded as parties.
Mr. Chopra on the other hand submitted that the only challenge was to the criteria for determination of seniority and in any case some other persons had themselves moved an application for being impleaded as respondents.
7.
It is well-settled that seniority of a person relates to his conditions of service.
It governs his further career in service.
It cannot be affected except after giving the person concerned a due and reasonable opportunity of being heard.
There is a catena of decisions wherein it has been held that seniority cannot be changed except after compliance with principles of natural justice.
In the present case, the petitioners are seeking to affect the rights of more than 100 persons without impleading them as respondents.
If the Govt. cannot change the seniority without hearing the persons concerned, even this court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction, cannot upset the already determined seniority without affording an opportunity to the persons who are likely to be affected.
Each one of those persons has to be impleaded.
The petitioners impleaded none.
Even though six persons have become parties yet the remaining persons have not been impleaded.
Their seniority cannot be affected without hearing them.
Each one of them is a necessary party.
The seniority of persons who are not before this Court cannot be affected without affording them a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
That being so, it is not possible to grant any relief to the petitioners in the absence of persons who, in my view, are necessary parties.
8.
Mr. Chopra, however, submits that the only challenge in the petition is the criteria adopted by the respondents.
Factually, it is not so.
The petitioners have, inter alia, prayed that the orders at Annexure P-9, P-11 and P-12 be quashed.
They have further prayed that the original seniority-list which had been issued by the Govt. depicting the position upto October 1, 1979 be restored.
There is no prayer for quashing any other order.
In fact, the instructions issued by the Govt. vide their letter dated March 15, 1962 have not even been challenged in the writ petition.
It is thus apparent that there is no challenge to the policy decision.
The challenge is in fact to seniority lists and the consequential orders granting the senior grade.
Mr. Chopra is, therefore, not right in submitting that the challenge is to the criteria for determination of seniority and, therefore, the persons who were likely to be affected are not necessary parties.
9.
In view of the above, I hold that necessary parties having not been impleaded as respondents, their seniority cannot be adversely affected and the order granting seniority grade to 47 persons cannot be quashed.
10.
Even on merits, I do not think that the claim of the petitioners can be sustained.
The petitioners had been initially appointed on ad hoc basis during the years 1973 and 1974.
The posts of Grading Assistants were advertised while the petitioners were still working on ad hoc basis.
The Petitioners were at liberty to compete for direct recruitment.
Learned counsel for the petitioners was not in a position to state unequivocally that none of them had competed.
In any case, they had the opportunity to compete.
They either competed and did not attain the requisite merit or they chose not to compete.
In dither event, they did not prove their, merit to be better than that of 119 persons whose merit list was, issued by the Board on March 31, 1977.
By that date, even the decision to regularise the services of the ad- hoc employees had not been taken by the Govt. Factually the decision was conveyed only by a letter of May 3, 1977.
Before that date, the Board had issued the merit list and sent it to the Govt. vide its letter of March 31, 1977.
Regularisation with retrospective effect is only a concession conferred by an executive decision.
Persons who prove their merit in competitive selection cannot be justifiably shown junior to whose services have been subsequently regularised with retrospective effect from April 1, 1977.
If the contention raised by the petitioners is accepted, the result would be that even an ad hoc employee who had competed and failed to attain requisite merit would become senior to a person who has been successful in the selection conducted by the Board.
Such.
a course of action would neither be equitable nor in consonance with the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
Persons like the petitioners who have either not availed of the chance to compete or having competed have failed to make the requisite grade cannot be treated as senior to persons like respondent Nos. 4 to 9 or others of their category who have proved their merit.
Further, the executive order issued by the Govt. vide its letter dated March 15, 1962 appears to have been issued to meet a situation like the present.
It embodies a very fair principle.
It has been followed by the respondents in the present case.
No infirmity can be found in the view taken by the respondents.
11.
I, therefore, find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed with costs.
The costs are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition dismissed.