Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The seven petitioners herein, who were initially working on ad hoc basis and claim to have been regularised, were granted maternity leave for the periods mentioned in paragraph 2 of the writ petition.
They are aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not paying them the salary for the period during which they availed of maternity leave.
2.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The facts stated by the petitioners having not been controverted, are therefore, assumed to be correct.
3.
Mr. Umesh Wadhwa, learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the judgment delivered by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 4684 of 1986.
In almost similar circumstances their Lordships of the Division Bench following the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rattan Lal v. State of Haryana, 1985(2) SLJ 437 observed as under :-  "It is clear that on the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Rattan Lal's case (supra) that the petitioner is entitled to the salary for the period of maternity leave granted to her in the same manner in which such leave salary is payable to the regular employees.
The petition, therefore, succeeds and is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay salary for the period of maternity leave granted to the petitioner, as prayed for."
In view of the law as laid down by the Division Bench, the claim of the petitioners is well merited.
4.
At this stage Mr. Rajan Gupta, DAG Haryana appearing for the respondents has brought to my notice that necessary instructions have been issued to the District Education Officer, Kurukshetra vide Memo No. 600-2/49-88-EV(5) dated 1371988 to make the payment to the petitioners for the period of maternity leave.
Learned Counsel is not in a position to state as to whether or not the actual payment has been made to the petitioners.
5.
As observed, the petition is covered by the decision of the Division Bench.
In the circumstances, the only direction that is necessary to be issued is that in case the payment has not been made to the petitioners, the needful shall be done within two months from today.
I order accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.