RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner was enrolled as a Constable in Haryana Police on 211981.
At the time of filing the writ petition on 1171991, the petitioner was posted at the Police Training College, Madhuban on deputation.
On 29th November, 1990, a telegram was issued to all concerned including Director, Police Training College, Madhuban intimating that a test for administration of suitable constables to promotion - List B.1.
would be held in GRP Lines, Ambala City in January, 1991 by the departmental promotion committee and in accordance with Rule 137 of Punjab Police Rules (as applicable to the Haryana State also) the Constables who were under 35 years of age on 1st July, 1991 were eligible and those Constables who were willing to appear in the test were required to report in GRP Lines, Ambala City.
By another intimation sent later on, it was informed that the test in GRP Lines for the above-said purpose would be held on 4th January, 1991 and the Constables who wished to sit in the test were required to report on the evening of 3rd January, 1991.
2.
It has been averred by the petitioner that he was summoned to appear in the B-1 test on 411991, and in fact he went to appear in B-1 test on 411991, but when the papers were being distributed in the Examination Centre to the candidates, the Superintendent of Police, Railways, Haryana, (Respondent No. 3) who was present in the Examination Hall asked the petitioner to go out and did not allow him to sit in the test saying that he was overage.
The case of the petitioner is that he was not overage and was under 35 years of age on 1st July, 1991 and consequently the respondent wrongly did not allow him to appear in the test, which has deprived him to be brought on List B-1.
3.
In reply to the writ petition, it has been stated on behalf of the respondents that in fact the petitioner did not come at all to appear in the B.1 test and the question of his being turned out of the Examination Hall on the ground that he was overage, did not arise.
Mr. RC Setia Addl.
A.G. appearing on behalf of the respondents has produced before me attendance-sheet singed by various candidates numbering about 350 to show that whosoever was present in the Examination Hall had singed the attendance-sheet and the signatures of the petitioner are not there.
According to him this would go to show that the petitioner had not appeared in the test.
4.
In the replication filed on behalf of the petitioner, certain names are mentioned and it has been said that those persons were present for the B.1 test, but their presence was not recorded.
It has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents that the names mentioned by the petitioner in the reply do find mention in the attendance-sheet.
5.
Apart from the consideration that these are all disputed questions of facts, I am of the view that the petitioner has no case on merits.
If the averments as made in the writ petition were correct that the petitioner was turned out of Examination Hall on 4th January, 1991, then in normal circumstances, he would have made immediate representation to the higher authorities and would have raised a lot of hue and cry.
The only representation that is alleged to have been made and has been brought on the record (Annexure P-3) is said to have been made on 29th April, 1991.
This representation is said to have been sent by ordinary post.
There is no mention of any earlier representation in this representation nor the facts as averred in the writ petition are mentioned in the representation dated 29th April, 1991.
In the written statement, the respondents have denied the receipt of any such representation.
The present writ petition was filed on 11th July, 1991.
These facts would go to show that the averments made by the petitioner are not correct and the stand taken by respondents that the petitioner in fact never came to sit in the test, seems to be the correct version.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner then submitted that by virtue of interim order of this Court the petitioner was sent to Lower School Course and by now he has almost completed the Course and, therefore, this Court should in equity allow the petitioner to complete the Course.
I do not find an merit in the submission of the learned counsel.
For being deputed to Lower School Course, it is essential for a Constable to sit and pass in the test held under Rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Since the petitioner never sat in the test, he was wholly ineligible to be deputed for the Course.
Interim order of this Court cannot be made a tool for the petitioner to allow him to complete the Course for which he was not eligible.
For the forgoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed with costs.
Petition dismissed.