Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was a candidate for the post of Assistant Grade-III(D) in the Food Corporation of India.
She was selected.
Vide letter dated November 23, 1985, an offer of appointment was made to her.
On December 4, 1985, the offer was cancelled/withdrawn.
As a result she was not permitted to join.
She challenges the action of the Corporation in not allowing her to join the post of Assistant Grade-III in spite of the fact that she was at merit No. 5, while Mr. Ashok Kumar Sangwan, who was at No. 11 in order to merit has been given a letter of appointment on March 8, 1991.
2.
The Corporation points out that Mr. Ashok Kumar Sangwan has been allowed to join duties in pursuance of the judgment of this Court in L.P.A. No. 294 of 1989 decided on February 5, 1990 and the order of their Lordships of the Supreme Court by which the SLP against Division Bench judgment was dismissed on February 18, 1991 The Corporation claims that the petition is highly belated.
According to Corporation the cause of action had arisen on December 4, 1985, when the order of appointment was cancelled/withdrawn.
3.
Indisputably, the petitioner was at No. 5 in order of merit.
Mr. Ashok Kumar Sangwan was admittedly at No. 11.
Mr. Sangwan has been given an offer of appointment on March 8, 1991.
The petitioner, in my view, has a better right for appointment than a person below her in order of merit.
Once a selection has been made and a merit list prepared, the appointments have to be made in order of merit.
It is only when certain legal reasons like medical fitness, character or antecedents are found to be against the selected candidates that the order of merit may not be followed for the purpose of making appointments.
Otherwise, the action will attract the vice of the discrimination and be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, I am of the view that so far as the petitioner is concerned, she had a better right than Mr. Ashok Kumar Sangwan.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents contends that the cause of action had actually accrued on December 4, 1985, when the offer of appointment was cancelled/withdrawn.
It may be so.
However, the fact remains that a person below the petitioner has been ordered to be appointed on March 8, 1991.
So far as the present petitioner is concerned, it cannot be said that the cause of action has not accrued to her on this date, when a person below her has been allowed to join.
The offer may have been made in pursuance to the order of this Court in L.P.A. No. 294 of 1989.
This is a reason for making the offer of appointment.
So far as the present petitioner is concerned, her cause of action is not dependent on the reason for the issue of the letter of appointment.
She had a better right than Mr. Ashok Kumar Sangwan.
She is seeking to enforce that right now.
Even if a part of the cause of action had accrued in the year 1985, it cannot be said that no cause of action has accrued to her when a person below her in order of merit is actually offered the appointment.
At least a part of the cause of action has arisen on March 9, 1991.
As such, I am unable to hold that the claim made by the petitioner is belated or such as may deserve to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner as well as for the respondents have relied on a number of judgments in support of their submissions.
I do not think it is necessary to examine the various judgments, as in my view, a part of the cause of action had accrued in March, 1991 and the writ petition has been filed soon thereafter.
6.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner subject to her being found otherwise suitable.
The needful shall be done within two months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
It is, however, clarified that the petitioner shall not be entitled to any seniority or arrears of salary on the basis of this appointment over the persons, who have already joined.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.