MR Agnihotri, J - This writ petition was filed by Achhar Singh, Constable of Punjab Police in 1989.
However, he died on 9th April, 1990, that is, during pendency of the writ petition.
His legal representatives, namely, Smt. Sukhwant Kaur (wife) and Amarbir Singh (son) have been impleaded vide order of this Court dated 4th May, 1990.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioner was recruited as a constable in Punjab Police on 12th July, 1956, and after having served for about 21 years, he was dismissed from service on 3rd March, 1977, on the charge of absence from duty by the Additional Superintendent of Police, Amritsar.
This order was challenged in a civil suit which was dismissed.
The appeal filed against the same was allowed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, on 18th February, 1984, and by virtue of the declaration granted by the lower appellate Court, the petitioner was to be treated as having continued in service of the Police Department with all the privileges attached to his post.
Against the judgment, the State of Punjab filed R.S.A.
No. 1599 of 1984 which has been dismissed by me today by a separate order.
3.
When despite the judgment dated 18th February, 1984, of the learned Additional District Judge, Amritsar, the petitioner was not reinstated and assigned duty, the petitioner served a notice on 30th December, 1988, seeking pre-mature retirement after expiry of the notice period of three months.
When this request of the petitioner was also declined on 17th January, 1989, he filed the present writ petition seeking a mandamus against the respondent State of Punjab and the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, directing them to assign to the petitioner the duty by reinstatement and to pay the emoluments forthwith, or in the alternative to treat the petitioner as retired prematurely/voluntarily with full benefits of pay, allowances, seniority, status, etc.  4.
In the written statement, apart from contesting the writ petition on the usual technical and hyper-technical grounds, it has also been pleaded that in view of the pendency of the regular second appeal filed by the State of Punjab against the petitioner, no order whatsoever could be passed obviously regarding the grant of any relief to the petitioner, or permitting him to be relieved by granting permission for premature retirement.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the pleadings and keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has since expired during the pendency of the writ petition, and the regular second appeal filed by the State of Punjab has been dismissed by a separate order of date.
I allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to treat the petitioner as having retired prematurely after the expiry of the notice period of three months, that is, 31st March, 1989.
As a result thereof, the legal representatives of the petitioner shall be entitled to the necessary monetary benefits flowing from the voluntary retirement of the petitioner and the same shall be disbursed to them within a period of three months.
There shall be, no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.