VK Jhanji, J - This is plaintiff's second appeal impugning the judgment and decree of the Courts below dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
The plaintiff was appointed as officiating sweeper by the District and Sessions Judge, Patiala vide order dated 3181981.
Vide the same order, one Inderjit Kumar was also appointed as Officiating Peon in the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Patiala.
In the order dated 3181981, it is clearly stated that both the appointments are purely on temporary basis and their services are liable to be terminated at any time without notice.
In pursuance of this order, the plaintiff joined the office of the Senior Sub Judge, Patiala on 191981 and continued in service without break.
On 23121983, his services were terminated by the District and Sessions Judge, Patiala with immediate effect being no longer required.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration challenging the order of termination.
The grouse of the plaintiff in the suit was that the order of termination is illegal, null and void, vires and against the principles of natural justice.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
3.
Being aggrieved of the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the plaintiff filed first appeal before the Additional District Judge, Patiala.
4.
The appeal of the plaintiff was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Patiala, holding that the order of termination is legal and valid.
The plaintiff, by way of this second appeal, has challenged the judgment and decree of the courts below.
5.
The only contention of learned counsel for the plaintiff is that the plaintiff was a permanent employee and his services could not be terminated without holding any enquiry or giving an opportunity of hearing to the plaintiff.
He has further contended that in para 5 of the Plaint, it has been categorically stated that the plaintiff was a confirmed employee and got all the benefits including General Provident Fund and other funds admissible to other government employees.
This allegation of the plaintiff has not teen specifically denied by defendant No. 1 in his written statement.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for defendant No. 1 has submitted that the plaintiff was appointed purely on temporary basis and his services were terminated in terms of his appointment letter.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that the appeal has no merit.
Defendant No. 1 in his written statement not only has denied the allegations contained in para 5 of the plaint being incorrect but has further stated that "the plaintiff remained posted purely on temporary basis till his termination."
In view of what has been stated in the written statement, the contention of learned counsel for the plaintiff that defendant No. 1 has not specifically denied the allegations contained in para 5 of the plaint, is not correct.
Defendant No. 1 has categorically stated that the plaintiff was appointed purely on temporary basis.
8.
As far as the second contention is concerned that the plaintiff would be deemed to be a regular employee as he earned increments and was contributing towards General Provident Fund, is also without any merit because the plaintiff has not been able to prove on record that he earned any increment or that he contributed towards General Provident Fund, was a temporary employee and his services could be terminated without assigning any reason under the terms of contract providing for such termination.
9.
Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.
However, parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.