SS Sodhi, J - The controversy here is with regard to the inter se seniority of Sub-Inspectors in the Food and Supplies Department, Punjab.
2.
The petitioners are amongst a batch of Sub-Inspectors appointed as such in June 1971.
The appointment of these Sub-Inspectors was not made by an authority competent to do so, but their services were eventually regularised with effect from January 1, 1973.
The respondents on the other hand were appointed by the competent authority, but on an ad hoc basis in November, 1972.
Later, by an order passed on June 28, 1973, Annexure P/3, their services too were regularised.
3.
Earlier too there arose a contest regarding inter se seniority between the 1971 and the 1972 batch of appointments to the posts of Sub- Inspectors.
This was eventually resolved by this Court in Amar Singh Vs. State of Punjab, 1983(3) S.L.R.
264, where, it was held that the appointment of the 1971 batch came to be governed by the relevant service rules only with effect from the date when their services were regularised namely January 1, 1973, whereas, the respondents, i.e. the 1972 batch had been appointed with effect from 1972 and therefore, they would rank senior to the 1971 batch.
4.
The petitioners, who belong to the 1971 batch, now seek to reopen this decision of the Division Bench in Amar Singh's case (supra) and that too after the Special Leave Petition filed against it in the Supreme Court had also been dismissed on the plea that they were not parties to the earlier dispute regarding seniority and it was further contended that according to the true interpretation of the order passed on June 28, 1973 Annexure P/3, the services of the respondents must be deemed to have been regularised only with effect from that date, that is, June 28, 1973 and consequently, the petitioners must rank senior to them as their services had been regularised with effect from January 1, 1973.
5.
It will be seen that what in effect, the petitioners now seek is a review of the earlier decision of this Court in Amar Singh's case (supra) which is clearly not competent.
Further, it deserves note that some of the persons who had been appointed in 1971 had also applied for appointment on regular basis in 1972 and they were selected and appointed and they now figure in the 1972 batch.
Such persons too now rank senior to the present petitioners, but they are not parties to this petition.
If this prayer of the petitioners is now accepted, it would mean that their seniority would be disturbed and they would come to rank below the petitioners and that too by an order passed behind their back, a course clearly neither legal nor permissible.
6.
As regards the other contention, namely; that by the order of June 28, 1973, the respondents were regularized only from that date, it is in the first instance to be noted that this point has been taken up now for the first time in appeal.
At any rate, a plain reading of this order, Annexure P/3 belies this contention of the counsel for the appellant-petitioners, inasmuch as, it is clearly stated therein that they are to be regularised on the earlier terms, that is, the date on which they were originally appointed.
7.
Keeping in view, therefore, the matters, which have been discussed, in the context of the circumstances of this case, no exception can indeed be taken to the judgment of the learned Single Judge, which is hereby upheld and affirmed and this appeal is thus dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.