Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - In this writ petition jointly filed by the Teacher(s) working in various Government Schools in the State of Punjab, the petitioners are seeing a direction to the respondent-State to grant them the pay-scale admissible to JST/H.S.T.
Masters from the date they acquired the qualifications of F.A./Inter/T.D.C.
Part I which are higher than the requisite qualification prescribed for the post of primary teacher.
2.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contends that in view of the Government instructions contained in Circular letter dated 2371957, a copy of which is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, which envisage that the Teachers working in the Education Department are entitled to the pay-scales according to their qualifications possessed by them irrespective of the posts they are holding, the petitioners are entitled to the pay-scales as per their qualifications.
The learned Counsel further contends that now the matter is squarely covered by this Court's decisions in Nasib Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1988(4) S.L.R.
301; Rajinder Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1988(4) S.L.R.
297 and the Supreme Court's decision rendered in Punjab Higher Qualified Teachers Union (Non-Petitioners) v. State of Punjab, 1988(1) SVLR(L) 12.
3.
The learned Counsel for the State contends that the Punjab Government in view of the ratio of Supreme Court decision had decided vide its letter dated 1361990 to make payment of arrears on account of JST grade to the petitioners and other similarly situated non-petitioners for 38 months prior to the issuance of Government instructions dated 1921979.
In order to avoid discrimination, the arrears have been paid to all the teachers including petitioners/non-petitioners, who have improved their qualifications.
4.
In view of the stand of the respondents, this writ petition has become infructuous.
In case any one of the petitioners has not been paid the arrears, he may represent to the Government and the Government on receiving the same shall release the arrears within three months from its receipt.
5.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly, No order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.