Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - A two-fold grievance has been made in this petition.
The petitioners claim that by the impugned orders (Annexures P6 to P.13) the benefits granted to them have been retrospectively withdrawn.
Secondly, it is claimed that the revised pay scale of Rs. 510-800 has been awarded to the members of the same cadre from different dates.
The petitioners claim that the action of the respondents in doing so is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In the writ petition it has been averred that the petitioners were originally in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600.
This scale was revised and raised to Rs. 510-800.
The revised pay scale was given to 50 per cent members of the cadre w.e.f.
January 1, 1978.
The remaining half of the cadre had been granted the same scale w.e.f.
June 21, 1983.
This categorical assertion appears in paragraph 20 of the writ petition and the action of the respondent has been specifically challenged in paragraph 22(x).
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position is not disputed.
It is, however, claimed that the action of the respondents is not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
I have heard Mr. Vinod Sharma for the petitioner and Mr. Pawan Kumar Mutreja for the respondents.
Mr. Sharma relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in P Savita and others v. Union of India and others, 1985(3) SLR 29.
In this case their Lordships have considered the claim of the petitioners in the context of the order of the Government of India passed on January 27, 1978.
The said order directed as under :-  "The undersigned is directed to refer to Sl No. 32 of Part-D, Section I, in the First Schedule to the Civilians in Defence Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1973 and to say that the President is pleased to decide that as recommended by the Third Pay Commission in Para 81, Chapter 14, of the report, half the number of posts of Draughtsmen in the DGOF Organisation on the present pay scale of Rs. 205-7-240-8-280 will be placed in the revised scale of Rs. 425-15-500-EB-15-660-20-700 and the remaining half in the revised scale of Rs. 380-10-330-EB-12-500-500-15-560......On their allocation to the revised scale of Rs. 425-700 and Rs. 330-560, the existing Draughtsmen in the present pay scale of Rs. 205-280 who are brought on to the revised scale of Rs. 330-560 would continue to retain their present designation as a personal to them.
The placement of the existing Draughtsmen in the higher revised pay scale of Rs. 425-700 will be on the basis of seniority, subject to the rejection of the unfit.
Any administrative instruction that my be considered necessary may be issued by you.
These orders will take effect from 111973."
While examining this order, their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :-  "Para 11.
It has to be borne in mind that this differentiation is not based on any intelligible ground.
The group of Draughtsmen entitled to the higher scale of pay is not selected by any process nor is it based on any merit-cum-seniority basis, but is based only on seniority-cum-fitness.
There is no denial anywhere that both these types of Draughtsmen do the same work and discharge the same functions and duties.
According to the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, at Draughtsman has to get Rs. 330-10-380-EB-12-500-EB-560, while Senior Draughtsmen, like the appellants who have become so on promotion, will continue to get the same scale of pay and not the higher scale of pay.
In other words, the promoted persons like the appellants, are without any monetary benefit to them.
The pay that they would get as Senior Draughtsmen, would be the same as a Draughtsman would get under the Third Pay Commission.
That is, for the same work and same functions, the appellants would get less pay than the other group of Senior Draughtsmen.
The explanation is that this division is based on seniority.
This cannot be accepted as sufficient to meet the requirements of law.
By seniority, a Senior Draughtsman will get higher pay with the increments that he earns proportionate to the number of years he is in service.
Here that is not the case.
It is the classification of the Senior Draughtsmen into two groups, that is responsible for the higher pay.
For this classification, the Government must be able to satisfy the Court of certain other test which are non-existent, in this case, since it is not in dispute that Senior Draughtsmen, belonging to the two divisions, do equal and same work.
In view of the total absence of any plea on the side of the respondents that the Senior Draughtsmen who are placed in the advantageous group, do not (sic) perform work and duties more onerous or different from the work performed by the appellants group, it will have to be held that this grouping violates Article 14 of the Constitution."
4.
In the present case, it is admitted that all the Steno-typist or all the Clerks are performing identical duties.
There is no classification made on the basis of educational qualifications which may have a reasonable nexus with the job requirement.
The classification is based merely on the seniority.
The contention of Mr. Mutreja that the classification in the present case is reasonable cannot be sustained in view of the pronouncement of law by the Supreme Court.
All members of the cadre have a right to get the same scale of pay w.e.f.
the same date.
it is only when the classification is based on some intelligible differntia, which has reasonable nexus with the job requirement that differential treatment in the grant of pay scale can be sustained.
5.
In the above view of the matter it is not necessary for me to examine the validity of the orders at Annexures P6 to P.13.
Once it is held that the petitioners are entitled to the revised scale of pay of Rs. 510-800 w.e.f.
111978 as has been given to the others, the orders at Annexures P6 to P.13 become wholly inconsequential.
6.
As a result the writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the petitioners shall be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 510-800 w.e.f.
the same date from which the other members of the cadre have been granted this scale of Rs. 510-800.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
Petition allowed.