RS Mongia, J (Oral) - By this judgment, CWP Nos. 1384, 1208, 1302, 1393, 1395, 1439, 15741 1799, 3346 and 3743 of 1984 and 4381 of 1986, will stand disposed of.
It may be noticed that in some of the cases, the Motion Bench had ordered that those cases be heard with C.W.P.
No. 1284 of 1986.
There seems to be some typographical error as in fact those cases had to be heard with C.W.P.
No. 1384 of 1984, in which the identical questions of law and fact are involved.
For facility of reference, facts from C.W.P.
No. 11384 of 1984 are being adverted to.
2.
The petitioners had joined the Revenue Department in the erstwhile State of Punjab as Patwaris in the years 1954 and 1955.
Thereafter they were promoted to the posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks and were confirmed on those posts.
On the reorganisation of the State of Punjab with effect from 1st November, 1966, the petitioners were allocated to the State of Haryana.
In the years 1973 and 1974, the petitioners were promoted as Zilledars on purely stop-gap arrangement.
3.
According to the statutory Service Rules governing the posts of Zilledars (the Rules are known as Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Zilledars State Service Class III Rules, 1955), the academic qualifications which are required for the departmental candidates for the posts of Zilledars is Intermediate.
It is the admitted case on both sides that the petitioners were not having these academic qualifications.
After the petitioners had been promoted to the posts of Zilledas in the stop-gap arrangement, some of their juniors had also been promoted in stop-gap arrangement, but those juniors had the requisite academic qualifications.
In the year 1984, direct recruitment to the posts of Zilledars was made and on arrival of the selected candidates, the petitioners were reverted to their sub-stantive posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks.
An order dated 20th March, 1984 (Annexure P.3) was issued whereby certain other candidates were being appointed as Zilledars against the posts which fell vacant because of the reversion of the petitioners.
It is the reversion of the petitioners that has been challenged by way of the abovesaid writ petitions.
4.
The primary argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that when the petitioners were reverted the persons who were junior to the petitioners and had also been promoted in a stop-gap arrangement, were retained on the promoted ranks and the petitioners were reverted in complete violation of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
He has further argued that they could not be reverted after such a long time of 10-11 years on the ground that they did not hold the academic qualifications and the juniors could not be retained simply on the ground that they had the requisite academic qualifications.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioners had sufficient experience on the posts of Zilledars, which would be a sure guide to assess their suitability on the promoted ranks.
Moreover their initial promotion should be deemed to be in relaxation of the requirement of the academic qualifications, which the competent Authority can relax under Rule 20 of the abovenoted Rules.
In support of the argument, the learned counsel relied on a judgment of the Apex Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371, wherein it has been observed as under :-  The main controversy centres round the question whether some petitioners are possessed of the requisite qualifications to hold the posts so as to entitle them to be confirmed in the respective posts held by them.
The indisputable facts are that the petitioners were appointed between the period 1983 and 1986 and ever since, they have been working and have gained sufficient experience in the actual discharge of duties attached the posts held by them.
Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
In our view, three years experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the respondent, in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation."
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that since the petitioners did not hold the academic qualifications and as they were simply promoted in a stop-gap arrangement, they had no right to remain on the promoted ranks.
On arrival of the direct recruits, the petitioners had to make room for them.
6.
I have considered the respective arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and am of the view that these writ petitions must succeed.
There is no dispute that the petitioners did not have the requisite qualifications at the time when they were promoted as Zilledars in a stop-gap arrangement in the years 1973 and 1974.
But they were allowed to continue on the promoted ranks for almost 10 to 11 years.
As observed by the Supreme Court in the above referred case, practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualifications prescribed for the post are meant to be seen at the time of initial entry into that post.
Once the appointments are made and the incumbent is allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny the confirmation in the said post.
The Supreme Court case was of daily rated workers and it was held that after gaining experience of about three years, they were entitled to be confirmed though they lacked prescribed academic qualifications.
Otherwise also, it will be deemed that power of relaxation had been exercised in favour of the petitioners as envisaged under Rule 20 of the Rules, inasmuch as the petitioners were allowed to continue for a sufficiently long time.
Once, it is held so, the petitioners would be deemed to be qualified by virtue of relaxation.
On these grounds the reversion order is unsustainable.
7.
For the foregoing reasons these writ petitions are allowed and the reversion orders in all the cases are set aside, with the result that the petitioners will be entitled to all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
It may be observed here that for adjusting the petitioners as Zilledars, the services of Zilledars who were directly recruited, will not be terminated if they are within their quota.
If at all some reservations are to be made, those will be of junior persons than the petitioners.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.