RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner, Dr. Jagdish Chande Gondley, unfortunately died during the pendency of the writ petition on 6th January, 1991 and his widow Basant Kumari and other children were brought on record as legal-representatives.
The petitioner was appointed as a Medical Officer on ad hoc basis in the Health Department of Haryana on 10th September, 1980.
In the year 1982, his name was recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission for regular appointment against a permanent vacant post and on the recommendation of the Haryana Public Service Commission, he was appointed on regular basis as Medical Officer vide appointment letter dated 3rd September, 1982 (Annexure P-1).
The petitioner joined on regular basis on 6th September, 1982.
2.
The service conditions of the petitioner were governed by the statutory rules known as Haryana Civil Medical Service (Class-II) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Rule 11 of the Rules deals with the probation, the said Rules reads as under :-  11.
(1) Persons appointed to the posts in the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years : Provided that :-  a) any period after such appointment spent on deputation on a corresponding or a higher post shall count towards the period of probation; b) any period of officiating appointment shall be reckoned as period spent on probation, but no person who has so officiated shall, on the completion of the prescribed period of probation, be entitled to be confirmed, unless he is appointed against a permanent vacancy.
2) if, in the opinion of the appointing authority, the work or conduct of a person during the period of probation is not satisfactory, it may dispense with his services or extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such orders as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation.
Provided that the total period of probation, including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years.
3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may, if his work or conduct has in its opinion been satisfactory :-  i) confirm such person from the date of his appointment, if appointed against a permanent vacancy.
ii) confirm such person from the date from which a permanent vacancy occurs if appointed against a temporary vacancy; or iii) declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily, if there is no permanent vacancy : Provided that if neither of the above three decisions is taken within six months of the expiry of the original or extended period of probation, if any, then on the expiry of the aforesaid six month, period the officer concerned would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his period of probation."
According to Rule 11 of the Rules, the period of probation is two years, which is extendable by another year.
It has been provided in Rule 11 that if no decision is taken within six months of the original period of probation or the extended period of probation, if any, then at the expiry of six months' period, the Officer concerned would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his period of probation.
3.
On 23rd May, 1986, the services of the petitioner were terminated.
The said termination was challenged by the petitioner by way of filing a writ petition in this Court, being C.W.P.
No. 3243 of 1986.
That writ petition was allowed by Division Bench of this Court on 4th September, 1986, on the ground that the notice of one month for termination as required by the appointment letter fell short by six days, and, therefore, the termination order was bad.
The Division Bench did not think it necessary to go into the other grounds raised in the writ petition.
It was observed in the order of the Division Bench that the competent authority would be at liberty to pass fresh orders in accordance with law, if so advised.
4.
On 30th September, 1986, vide order Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, the respondents again terminated the services of the petitioner.
The order was endorsed to the petitioner on 22nd October, 1986.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition and the Motion Bench granted stay of the petitioner by virtue of which the petitioner continued to serve till 6th January, 1991, when unfortunately he died.
5.
The petitioner's counsel has submitted that though the writ petitioner has died during the pendency of the writ petition, yet he wants a decision on the matter as to whether the termination order was good or not, inasmuch as if the termination order is set aside, then the legal representatives may be entitled to family pension and other benefits which may arise from the petitioner's service in the department.
6.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that according to the rule of probation quoted above, the maximum period of probation was three years and if no order was passed within six months of the extended period of probation, then according to proviso to Rule 11(iii), the petitioner would be deemed to have successfully completed the period of probation and since the petitioner had been appointed against a permanent post (which fact has been admitted by the respondents in para 2 of the written statement), the petitioner would be deemed to be a confirmed employee and his services could not be terminated by giving one month's notice.
For this proposition he relied upon a judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Dr. Amar Singh Ahlawat v. The State of Haryana, 1988(3) S.L.R.
446.
The learned Single Judge while interpreting rule 11 of the Rules, held that if no decision is taken even within six months on the expiry of the extended period of probation, the Officer concerned would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his period of probation and his services could not be dispensed with after the expiry of the said period of probation.
7.
In the written statement, the plea taken is that as there were certain complaints of misbehaviour against the petitioner, his period of probation as extended for one year ie upto 5th September, 1985 vide Government order issued on 29th August, 1985.
There was a special report from 161985 to 491985 received on the work of the petitioner, which showed that his integrity was doubtful.
According to the stand taken in the written statement, a specific order was necessary under rule 11(iii) of the Rules regarding satisfactorily completion of the probationary period.
8.
There is a force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
No order after six months of the extended period of probation as necessary regarding the satisfactory completion of period of probation, as according to proviso to rule 11(iii), if no such order is passed within six months of the initial period of probation or the extended period of probation the officer would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
Once it is held so, then it follows that the officer's services cannot be terminated as he would be deemed to be confirmed.
His services could only be terminated on the ground of misconduct etc., if any, after following the due procedure.
The services terminated as no longer required while the respondents have retained other surveyors who are juniors to the appellants.
Therefore, on this ground also the impugned order of termination of the services of the appellant are illegal and bad being in contravention of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
The impugned order is liable to be set aside on this ground also.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, I allow this writ petition.
The Officer concerned would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his period of probation and his services could not be dispensed with after the expiry of the said period of probation.
7.
In the written statement, the plea taken is that as there were certain complaints of misbehaviour against the petitioner, his period d of probation was extended for one year ie upto 5th September, 1985 vide Government order issued on 29th August, 1985.
There was a special report from 161985 to 491985 received on the work of the petitioner, which showed that his integrity was doubtful.
According to the stand taken in the written statement, a specific order was necessary under Rule 11(iii) of the Rules regarding satisfactorily completion of the probationary period.
8.
There is a force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
No order after six months of the extended period of probation was necessary regarding the satisfactory completion of period of probation, as according to proviso to rule 11(iii), if no such order is passed within six months of the initial period of probation or the extended period of probation the officer would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
Once it is held so, then it follows that the officer's services cannot be terminated as he would be deemed to be confirmed .
His services could only be terminated on the ground of misconduct etc., if any, after following the due procedure.
I set aside the order of termination, dated 30th September, 1986 (Annexure P4).
11.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that the respondents will take expeditious steps regarding the family pension and other monetary benefits that may flow to the legal-representatives by virtue of the setting aside of the termination order.
The respondents are directed to finalise all the monetary benefits, if any, to the legal-representatives of the petitioner, within a period of six months of the receipt of this judgment.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.