JL Gupta, J - The petitioners who were students were admitted to the MBBS course at Govt. Medical College, Amritsar are aggrieved by the order by which respondent Nos. 5 to 8 have been transferred from the Government Medical College, Faridkot to the Government Medical College, Patiala without considering their claims.
It is their case that they were higher in merit than respondent Nos. 5 to 8 and as such, the action of the respondents in not transferring them from the Government Medical College at Amritsar to Government Medical College at Patiala was arbitrary and unfair.
2.
The petitioners claim that they appeared in the competitive examination held for admission to Medical College, Patiala.
In accordance with the stipulation in the admission forms they had indicated their first preference for admission to Medical College at Patiala, second preference for the college at Amritsar and the third for the Medical College at Faridkot.
However, on the basis of their merit they were admitted to the Medical College, Amritsar and not at Patiala.
The petitioners further claim that respondent Nos. 5 to 8 who were lower than one or the other petitioner were admitted at Medical College, Faridkot.
The petitioner have also averred that certain seats became available at Medical College, Patiala.
They claim to have represented vide Annexure P-3 for their being transferred against the available seats.
Instead of transferring the petitioner, the respondents transferred persons (respondent Nos. 5 to 8) who were below one or the other petitioner in order of merit from Medical College, Faridkot to the Medical College, Patiala.
This the petitioners claim, was not only contrary to the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter dated 1121982 (Annexure P-2) but was even otherwise contrary to the rule of merit and was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
3.
A written statement has been filed by respondent No. 4.
It has been inter alia, averred that in the prospectus for admission to MBBS course in clause 4.2.b(iv) it is mentioned that 16101990 is the cut-off date for mutual adjustment of candidates and no adjustment could be made after that date.
It has been further averred that as per instructions issued by the Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, vide letter dated 681981 (Annexure R-1), the students admitted at Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot only can be shifted to Medical College, Patiala or Amritsar against the resultant vacancy.
No other transfers are made except the migration in accordance with rules laid down by the Medical Council of India.
Reference has also been made to the order passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 10719 of 1989 and the order passed by their Lordships of Supreme Court in S.L.P.
No. 1293 of 1990.
4.
I have heard Mr. GK Chatrath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and Mr. HS Riar, learned Addl AG (Punjab) for the respondents.
Mr. GK Chatrath has raised a two-fold contention.
He has submitted that the petitioners being higher in order of merit than respondent Nos. 5 to 8, had a better right than the respondents for being admitted at Patiala.
He has further submitted that the cut-off date is not relevant as the State itself had in fact permitted transfer from the Medical College, Faridkot to the Medical College, Patiala.
As against this, the learned Addl AG Punjab has stated that the College at Faridkot does not have the same facilities as the Medical Colleges at Amritsar and Patiala have.
Consequently, only the candidates from Faridkot are shifted to the two other Medical Colleges.
He has also placed reliance on the letter at Annexure R-1.
It has also been pointed out that there are candidates even higher in merit than the petitioners at Medical College, Amritsar and their claim is better than that of the petitioners.
5.
It is an admitted position that the petitioners were higher than respondent Nos. 5 to 8 in the merit list prepared by the respondents for admission to the three Medical Colleges.
It is also admitted that the petitioners had given their first preference for admission to the Medical College at Patiala.
In such a situation, as and when seats fell vacant in any of the Medical Colleges, it would have been fair and proper for the authorities to consider students in order of merit and adjust them according to the preference as given by them.
If such a course of action had been followed, no candidate could have any grievance at all.
However, this has not been done.
The students from Medical College, Faridkot who were lower in merit have been picked up and transferred to the College at Patiala.
I find no reason which could have justified such a course of action.
The claim of the respondents that this action has been taken in accordance with the instructions of the Director issued vide letter dated 681981 (Annexure R-1) does not appear to be well merited.
The relevant portion of the letter dated 681981 reads as under :-  "Subject :- MBBS Admission 1981 -  Criteria for allocation of College to students admitted from waiting list.
1.
No changes have been permitted from Amritsar Medical College to Patiala Medical College or vice-versa till today.
2.
In letter No. 21(187) 5HB 111-80/21479 dated 2781980 it has been stated clearly by the Government that it should be ensured that there is no large scale dislocation.
You are therefore, requested to only permit shift of students of Medical College, Faridkot to Medical College, Patiala/Amritsar according to the vacancies in preference to those on the waiting list.
No other transfers are to be done from Amritsar to Patiala or Patiala to Amritsar, unless mutual transfer with the permission of this office, as the Government policy."
As I read the above, the letter does not appear to embody any general instructions which may be applicable to the shifting of students from one Medical College to another.
It appears to contain only a statement of facts that no changes had been permitted from Medical College, Amritsar to the Medical College at Patiala or vice-versa.
Further, it appears that in response to a communication from the principal Medical College, Amritsar the Director had informed him to only permit shifting of students according to the vacancies "in preference to those on the waiting list."
In my view it meant that the candidates who had been already admitted being higher in merit than those in the waiting list, are alone to be allowed to shift from the Medical College, Faridkot, to Medical College, Patiala or Amritsar.
In fact, the Government appears to have issued instructions only by its letter dated 1121982 (Annexure P-2).
In this letter, it was inter alia observed as under :-  "b) Candidates to be admitted from the waiting list should be allocated the Medical or Dental College after exhausting the choice of place already given on the original application of the higher merit students already admitted.
c) Change of allocation on the basis of mutual transfer should be allowed on the basis of merit-cum-choice, for instance 'A' in College 'X' wants to change with 'B' in College 'Y' change of B should be allowed only if no student with merit higher than that of 'B' is willing to come to College 'X' other-wise the student with higher merit should be sent to College 'X' in preference to 'B'."
In my view the above instructions embodied the rule of "merit-cum-choice".
In any case, I do not find any decision of the Government which may debar transfers from Medical College, Amritsar to Medical College, Patiala or vice-versa.
In my, view the power to issue general instructions vests only in the authority competent to frame rules viz. the Government and not the Director.
The letter of August, 1981 issued by the Director could in no case be treated at containing executive instructions.
6.
Both in principle and in equity, the stand of the respondents appears to be unfair.
The petitioners being higher in order of merit than respondent Nos. 5 to 8, had a better claim for being allowed to shift to a college of their choice.
The action of the respondent-authorities in not permitting them to do so is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The respondents have claimed that students had been shifted from Medical College, Faridkot to Medical College, Patiala before 16101990.
It may be so.
Still the respondents were bound to give an opportunity to those higher in order of merit to exercise their choice.
This is all the more so because as early as 10.8.1990, petitioner Harvinder Kaur had put in her representation seeking a seat at Government College, Patiala.
Even the other petitioners appear to have submitted a representation.
A subsequent representation by the father of Meenakshi Singla petition No. 1 has also been produced.
There appears to be no justification or the action of the respondents in not allowing them to shift from Medical College, Amritsar to Medical College, Patiala.
7.
I am thus of the opinion that the claim of the petitioners is well founded.
The only question that remains is as to what directions should be given, when the matter was originally heard by me on 2031991, the learned counsel for the petitioners had submitted that he did not wish to disturb the students who had already been admitted at Govt. Medical College, Patiala.
He had prayed for a direction to accommodate the petitioners at Govt. Medical College, Patiala against any seat or seats that may fall vacant in future.
Time had been given to the learned Assistant Advocate General who had appeared for the State to get instructions.
On the next date of hearing, the learned Additional Advocate General appeared and expressed his inability to concede even this request of the petitioners.
In this situation, I am of the view that the persons who have already been shifted from Medical College Faridkot to Medical College, Patiala may not be disturbed.
However, the petitioners may be accommodated against any seat or seats that may fall vacant at Medical College, Patiala henceforth.
Their transfer shall be ordered in the order of merit.
Since the persons who may be higher than the petitioners in order of merit have not considered it necessary to approach this Court, the petitioners shall be considered against the first three vacancies that may become available.
The petition is accordingly disposed of with no order as to costs.