Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - These four writ petitions, viz. CWP Nos. 3985, 4007 and 4014 of 1986 and 3126 of 1987 are by the Sectional Officers working in different Local Bodies.
The Petitioners, who were appointed temporarily/purely on ad hoc basis, are aggrieved by the orders terminating their services.
The claim is that they were entitled to be considered for regularisation in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letters dated March 29, 1985 and August 8, 1985.
2.
A brief reference to the factual position in CWP No. 3985 of 1986 may be made.
The seven Sectional Officers, who were appointed on temporary/purely on ad hoc basis in 1983, are aggrieved by the order, dated July 23, 1986 (Annexure P.1) by which their services were ordered to be terminated by respondent No. 1.
It is inter alia averred that they were entitled to be considered for regularisation in accordance with the instructions at Annexures P.3 and P.4.
It is maintained that the action of the respondents in terminating their services was not only violative of the instructions, but also of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioners are neither civil servants nor government employees appointed to Class-III service/post in the Government department/offices.
Consequently, the instructions at Annexures P.3 and P.4 are not applicable with regard to the service conditions of the employees of the Local Bodies.
This plea was controverted by filing replication.
It was inter alia pleaded that the petitioners were holding civil posts and that by orders, dated February 6, 1984 and October 23, 1984 the services of various ad hoc employees had been actually regularised.
Copies of these orders have been appended as Annexures P11 and P12.
In the rejoinder to the replication, the factum of the services having been regularised has not been disputed.
However, it has been averred that the orders of regularisation were not passed in pursuance to the instructions of the government contained in Annexures P 3 and P.4.
4.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and purused the record of the case.
The petitioners, except Petitioner No. 5, have admittedly been working in the service of the Corporation since the year 1983.
Some of them were even employed in various Organisations prior to their appointment in the service of the respondent-Corporation.
In the very nature of things, they would have become over-age for appointment in any government service.
It would be very unjust and unfair to terminate their services after the lapse of so many years.
Furthermore, the Corporation itself has been regularising the services of various ad hoc appointees.
Vide order dated February 6, 1984, Annexure P11 sanction was accorded to the regularisation of appointment of seven Sectional Officers.
By another order of October 23, 1984, (Annexure P12) respondent No. 1 had regularised the services of an Assistant Engineer.
It is, thus, clear that the cases of various employees have been considered by the respondents for regularisation.
The petitioners are entitled to parity of treatment and the action of the respondents in not considering the claim for regularisation is violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
The persons working on ad hoc basis constitute a special source for recruitment.
This rule was enunciated by the Full Bench of this Court in Daljit Singh v. State, 1978 (4) SLR 32.
The instructions at Annexure P.3 were issued with the object of regularising the services of such ad hoc and temporary employees as had completed a minimum service of two years on April 1, 1985.
Vide orders dated August 8, 1985 (Annexure P4) it was inter alia provided as under :-  "The matter has been reconsidered and government have now decided that the services of all ad hoc/temporarily appointed employees to Class III Services/Posts, who have one year service to their credit on 1485 may also be regularised.
The conditions for such regularisation as contained in the Department's earlier communication, dated 29th March, 1985, as referred to above, however, remain the same and should be meticulously observed."
6.
In view of the above instructions, all ad hoc employees appointed to Class-III services/posts, who had completed one year of service on April 1, 1985 were entitled to be considered for regularisation.
The petitioners fulfilled this requirement.
There is nothing to show that the post had to be a civil post.
Consequently, without going into the question as to whether or not the petitioners were holding civil posts, they fulfilled the requirement of the instructions contained in Annexure P4.
They had, as such, a right to be considered for regularisation.
This right was wrongly denied to them.
7.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Under Section 71(9) of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976, it is incumbent on the appointing authority "to follow the instructions issued by the Government from time to time in relation to reservation of appointment of posts for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and any other special category of persons" (emphasis supplied).
The instructions at Annexures P.3 and P.4 are clearly referable to the above provision.
By these instructions it had been decided to fill up the posts from the special category of ad hoc employees.
The petitioners constitute that special category.
The instructions were binding on the appointing authority.
8.
I accordingly allow CWP Nos. 3985, 4007 and 4014 of 1986 and set aside the orders of termination.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioners in accordance with the instructions dated March 29, 1985 and August 8, 1985.
Since all the petitioners, except Mahinder Singh in CWP No. 3985 of 1986, have continued in service, the question of granting any consequential benefits in the matter of pay does not arise.
If the petitioners are found to be suitable for regularisation w.e.f.
the due date, the respondents shall give them benefits of seniority etc. Petitioner No. 5 in CWP No. 3985 of 1986 having not joined service in pursuance to the directions given to him, shall not be entitled to the arrears of salary.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
9.
In CWP No. 3126 of 1987, it has been inter alia contended by Mr. SP Kerwal, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, that the petitioner had gone abroad on one months's leave, but had remained absent for almost a year.
In this situation, he should not be granted any relief by this court.
10.
The services of the petitioner were terminated vide orders dated July 23, 1986.
It appears that the petitioner was abroad at that time.
He returned only in April, 1987.
Thereafter the had filed the present petition.
The Motion Bench had stayed the termination of the services.
The petitioner is alleged to have submitted his joining report on May 4, 1987.
This report was not accepted by the Corporation as the petitioner had remained absent from duty.
Thereupon the petitioner moved a Civil Misc.
Petition No. 13169 of 1988.
This application was allowed by MS Liberhan, J vide order dated January 25, 1989 with the following order :-  "It is not disputed that the petitioner was intimated with respect to his termination.
The termination of other co-workers by the same order was stayed in the connected writ petition No. 3985 of 1986.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that solely on the ground, the petitioner was relieved before he approached this Court in a writ petition, it is not fair for the Corporation to treat the petitioner differently.
The Corporation being a public undertaking should evoke confidence for fairness in administration by permitting the petitioner to join duty and treat him similarly as the petitioners in the order writ petition.
Keeping in view these facts and circumstances, the respondents are directed to take the petitioner back in service till the disposal of the writ petition on the same terms and conditions as the petitioners in other case i.e. CWP No. 3985 of 1986.
The petitioner undertakes not to claim back wages till the disposal of the writ petition.
In pursuance to the above order, the petitioner has continued in service.
11.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and the conclusion recorded above, the order of termination is set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for regularisation in accordance with the instructions, referred to above.
It is further held that the period from the date the petitioner proceeded on one months's leave till January 25, 1989 shall be treated as leave of the kind due.
In case, no leave is due to the petitioner, he shall not be paid any arrears of salary for that period.
No order as costs.
Order accordingly.