RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioners were selected and recruited as constables in the Punjab Police and were enlisted on 2061966, 25111962, 741967 and 1771967 respectively.
Thereafter, the first three petitioners were promoted as Head Constables in the year 1976, whereas Petitioner No. 4 was promoted as such in the year 1979 and confirmed as Head Constables on 551979, 451979, 1881978 and 771982 respectively.
The petitioners were not being deputed for the Intermediate School Course provided under the Punjab Police Rules, which led to their filing of two writ petitions in this Court, being CWP Nos. 498 of 1984 and 4207 of 1985, for a direction to the respondents for deputing them for Intermediate School Course as per their seniority when Head Constables junior to them were deputed for the said course.
2.
The abovesaid writ petitions came up for hearing before a learned Single Judge of this Court and the same were allowed.
The judgment is now reported as Dhanna Singh v. The State of Punjab 1986(4) S.L.R.
617.
It may be observed here that it was contended before the learned Single Judge in the abovenoted case that the petitioners were working as Clerks in different Offices of the Police Department in the rank of Constables when they were asked to give their options as to whether they would like to be transferred to the Executive Clerical Cadre or would remain in the Executive Cadre of the Police Department and the petitioners opted for the former.
It was the case of the respondents that as a result of this option not only they continued in the Executive Clerical Cadre, but were later confirmed as Head Constables without passing the lower school course, which in normal course would not have happened under the Rules.
Since the respondent-Authorities were not in a position to produce any material before the learned Single Judge to show that as a matter of fact the two alleged Cadres named as Executive Clerical Cadre and Executive Cadre in the Police Department were created by any competent authority, the writ petition was allowed as it was held that there was no distinction between the Constable/Head Constables in the Executive Clerical Cadre and the Executive Cadre.
It was observed in para 3 of the reported judgment in Dhanna Singh's case (supra) as under :-  "3.
On my repeated asking, the respondent authorities are not in a position to produce any material before me to show that as a matter of fact the two alleged Cadres named as Executive Clerical Cadre and Executive Cadre in the Police Department were created by any competent authority.
It is also not shown to me that while exercising their alleged options to continue to work on the clerical side the petitioners had ever given up their claim or right to be promoted to the next ranks under the Rules.
Otherwise also it is difficult to accept the plea raised on behalf of the respondent.
If the petitioners were brought to the clerical side or the cadre as those authorities choose to call it only as Constables, how and why these people cannot aspire for or seek their due promotions in accordance with the Rules while remaining in the same branch or cadre of the Police Department ?
If they were brought to these offices as Clerks, why cannot they continue in these very offices as Head Constables or ASIs.
or while enjoying still higher ranks ?
In the light of this I see no merit in the stand taken on behalf of the respondent authorities."
3.
On the basis of the directions given by the learned Single judge in the abovenoted cases, the petitioners were deputed for the Intermediate Course which they successfully completed in the year 1987.
On their passing the Intermediate Course, they were promoted as Officiating ASIs., taking their date of passing the Intermediate Course into consideration and assigning them seniority accordingly.
The case of the petitioners, however, is that they were entitled to be considered for promotion with effect from the dates their junior Head Constables were promoted as ASIs.
and not from the date when they had passed the Intermediate Course.
The arguments proceeds that for no fault of the petitioners, they were not deputed for the Intermediate Course according to their seniority as Head Constables, for which they had to come to this Court as mentioned in the earlier paragraph of the judgment.
Had they been sent for the intermediate course according to their seniority as Head Constables, then they would have been promoted as ASIs.
according to their seniority as Head Constables.
4.
In the written Statement filed on behalf of the respondents, there is again no indication as to by which order and by which authority and under which law, the two cadres i.e. Executive Clerical Cadre and the Executive Cadre were created in the Police Department.
Even orally the counsel appearing for the respondents has not been able to show anything as to how these cadres were created.
In view of the judgment of the learned Single Judge in Dhanna Singh's case (supra) there is no escape from the conclusion that in fact there is no distinction between the Head Constables working in the Executive Clerical Cadre and the Executive Cadre.
That being so, the petitioners had also to be considered for promotion as ASIs.
from the dates when their junior Head Constables were promoted as such.
5.
For the foregoing reasons I allow this writ petition and quash orders Annexures P-2 and P-8 rejecting claims of the petitioners for being considered for promotion from the dates when their junior Head Constable were promoted.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioners for promotion as ASIs.
from the dates when their junior Head Constables were promoted as such.
In case the petitioners are found suitable for promotion from the respective dates when their juniors were promoted, they would be entitled to all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
Let these directions be carried out within three months from the date of the receipt of this judgment.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.