Manmohan Singh Liberhan, J. - It is not disputed in the course of arguments that the petitioner worked for more than 240 days with the respondent-Institute.
The finding of respondent No. 1 in the impugned order with regard to the petitioner having worked for 240 days has not been challenged by the respondent.
In view of these facts, non-compliance of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the finding of the Authority below to the same effect is also not in dispute.
2.
The sole ground on which back wages of the petitioner have been refused is that on October 17, 1989 an offer was made to him by the management for his reinstatement in service provided he agrees to relinquish his back wages.
Though the Authority below has observed that since the workman was a daily wager therefore, ends of justice would be met if 40% back wages are paid to him.
A reading of the award leaves us with no doubt that the Presiding Officer appears to have been swayed by this offer made by the management for reinstatement of the petitioner.
3.
The conspicuous object of granting compensation under Section 25 of the Industrial Disputes Act, is to provide a sense of security of service on completion of a statutory period and to make the workman entitled for some compensation 'in view' of the service rendered, in order to settle again after he is removed from service.
It is not disputed that compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, are mandatory and its non-compliance would render the order of removal from service as void.
Making an offer to an employee having completed 240 days, to surrender his back wages inspite of the fact that the management has not complied with the provisions of law, would render the object of providing security of service and relief to the poor workman in case of his retrenchment, negatory.
4.
Ordinarily, the workman whose services have been terminated illegally are entitled to reinstatement with full back wages unless something contrary is shown.
We are unable to comprehend how the offer made by the management to the petitioner who is a class IV employee viz. Mali having worked for 240 days with the respondent Institute, to join the job provided he relinquishes his back wages, is justified.
This is nothing but an unfair labour practice and further exploitation of a helpless worker who may have succumb to surrender his rights and protection provided by law in order to make his living.
5.
The second contention of counsel for the respondents is that the petitioner was a daily wager and as he made demand after five months, he is not entitled for any back wages.
We find no force in this contention.
Making a demand after five months by an illiterate worker is not such a belated demand which would render him not entitled to the back wages.
There is nothing on record that the petitioner was a gainfully employed during these five months.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents cites Ram Chandra Yadav v. The State of Bihar, 1988(2) SLR 482 in order to contend that where the reference is filed after a long time, the workman is not entitled for the back wages.
Undisputedly reference sought after five months, cannot by any stretch of imagination, be treated to have been filed after long time.
Learned counsel further placed reliance on Tekrai Vasandi alias KL Basandhi v. Union of India, 1988(3) SLR 560.
We are unable to comprehend how the facts and laws laid down in the said judgments are para materia to the facts of this case.
On the other hand, the facts and circumstances of the present case are squarely covered by Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1979 Punjab Law Reporter 720 and Mehar Chand v. Patiala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, 1989(6) SLR 134.
7.
In view of the observations made above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned award is modified to the extent that the petitioner would be entitled to full back wages except for five months for which he had not sought the reference.
The writ petition is allowed with costs.
Costs Rs. 1,000/-.