GR Majithia, J - The unsuccessful plaintiff has come up in regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the trial Court dismissing his suit for declaration that he was entitled to Jalandhar rates of pay and DA, including other allowances claimed in the plaint.
The facts :-  The plaintiff sought a declaration to the effect that he and the other plaintiffs were entitled to Jalandhar rates of pay and DA including other allowances as revised from time to time.
They joined service in P.A.P.
at Jalandhar and were awarded Jalandhar rates.
The Jalandhar rates were also awarded by the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala vide his order No. 189/D.N.
and endorsement No. 643-44/D.M.
dated April 8, 1974.
It was further pleaded that same grades will be available to the employees of 82 Bn.
PAP, Bahadurgarh.
On the transfer to the plaintiff to 82 Bn.
PAP, Bhadurgarh, District Patiala, he was being given the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala and not the one which was being given to him at Jalandhar.
He claimed that he was entitled to the same revised grades as payable to him at Jalandhar and those rates could not be revised to his detriment.
2.
The defendants contested the claim of the plaintiffs on the ground that the plaintiffs are contingent paid employees; they were paid out of the contingent fund only those rates which were fixed by the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned district every year.
The plaintiff was working on the contingent staff in district of Patiala and the pay and allowances fixed by the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala will be payable to him.
3.
The first appellate Court, after appraising the evidence, came to the conclusion that the plaintiff was not working on the staff of the PAP either as temporary or permanent Government servant.
He was merely contingent paid staff.
The pay and allowances etc. payable to the contingent staff are fixed by the Deputy Commissioner of each district every year keeping in view the local conditions.
Since the plaintiff is working as a contingent employee in PAP Bahadurgarh, District Patiala, he is entitled only to the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner for the contingent staff every year.
4.
I do not find any infirmity in the reasoning and conclusions arrived at by the first appellate Court.
The plaintiff cannot successfully urge that since the contingent staff working in Jalandhar district is paid different rates of pay and allowances from the one paid to the contingent staff working in P.A.P.
Bahadurgarh, district Patiala, this action of the officers of the Government is hit by the rule or arbitrariness.
The plaintiff is not a temporary or a permanent Government servant.
He is merely a contingent paid staff paid out of the contingency fund and he will be entitled to be paid the pay and allowances as are payable to the contingent staff working in the district of Patiala where at present he is working.
5.
This appeal is devoid of merit and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.