Ashok Bhan, J. (Oral) - This is plaintiff's second appeal who in the present suit had challenged the order dated 1751973 passed by Collector, Karnal, vide which he was dismissed from service.
2.
The case of the plaintiff-appellant is that he joined the revenue department as Patwari after passing the Patwar examination.
His work and conduct remained satisfactory during the tenure of his service.
He was placed under suspension on 2141971 by order of Collector, Karnal.
Thereafter he was served with a charge-sheet that he misappropriated a sum of Rs. 223871 after recovering the same from various persons and that he remained absent since 17.2.1971 except from 431971 to 531971.
The charge-sheet was framed on the basis of complaint filed by Hari Singh Karam Chand Baru, Bhana and Hoshiar Singh, Tehsildar Panipat, conducted preliminary enquiry and in that enquiry Tehsildar recorded the statements of the complainants as also of Ramji Lal Kanungo.
Tehsildar submitted his report on the basis of which charge-sheet was framed and Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil) Panipat, was appointed as Enquiry Officer to conduct a regular enquiry who examined the above-mentioned persons as witnesses besides Anand Parkash, Jaswant Singh and Dharam Singh Sarpanch.
It was also alleged that the witnesses did not support the charges but the Enquiry Officer relying upon the statements recorded during preliminary enquiry held the charges to have been established against the appellant.
It was also alleged that the Punishing Authority did not apply its mind and agreed with the Enquiry Officer and ordered the dismissal of the appellant.
His appeal was also dismissed by the Commissioner, Ambala Division.
According to the plaintiff-appellant, this order is illegal, without any evidence and against the principles of natural justice.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendant-State.
In the preliminary objections taken in the written statement, it was stated that the suit was not maintainable in the present form; notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was invalid and that the plaintiff had no cause of action.
On merits, it was stated that plaintiff-appellant was a Patwari and he was placed under suspension and charge-sheeted.
It was further stated that the plaintiff-appellant was dismissed on receipt of the report of the Enquiry Officer; he was granted personal hearing before passing the impugned order.
The other allegations made by the plaintiff were controverted.
It was stated that the plaintiff supplied with the charge-sheet, list of witnesses and documents as required under law.
He was given full opportunity to produce his evidence and allowed to be assisted and represented by the counsel.
The Enquiry Officer and Punishing Authorities have fully complied with the relevant provisions applicable to the case.
4.
Trial Court on the basis of pleadings of the parties, framed issues and after recording evidence and hearing the arguments, dismissed the suit vide its order dated 7.12.1977.
An appeal was carried against this order which was also dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Karnal, vide his judgment and decree dated 641978.
The judgment and decree of the Courts below have been assailed before this Court on the ground that it was a case of no evidence before the Enquiry Officer as the complainants did not support their allegations before the Enquiry Officer and as such the order of dismissal is not sustainable in the eyes of law.
I find no substance in the submissions.
The complainants had supported their allegations during the preliminary enquiry and the Enquiry Officer as well as the Punishing Authority have mainly relied upon the testimony of these witnesses made during preliminary enquiry.
Moreover, misappropriated amount was later on deposited by the appellant in the government treasury.
The Enquiry Officer was well within his rights to rely upon the testimony of witnesses which was recorded during preliminary enquiry.
5.
The next argument raised by the counsel for the appellant is that the copies of statements of witnesses recorded by the Tehsildar during preliminary enquiry were not supplied to the appellant during the enquiry against him conducted by Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil) Panipat and that he was prejudiced in his defence.
It was also argued that the appellant was entitled to get the copies of statements of witnesses which were recorded during the preliminary enquiry and the said statements could not be used against him in regular enquiry until and unless he was supplied the copies of statements of the witnesses recorded by Tehsildar Panipat during preliminary enquiry.
I again do not find any substance in this submission.
A finding has been recorded by the first appellate Court that full opportunity was given to the appellant to cross-examine the witnesses and he was permitted to lead evidence which was done by the plaintiff-appellant after examining the entire record which included the preliminary enquiry report and statements of witnesses recorded during preliminary enquiry.
Since the whole record had been made available to the appellant, it cannot be urged by him that any prejudice was caused to him for non-supplying the copies of the statements of the witnesses recorded by Tehsildar Panipat during preliminary enquiry.
Had this opportunity of inspection of record been denied to him, he could urge with some justification that he had been prejudiced in the defence of his case as the copies of statements of witnesses which were recorded during the preliminary enquiry had not been supplied to him but as stated above since the whole record was made available to him for inspection, in my opinion, no prejudice or loss has been caused to the appellant for non-supply of copies of statements of the witnesses recorded by Tehsildar Panipat during preliminary enquiry.
Plaintiff-appellant even did not make any application for obtaining these copies and in fact no objection was taken by him before the Enquiry Officer that he had not been supplied with the copies of statements of the witnesses recorded during the preliminary enquiry.
This objection was not raised by him either before the Punishing Authority or before the Commissioner in appeal.
This shows that at all stages he was satisfied and prepared to defend himself as full opportunity had been given to him to inspect the record.
6.
In view of the above, I do not find that any prejudice has been caused to the appellant in the absence of supply of copies of statements of the witnesses although he was given full opportunity to inspect the record.
Lastly the learned counsel for the appellant has urged that since the amount has been deposited and no loss has been caused to the state, the order of dismissal from service is excessive and the same should be set aside on the ground that the punishment meted out to the plaintiff-appellant is excessive keeping in view the nature of offence and the extant of damage caused to the State.
I do not find any substance in this submission.
The charge against the appellant was that he had misappropriated, though temporality, the Government funds and further that he remained absent from duty without any sufficient cause or sanctioned leave.
The charges against the appellant are grave in nature.
and the punishment awarded to him, in my opinion, is edequate.
7.
In view of the above discussion, I find no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.