RS Mongia, J - The facts giving rise to the present writ petition are that the Board of Directors of respondent-Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) sanctioned the creation of 12 posts of Field Publicity Assistants (in short FPAs) in the scale of Rs. 160-400 on 30th September, 1976.
The said posts were advertised and the petitioners, who are ten in number, were recruited against the same on 1st July, 1977.
The qualifications for the post of FPAs.
at the relevant time were as follows :-  "Qualifications : Bachelors' Degree in Arts, Commerce or Science.
Preference to be given to those having passed Sociology as one of the Elective subjects.
Experience : Must have three years experience of working in publicity organisation of repute or Public Relations Department as a Publicity Supervisor or similar cell in the Army."
2.
It may be observed here that at the time of recruitment of the petitioners, the Corporation had not framed any Regulation; governing the condition of service of its employees.
It en averred by the petitioners and admitted by the Corporation in its reply that the Corporation was functioning in accordance with the Draft Service Bye-laws own as PUNSUP Service Regulations, 1975.
These Draft Regulations were being followed for running the Corporation.
Regulation 11 of the Draft Regulations regarding the determination of seniority read as follows :-  "11.
Seniority of Members of Service :- (a) Seniority of category V will be maintained at district level and that of other categories at State level.
(b) The seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in the Service."
It may be noticed that at the time of the recruitment of the petitioners, the qualification for recruitment of Inspectors given in the Draft Regulations was Bachelor's degree.
3.
In its 40th meeting held on 29th September, 1978, the Board of Directors of the Corporation, decided to discontinue the 12 posts of FPAs.
against which 10 petitioners had been appointed, and the present incumbents on those posts to be absorbed as Inspectors.
By a letter dated 24th November, 1978, the Managing Director of the Corporation conveyed to all the District Managers of the Corporation in the State, regarding the sanction of the Board of Directors to the creation of 12 posts of Inspectors and also regarding the abolition of 12 posts of FPAs.
and for absorption of the present incumbents as Inspectors.
An order dated 17th April, 1979 was issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation appointing/adjusting the petitioners against the posts of Inspectors.
A copy of this order has been appointed as Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
The Managing Director of the Corporation sought advise of the Director of Food and Supplies and Joint Secretary to Government, Punjab regarding the fixation of seniority of the FP As who had been adjusted against the post of Inspectors in his letter dated 15th December, 1979 (Copy Annexure P3), the Managing Director of the Corporation had mentioned to the Director, Food and Supplies that consequent upon the merger of the cadres of FPAs.
and of Inspectors, the matter regarding fixation of their seniority had been under consideration of the Corporation.
After giving the detail of the duties performed by, the FPAs.
and the Inspectors as also their qualifications advice was sought on the following points :-  "5.
In the right of foregoing details, it is requested that the Department of Personnel, Government, Punjab may be approached for seeking clarification as to whether the officials previously holding the posts of FPAs may be given the seniority :  (i) From the date of their creation/taking over as Field Publicity Assistants in the Inspectors cadre;  (ii) From the date of discontinuance absorption of the post of Field Publicity Assistants.
(iii) In either of the above (i) and (ii) circumstances, it may be clarified as to how the seniority of the Field Publicity Assistants (of the defunct cadre) viz-a-vis the cadre of Inspectors (the absorbing cadre) is to be fixed.
An early clarification in the matter is requested."
The Government of Punjab in the Department of Food and Supplies, sent its advice to the Managing Director of the Corporation vide letter dated 21st February, 1983 (Copy Annexure P4) wherein it was mentioned that the matter had been referred to the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms for their advice and they had advised that the seniority of the concerned employees in the joint seniority list may be deterrained on the basis of continuous length of service in the equated ranks.
Since the posts of FPAs.
and of Inspectors carry identical pay scales, qualifications, duties and responsibilities, therefore, their seniority was advised to be fixed with reference to their continuous length of service in the two equated posts.
4.
It has been further averred in the writ petition and admitted by the Corporation in its reply that on the basis of the aforesaid advice given by the Government the Board of Directors of the Co ration resolved on 28th February, 1984 to fix the seniority of the petitioners in the cadre of Inspectors from the date of their joining as FPAs.
Accordingly, the petitioners were shown in the seniority list of Inspectors at Serial Nos. 52 to 61 on the basis of their continuous length of service in the Corporation.
5.
One Shri Balkar Singh, Inspector, who was working as such before the appointment/adjustment of the petitioners as Inspectors, represented to the Corporation that the seniority of the petitioner should be prepared on the basis of date of the joining on Inspectors' posts and since he had joined as Inspector before the petitioners, he would rank senior to them.
Before the said representation could be decided, Balkar Singh and others filed C.W.P.
No. 3825 of 1984 in is Court.
At the motion stage on 16th February, 1985, this Court ordered that the seniority of the petitioners and respondents in that case be decided after giving an opportunity of hearing.
It has been further averred that after the aforesaid order of this Court, the petitioners in that case (now respondents) were given personal hearing by the Managing Director of the Corporation and on 19th March, 1985, the Managing Director withdraw the seniority list circulated earlier and decided to examine the whole case afresh.
The present petitioners gave a detailed representation to the Managing Director of the Corporation that their seniority had been rightly fixed in the cadre of Inspector by taking into account the continuous length of service in the Corporation, which included the service as FPAs.
The respondent-Corporation in its 77th meeting held on 5th July, 1985, decided that the petitioners shall be given seniority from the date they joined on the posts of Inspectors.
The petitioners who originally stood at Serial Nos. 52 to 61 in the earlier seniority list were pushed down to Serial Nos. 147 to 156.
A copy of this order has been appended as Annexure P-5 to this writ petition.
On the basis of order, Annexure P5, petitioners 1 to 4, who had in the meantime been promoted as Field Officers, were ordered to be reverted as Inspectors with immediate effect.
Copy of the reversion order dated 9th July, 1985 has been appended as Annexure P.6.
The petitioners have challenged the orders, Annexures P-5 and P-6 by way of the present writ petition.
5A.
The learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. PS Patwalia, argued that on the discontinuance/abolition of the posts of FPAs.
the petitioners, who were working as FPAs.
were merged with the Inspectors, and, therefore, their entire length of service in the Corporation had to be counted for the purpose of determining their seniority as Inspectors.
He further submitted that the pay-scales of the posts of FPAs.
and Inspectors were the same, the duties of the FPAs.
and that of the Inspectors were also almost the same and, in fact, the petitioners were performing the duties of Inspectors while they had been appointed as FPAs.
He went on to argue that the period of the petitioners' service as FPAs had been counted for the purpose of fixation of their pay as well as towards probation on the posts of Inspectors and according to him, if the service as FPAs.
was to be counted for purposes of pay and towards probation, there was no reason as to why the said service be not reckoned for the purpose of determining seniority as Inspectors.
"The further submission was that even the Government had advised the Corporation that the seniority of the petitioners had to be fixed by taking their continuous length of service in the Corporation and not from the date when they were adjusted/appointed against the posts of Inspectors.
6.
On the other hand, the stand of the learned counsel for the respondents was that the posts of the erstwhile FPAs.
were discontinued/abolished and the adjustment of the incumbents as inspectors was purely on compassionate grounds.
According to them, had the petitioners who were working as FPAs.
not been adjusted against the posts of Inspectors, they would have been on the road without job.
According to the private respondents, the petitioners were appointed afresh as Inspectors after the posts of FPAs.
had been abolished, and, consequently, they could not count the period of service its FPAs for seniority as Inspectors.
It had been further argued by the learned counsel for the private respondents that the Draft Regulations were approved and enforced with effect from 1st April, 1979; wherein the seniority regulation as contained in the Draft Regulations was changed.
The seniority regulation (relevant extract) as finally approved, reads as under :-  "The seniority inter se of members of the Service shall be determined by the length of their continuous service on a post in the Service."
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the considered view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
When the proposal for the abolition of 12 posts of FPAs.
was being mooted, it was also being considered that the incumbents of the posts of FPAs.
would be absorbed against the posts of Inspectors, 12 posts of Inspectors were created on the abolition of the posts of FPAs.
The FPAs.
did hold the qualifications of the Inspectors, otherwise the could not have been absorbed as Inspector.
It has been specifically averred by the petitioners that they were virtually working as Inspectors though posted as FPAs.
The nature of duties and responsibilities were identical.
The Corporation in its reply admitted this fact and has averred :- "In addition to the duties as Field Publicity Assistants, they were also performing other duties being performed by the Inspectors."
It has been further admitted that the period of service spent by the petitioners against the posts of FPAs.
has been reckoned for fixation of pay as Inspectors and also towards clearing the probation period as Inspectors.
From all this, it is evident that this was virtually a case of merger of two cadres and the service of the petitioners as FPAs.
could not be ignored for determination of seniority in the rank of Inspectors.
8.
I am not impressed by the argument of the respondents that according to the Regulations of the Corporation, which came into force on 1st April, 1979, the seniority was to be determined on the basis of length of service on a post and not in the service as was envisaged by the draft regulations.
Apart from what I have held above that this was a case of merger, and therefore, the length of service of the petitioners against the posts of FPAs.
would be taken to be a service on the post of Inspectors.
I am of the view that the posts of FPAs were abolished on 29th September, 1978 and the Regulations of the Corporation came into force on 1st April, 1979.
Prior to 1st April, 1979, the Draft Regulations were being followed and the petitioners' seniority had to be determined according to the length of service in the Corporation and not on a post.
Consequently the petitioners right to get their seniority determined in accordance with the length of service in the Corporation was there on 29th September, 1978, when the posts of FPAs.
were abolished.
The passing of formal orders of adjusting/appointing the petitioners as Inspectors on 17th April, 1979 was just a ministerial act.
Therefore, even according to the draft regulations which were being followed, the seniority had to be reckoned on the basis of length of service in the Corporation.
9.
I am farther of the view that when the Corporation had sought advice from the Government, the Government had rightly advised that the entire period of service including the service as FPAs.
was to be reckoned for determination of seniority of the petitioners as Inspectors.
Ignoring the service of the petitioners on the posts of FPAs.
for determination of seniority as Inspectors is unjust, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Fortiori the order of reversion (Annexure P.6) based on wrong determination of seniority of the petitioners is also violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed, the order of the Corporation, dated 9th July, 1985 (Annexure P5) determining the petitioners' seniority and order dated 9th July, 1985 (Annexure P.6) reverting petitioner Nos. 1 to 4 from the posts of Field Officers to the posts of Inspectors are hereby quashed.
The petitioners will be entitled to all consequential benefits flowing from quashing Annexures P-5 and P-6, which may be given to them within a period of two months from the receipt of this order.
I leave the parties to bear their own costs.