GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate from this Court to the respondent to give him the benefit of military service towards seniority etc.  2.
The facts :-  3.
The petitioner joined the Army as a Sepoy on July 29, 1963.
He rendered active service at the front during 1965 and 1971 wars.
He was awarded Raksha Medal in 1965 war, Sangram Medal in 1971 war besides GS Medal with clasp Nagahills.
He was released from the Army on compassionate grounds on September 4, 1981.
After his release from the Army, he was selected as a clerk through the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, and he joined as such on October 14, 1982.
He was appointed against the quota reserved for Ex-servicemen.
The petitioner unsuccessfully made representation to the respondent to give him benefit of war service.
The petitioner's apprehension is that although no such order has been passed yet he has been denied the benefit only on the ground that he was released compassionate grounds.
4.
The Punjab Government framed rules known as Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (for short, the Rules).
After re-organisation of the Punjab State, the rules became applicable to the Haryana State also.
In the year 1976, the Haryana Government brought about three amendments in the Rules.
In the instant case, we are only concerned with third amendment which was added by way of proviso to Rule 4 of the Rules and it reads thus :-  "Provided that a person who has been released from the Military Service on compassionate ground shall not be entitled to any concession under this rule."
The validity of this proviso was challenged in the apex Court in Ex. Capt.
KC Arora v. State of Haryana, reported in 1984(2) SLR 97 (SC).
It was ruled by the apex Court that the amendments were ultra vires the constitution and thus bad.
This proposition of law was re-affirmed in Rajpal Sharma v. State of Haryana, 1985(3) SLR 573 where it was held thus :-  "In this view of the legal position the petitioners herein are also entitled to the benefits of Rule 4 and the mere fact that they were released from military service on compassionate grounds cannot disentitle them as they satisfy the requirement of R 4 of the Punjab Rules as it originally stood.
The grounds on which they were released are not material.
If once they are held to be ex-military servicemen they are entitled to the benefits of R 4."
5.
The respondent has not so far disposed of the claim of the petitioner.
It will meet the ends of justice, if the respondent is directed to dispose of the claim of the petitioner fur grant of benefit of military service within three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
The Registry is directed to send a copy of the writ petition alongwith annexures to the respondent.
The respondent will treat the petition as a representation of the petitioner and will dispose it of within the prescribed period in the light of the observations made in Ex. Capt.
KC Arora and Rajpal Sharmas' cases (supra) Civil Writ Petition in disposed of accordingly.
No order as to costs.