VK Jhanji, J - The petitioner is a Matriculate and has also passed 3- Year Diploma in Electronics.
The Director, Police (Telecommunications), Punjab, Chandigarh, on 1531989 issued an advertisement inviting applications for the posts of Assistant Sub Inspectors (Technicians).
As per the said advertisement, the qualification prescribed for Assistant Sub Inspectors (Technicians) was Matriculation and 3 years' Diploma in Electronics.
Since the petitioner has the requisite qualification, he applied for being selected as Assistant Sub Inspector (Technician) in pursuance of the said advertisement.
On 1041989, physical test was conducted and the petitioner was declared physically fit.
Thereafter the petitioner was asked to appear for physical efficiency test which he also successfully qualified.
Then, the petitioner appeared in the written test and qualified the same.
After the written test, a Committee was constituted.
of DIG Police Telecommunications), Punjab Director, Police Telecommunications), Punjab and one Senior Superintendent of Police, for holding interviews.
The petitioner appeared in the interview on 26.4.1989.
After the interviews, a merit list of 16 candidates was prepared and the petitioner was shown at No. 4 in the merit list.
2.
On 451989 the respondent No. 3 asked the Chief Medical Officer, Hoshiarpur to medically examine the petitioner.
The Chief Medical Officer examined the petitioner on 951989 and declared him fit.
Again on 2861989, respondent No. 3 asked Civil Surgeon-Chief Medical Officer, Hoshiarpur, that on 451989 when the petitioner was examined and was declared medically fit with Myopia 25 DSP, but as per police rule 1216, a candidate for employment in Police department should have eye vision 6/6 without glasses.
In view of this the Civil Surgeon was requested to intimate whether the vision of the candidate is as per the rules quoted or otherwise.
He was also required to intimate whether the defect of Myopia makes a candidate fit for police service or not.
In response to the said letter, the Civil Surgeon, Hoshiarpur informed respondent No. 3 that since the post on which the petitioner is to be appointed is of technical nature (ASI - Technician), Myopia with 25 DSP does not make him unfit for the post of ASI (Technician).
The matter did not rest here but was referred to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab who also informed Respondent No. 3 that Civil Surgeon, Hoshiarpur has clearly opined that Myopia with 25 DSP does not make the petitioner unfit for the post of ASI (Technician).
As such the request made by respondent No. 3 for constituting a Medical Board cannot be considered.
Despite fitness certificate issued by the Civil Surgeon and the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, the petitioner was not appointed as ASI (Technician) and the persons who were placed lower in merit to the petitioner, were appointed as Assistant Sub Inspectors (Technicians).
Because of inaction on the part of the respondents, the petitioner was left with no alternative but to approach this Hon'ble Court by way of this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
3.
At the time of motion hearing, on 451990, the Division Bench observed that as in para 7 of the written statement the respondents have made an averment that the case of the petitioner is being referred to the Postgraduate Institute, Chandigarh, for medical examination to ascertain the suitability of the petitioner for appointment, the petitioner was directed to get himself medically examined and the result of the examination was directed to be placed before the Court on 3051990.
On 3051990, reports of the PGI as well as Director, Health and Family Welfare regarding medical examination of the petitioner were placed on record.
The report of the PGI is to the following; effect :-  "On examination, he was found to have straight eyes.
He has visual acuity of 6/5 in both eyes with Myopia correction of right eye-2.25 D Sph with 050 x 90 D cyl.
and left eye-250 D Sph.
His fundus examination is within the normal limit.
He has no Myopia degenerative changes and his colour vision is within normal limits."
The PGI further observed that according to Government of India letter No. F.5(Il)-12/57-MII(PT.Il) dated 17121957 (Ministry of Health), the petitioner is fit for government service (Technical) of police services.
After the receipt of the report, replication was filed by the petitioner.
In para 7 of the replication, it has categorically been stated by the petitioner that the letter dated 17121957 issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Health, has also been adopted by the State of Punjab vide its Letter dated 29.7.1959.
A copy of letter dated 29.7.1959 along with letter issued by the Government of India was also enclosed with the replication.
A bare reading of letter dated 29.7.1959 shows that letter dated 17121957 of Government of India has been adopted by the State of Punjab.
There is no rebuttal on the part of the respondents to this effect.
4.
After considering the entire matter at length; I find that once the petitioner was found medically fit not only by the Civil Surgeon but also by the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab and as per letter dated 17121957 of Government of India, the petitioner is fit for government service (Technical) and the said letter having been adopted by the State of Punjab, there was no reason for respondent No. 3 not to appoint the petitioner as Assistant Sub Inspector (Technician).
Though the petitioner was placed at No. 4 in the merit list, persons who were below him on the merit list, were appointed but the petitioner was made to come to this Court as he was denied appointment on technical grounds although be was medically fit for being appointed as Assistant Sub Inspector (Technician).
As a result thereof, this writ petition is allowed with costs and a direction is issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Assistant Sub Inspector (Technician) in Punjab Police (Telecommunications) for which post he had applied in pursuance of advertisement dated 1531989 and was also selected by the Departmental Selection Committee.
Petition allowed.