GR Majithia, J - The Petitioner started his career in the service of Punjab Government as Automobile Engineer on 17th March, 1970; he was promoted to the post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 750-1300 with effect from 3rd October, 1975 on purely ad hoc basis.
This ad hoc arrangement continued for sufficiently long time.
He came to know that respondent No. 3 Deputy Director, State Transport, Punjab, has been approved by the Public Service Commission for the post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer and as a result of this, the petitioner was going to be reverted from th post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer.
The petitioner has challenged the order of reversion on the ground that reversion is violative of the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
It is also averred that respondent No. 3 is being approved for promotion after his adverse remarks had been expunged.
Before expunging the adverse remarks, the petitioner should have been given an opportunity of hearing.
The State has filed written statement through Shri GS Sandhu, IAS, Deputy Secretary, Transport, Punjab.
In the written statement, the State has taken the stand that the petitioner was appointed Mechanical Automobile Engineer on purely ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement for a period of six months or till a candidate is recommended by Punjab Public Service Commission (for short 'the Commission') for appointment to this post whichever is earlier.
It has been clarified that there was a lengthy correspondence between the Government and the Commission regarding the appointment of the petitioner and it was not correct that the case for regularisation of the service of the petitioner was pending.
It is pointed out that the Commission raised several objections to the appointment of the petitioner such as :-  (a) some confidential reports are not on record; (b) a slab of three eligible officers should be proposed for promotion along with the seniority list;  (c) the reasons for not amending the departmental Service Rules may be given; (d) why it is not proposed by the Government that the vacancy should be advertised again for recruitment form the open market; (e) decision of the Commission suggesting experience of eight years instead of five years should also be taken into consideration by the Government.
It is also stated that the Government gave its reply to the Commission and explained its position, however, the Commission vide letter dated 1291977 regretted to approve the promotion of the petitioner against the said vacancy.
It is further averred that the qualifications for the post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer were prescribed by the Government in consultation with the Commission in June, 1976.
The following qualifications were laid down for this post :-  (i) Graduate in Automobile Engineering or Graduate in Mechanical Engineering with specialisation in Automobile Engineering.
(ii) Experience on the post of general Manager, Punjab Roadways for three years and on the post of Works Manager, Automobile Engineer and Service Engineer for four years and on the post of Extra Assistant Transport Controller (Technical) for a period of five years.
It was admitted that the promotion of the petitioner was never made against this post on regular basis.
2.
It is further stated that respondent No. 3 represented to the Government that it had not correctly informed the Commission about his experience.
It was stated in the representation that respondent No. 3 fulfilled the qualification.
In his representation, respondent No. 3 stated that his experience on the higher post of General Manager, Punjab Roadways, in addition to the experience as Works Manager has to be counted for the purpose of promotion to the post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer.
The representation was accepted by the Government.
It came to the conclusion that the claim of respondent No. 3 was valid.
At the time of reference of the case to the Commission, respondent No. 3 was working on a higher post of General Manager and, therefore, he was certainly senior to the petitioner in the lower post from where promotion was being considered.
It was also found that factual inaccuracy must be brought to the notice of the Commission in the interest of justice and equality of treatment was to be given to the eligible officers.
Another relevant fact which came on record was that the adverse remarks given in one of the confidential reports of respondent No. 3 for the year 1977-78 had been represented against by him vide his representation dated 14.6.1979.
This representation had been processed by obtaining comments from his supervisory officers.
While representation against these adverse remarks in the confidential report had yet to be decided, this fact was not correctly stated in the reference made to the Commission vide letter dated 31st March, 1980 and it was mentioned that the record of service of respondent No. 3 is not good.
It is further averred in the written statement that since the rights of individual officers to a higher post were involved, it was necessary in the interest of justice that the State Government bring these facts to the notice of the Commission.
This was accordingly done in consultation with the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms on the issue whether the advice of the Commission should be accepted or whether the case should be referred back to the Commission.
It is also stated that after considering all aspects of the matter and with a view solely to do justice to the conflicting claims of both the officers, the Government referred the case again to the Commission for reconsideration by taking into consideration the correct factual position.
The correct position about the qualifications and experience laid down in the draft rules was brought to the notice of the Commission.
The Commission re-examined the matter on 26.12.1983 and informed the Government conveying its approval to the suitability of respondent No. 3 for promotion to the post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer.
3.
Written statement has also been filed on behalf of the Commission through Shri Shamsher Singh, Under Secretary to the Commission.
The Commission has taken the stand in the written statement that the qualifications for the post of Mechanical Automobile Engineer were laid down by the Government with the approval of the Commission.
The Government vide letter No. 1/9/78/I.T./4067, dated 2861982 asked the Commission to reconsider the matter.
In the reference, it was pointed out that respondent No. 3 was holding the post which was senior in status and responsibility to that of Automobile Engineer held by the petitioner at the time of making reference to the Commission.
The Government requested it to reconsider the case afresh keeping in view the qualifcation/experience mentioned in the draft rules.
The Commission has further stated in it that the recommendation for promotion of respondent No. 3 was made as a result of objective appraisal of the de novo representation of facts by the Government.
The petitioner has not filed any rejoinder to the written statements filed by the State Government and the Commission.
4.
It is contended by Shri JL Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was promoted on 3rd October, 1975, and he could not reverted after such a long time.
It is quite evident from the written statement filed by the State that the correct position regarding the post held by respondent No. 3 was not brought to the notice of the Commission when original reference was made.
The post held by respondent No. 3 was of higher responsibility than the petitioner.
Respondent No. 3 had submitted representation against the adverse remarks in the year 1979 which representation was pending.
This fact was also not brought to the notice of the Commission.
Later on these remarks were expunged.
It is thus clear that the correct position regarding respondent No. 3 was not brought to the notice of the Commission.
The correct position became clear when the Government examined the matter on the representation made by respondent No. 3.
When the Government was convicted that the earlier reference to the Commission was not correct, it explained the correct position to the Commission and requested for reconsideration of the matter.
It is also important to note that representation against the adverse remarks for the year 1977-78 was pending which were later on expunged and this fact was not stated in the first reference made to the Commission.
Relief cannot be denied to respondent No. 3 for the mistake committed by the State.
Denial of relief will amount to perpetuating injustice.
5.
It is well settled that if consideration for promotion to the post is not correctly made on account of the fact that correct facts were not brought to the notice of the Commission or the promoting authority, the Government is well within its right to correct the mistake and reconsider the case for promotion.
A Division Bench of this Court in Ranjit Singh, IPS v. The President of India and others, 1971(2) S.L.R.
561 observed thus :-  "Where an order was passed by the Government which was palpably an erroneous administrative decision which affected several senior officers, there was no rule of law which debarred the Government while acting administratively from remedying the wrong done by itself.
Every Administrative Authority has an inherent right to rectify its own mistakes unless there is some specific provision of law which prohibits such a course.
An officer holding an officiating post has no vested right to be heard or to urge that since he had obtained some benefit under a wrong decision made by a departmental authority, that decision be not rectified as it would result in the loss of that Benefit to him."
The Division bench further observed :-  "A Government servant holding an officiating post does not have any protection unless it is found that the impugned reversion was directed by way of punishment and it makes no difference whether the officiating charge was held against a substantive vacancy or otherwise.
Civil consequences in a general sense, meaning thereby loss of rank, seniority and emoluments etc., are always incidental to a reversion as whosoever is reverted must lose salary and rank of the higher post and in some cases even seniority in that post.
These are consequences certainly unpalatable for the government servant and may be described as evil for him but it must be remembered that no one has a right to continue in an officiating appointment.
The Constitution makers did not intend to give protection against any such consequences and the only protection given is when the case falls fairly and squarely within the ambit of Article 311, namely, when the public servant has been reverted by way of punishment.
To invoke the principles of natural justice for giving protection to a Government servant against dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, the cases beyond those falling under Article 311 will be tantamount to introducing a new kind of protection not contemplated by the Constitution.
There may be a statute or rule of service giving further protection.
The complexion of the order which is administrative in nature does not change because the competent authority has looked into the matter and reconsidered its decision on some representation made to this effect.
The representations may be helpful to such an authority in assessing the correctness and legality of the administrative decision taken by it and which is sought to be reviewed.
When there is no legal right to hold a post and it is so in case or infringement of his legal right arises requiring an opportunity to be afforded to him to be heard to show cause against the proposed action."
In view of the law laid down in the above case, it is clear that where there was no correct consideration of the case of a Government servant, the Government can always order reconsideration of the case and if in consequence of reconsideration, the officer who was unduly promoted is reverted, no penal consequences follow and then the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution are not attracted.
No hearing is required to be given before ordering such reversion.
So, I find no merit in the argument of Shri Gupta that the petitioner was not given any opportunity of hearing.
It is a case of mere correction of the mistake on the part of the Government.
The Government in their original reference did not give correct position and status of respondent No. 3 and did not supply correct information regarding the fact that representation against the adverse report was pending.
It is settled by the apex Court that adverse remarks cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned and afforded an opportunity to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
The superior authority has to decide on consideration of the representation, whether the adverse report is justified.
In Gurdial Singh Fijji v. State of Punjab and others, 1979(1) S.L.R.
804, it was held thus :-  "The principle is well-settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified."
Now these adverse remarks have already been expunged.
It is well settled that if the adverse remarks are expunged, the Government servant is entitled to reconsideration of his case of promotion.
Considering the facts of this case, I am of the opinion that respondent No. 3 was unduly denied the promotion because the reference of the Government to the Commission did not contain the correct information regarding the status of respondent No. 3 and his service record.
The Government on the representation of respondent No. 3 realised its mistake and asked the Commission to reconsider the case of promotion.
A Full Bench of this Court in Sunder Lal and others v. State of Punjab, 1970 Volume 4, Services Law Reporter 59 observed as follows :-  "If owing to some bona fide mistake, the Government has taken a decision regarding the confirmation of an officer, it can certainly revise its decision at a subsequent stage when the mistake comes to its notice.
The mistake can be corrected and it cannot be said that it should be allowed to perpetuate even when the same is discovered.
The consequent reduction of the officer could not amount to reduction in rank and attract the applicability of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Such a reduction is the necessary result of any routine administrative decision.
It is only when an officer brings his case within the purview of Article 311 of the Constitution that he can attack the legality of any order passed by the Government which might adversely affect his career in government service.
Such a case does not come within the four corners of Article 311 of the Constitution.
In the instant case the Government, after having misinterpreted the Rules, had given war service concessions to the petitioners.
Subsequently, they realised their mistake and withdrew those benefits, with the result that the seniority of the petitioners was affected.
The Government could correct the error and such a decision would not come within the ambit of Article 311 of the Constitution."
6.
Although I have found that respondent No. 3 was wrongly denied the promotion and the petitioner was promoted to the next higher post to which respondent No. 3 was entitled, both the them have been granted promotions.
The petitioner will not be disturbed from his present post.
The State Government will create a post of equal rank for respondent No. 3 and adjust him against that post with all consequential advantages within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
7.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.