Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The counsel for the parties have consented that in both the writ petitions bearing No. 599 of 1989 and CWP No. 16745 of 1989 common questions of law and facts are involved and, therefore, the same be disposed of by a common judgment.
For the purpose of judgment, the facts have been picked up from CWP No. 599 of 1989.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that she was appointed as Staff Nurse on 25.11.1969 whereas respondent No. 5 namely Santosh Rani joined as such on 25121970 and the petitioner was promoted to the post of Principal Tutor prior to respondent No. 5's promotion as such.
The petitioner remained senior to respondent No. 5 throughout but the official respondents ignoring this fact have downgraded the petitioner's seniority.
3.
Mr. Arun Jain, the learned Counsel for the petitioner, contended that respondent No. 5 was appointed as Sister Tutor alongwith others vide order dated 1391982, copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
She was never appointed by way of 'direct appointment' even though her name was recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (hereinafter referred to as the 'Board').
The Counsel further contended that in the light of the promotion order, Annexure P-3, respondent No. 5 could not be treated as senior to the petitioner, in any manner as the former was shown at Sr. No. 9 and latter being shown at Sr. No. 14 of the said promotion order.
4.
On the other hand, the stand taken by the respondents is that respondent No. 5 was appointed as Sister Tutor by way of 'direct recruitment, by the Board and she was inadvertently shown to have been promoted as a departmental candidate.
On the representation of respondent No. 5, this mistake was rectified and the petitioner was downgraded in the seniority and was accordingly reverted from the post of Principal Tutor to Sister Tutor.
It is also the stand of the official respondents that the petitioner was promoted from Nursing Sister in her own pay scale and as such she cannot be assigned seniority over and above respondent No. 5.
5.
I have considered the respective submissions of the Counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
Now the only question which requires consideration in the matter is whether respondent No. 5 was appointed as Staff Nurse by way of 'direct appointment' or promoted by way of promotion as per her seniority.
6.
A perusal of the paper-book indicates that respondent No. 5 joined as Staff Nurse, Nursing Sister and Sister Tutor after the petitioner's appointment.
It further reveals that the Director, Health Services, Haryana vide its order dated 1391982 promoted the petitioner as well as respondent No. 5 as Sister Tutor in the pay scale of Sister Tutor and in pursuance of the above said promotion order dated 1391982, Annexure P-3, respondent No. 5 Santosh Rani accepted the terms and conditions as laid down therein and joined the promotional post as Sister Tutor.
Subsequently, Smt. Santosh Rani submitted a representation dated 5.11.1983 requesting therein that she be assigned seniority over and above the petitioner and others, who were promoted vide order dated 1391982 alongwith her on the ground that prior to the issuance of this promotion order, her name was also recommended by the Board for the said post of Sister Tutor.
Accordingly, her appointment as Sister Tutor be treated as 'direct appointment' instead of by way of promotion.
The Director, Health Services, Haryana, respondent No. 2 rejected the aforesaid representation of respondent No. 5 vide order dated 1261984.
It was specifically mentioned in the rejection order, which reads as under :-  "You are informed that you have been promoted as per your seniority as Sister Tutor according to the method of appointment to the post of Sister Tutor contained in the Service Rules for the Nursing personnel and not as per the recommendations made by the Board."
In the meantime as per seniority in the Seniority List of Sister-Tutors, which was operative in the Department, the petitioner in the instant writ petition and the other petitioners in CWP No. 16745 of 1989 were further promoted as Principal Tutors.
The petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 in the other connected writ petition No. 16745 of 1989 and the petitioner in the present writ petition were promoted as Principal Tutors vide order dated 21.3.1984 passed by respondent No. 2 and the other petitioners were promoted in due course of time.
Respondent No. 3 Smt. Santosh Rani filed a Civil Writ Petition bearing No. 8209 of 1988 in this Court.
This Court vide its order dated 19.9.1988 directed the State of Haryana, respondent No. 1, to consider the representation of the petitioner (now respondent No. 5 in the present writ petition) and dispose of the same within three months.
After this direction of the Court, the Director, Health Services, Haryana, vide its letter dated 8111988 issued a show cause notice to the petitioners in both the writ petitions to the effect that he had decided to treat the appointment of respondent No. 5 as Sister Tutor by way of direct recruitment w.e.f.
1391982 instead of by way of promotion.
All the concerned parties had replied to the said show-cause notice.
The Director accepting the appeal of respondent No. 5 dated 12101984 declared all the petitioners junior to all the private respondents in both the two writ petitions.
Consequently, the petitioners were downgraded in the seniority and were reverted also.
I am of the considered view that while declaring all the petitioners in both the writ petitions junior to the respondents, the respondent No. 2 had taken altogether a contrary view of the matter ignoring the fact that the petitioners in both the writ petitions were being treated as senior to private respondents right from the beginning and even at the time of their promotion vide order dated 1391982 as Sister-Tutors and their subsequent promotion as Principal Tutors in the years 1984-85.
7.
The perusal of the impugned order dated 19121988 (Annexure P-10) in CWP 16745 of 1989 reveals that the case put forward by respondent No. 5 before the authorities was that though she had been appointed by way of promotion vide order dated 1391982 alongwith the petitioners, since she alongwith other private respondent Nos. 3 to 7 in the connected writ petition was recommended by the Board vide its letter dated 481982 for 'direct recruitment' as Sister-Tutor as the decision to fill up these five posts was taken as early as in the year l980 against which they applied in response to the advertisement and the board had recommended their names in the year 1982, therefore, the respondent No. 2 was bound to appoint them as Sister-Tutors by way of 'direct recruitment' instead of by way of promotion ordered vide order dated 1391982 as Sister-Tutors alongwith the petitioners.
While rejecting the representation of respondent No. 5 vide order dated 1261985, it was clarified by the then Director to her that she had been promoted according to her seniority in the cadre of Sister-Tutors and not as a recommendee of the Board.
Since the petitioner was much senior to the private respondents as Staff Nurse/Nursing Sister/Sister-Tutor being ad hoc for the last so many years, therefore, the respondent-department rightly decided to fill up the posts by way of promotion for the simple reason that the claim of the experienced persons like the petitioner was not considered by the Board as the departmental candidates were overage.
It is clear that though the Board had recomended the candidates, but the recommendations were not accepted, rather the Department chose to promote the petitioner as well as the nominees of the Boards.
The Department while rejecting the representation of Respondent No. 5 was fully aware of the fact that the recommendations of the Board were not accepted rather promotions were made which were per Rules and competency of Director, Health Services.
More so, the life of a panel of the selected candidates prepared by the Board is generally six months and it cannot be given effect after a period of seven years as was done by the Department in this case vide its order dated 19121988.
Though there is no fixed quota for direct recruitment, but, as per rules, there are two methods of recruitment for filling up the posts of Sister-Tutors either by way of 'direct appointment' or through departmental promotion.
The decision of the Department in treating the promotion of respondent No. 5 and other private respondents by way of 'direct recruitment' after long time and assigning higher seniority to them over and above the petitioners in these two writ petitions, is arbitrary, illegal and unjustified as it appears to be an afterthought.
It seems to have been taken just to give undue favour to the private respondents for the reasons best known to the Department, otherwise, there was no justification at all to disturb the settled seniority of the petitioners who have throughout been senior to the private respondents.
The Service Rules clearly envisage that when a post falls vacant or is about to fall vacant, the Director shall, in cases, where more than one method of appointment is prescribed, determine by which of those methods the vacancy is to be filled.
Thus, there is no restriction under the Rules which debars the appointing authority from filling the post through departmental promotion.
Under the circumstances, by no stretch of imagination, it can be held that respondent No. 5 was appointed as Sister-Tutor by way of 'direct appointment' and as such the impugned orders dated 29.10.1988, Annexure P-10, declaring the petitioner junior to respondent No. 5 and 19121988, Annexure P-11 reverting the petitioner from the post of Principal Tutor to Sister-Tutor, are liable to be set aside.
8.
In view of the foregoing discussions, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders dated 29.10.1988, Annexure P-1 and 29121988, Annexure P-11 (both orders in CWP No. 16745 of 1989) are quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.