Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 12705, 14126, 14127 and 15084 of 1989 as the question of law and fact involved in these petitions is common.
For the purpose of decisions, the facts are being referred to from CWP No. 12705 of 1989.
2.
The petitioner joined the erstwhile Government of Punjab, Irrigation Department in the year 1948 as work-charged employee for the construction of gigantic dam in Bhakra Nangal Project.
In the year 1957-58, 49 work-charged posts of different cadres were converted into permanent regular pensionable posts, with effect from 141957 vide letter dated 14101957, Annexure P-1.
The petitioner was appointed against one of these posts by the Selection Committee constituted by the erstwhile Punjab State.
He was promoted as Chargeman in 1491972 with effect from 471972 in the pay scale of Rs. 200-450, vide order Annexure P-2.
On re-organisation of erstwhile Punjab State, the petitioner was allocated to Haryana State.
He retired from service on 3091983.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that though on re-organisation of the erstwhile Punjab State, the employees recruited by the Bakra Management Board and allocated to the Punjab State have been given the pensionary benefits, but his pensionary benefits have not been settled under the Rules by the State of Haryana on the plea that it had not sanctioned the pay scales of Chargeman in Haryana working in the Bhakra Management Board.
4.
Before going through the matter any further, it would be pertinent to mention here that the questions raised in this catena of writ petitions had earlier come up before a Full Bench of this Court which after elaborate discussion and consideration of various principles observed in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab through the Secretary, P.W.D.
(B&R), Chandigarh and others, 1988(2) P.L.R.
223, as under :-  "After the services of a work-charged employee have been regularised he becomes a public servant.
The service is under the Government and is paid by it.
Once the services of work-charged employee have been regularised, there appears to be hardly any logic to deprive him of other public servants under Rule 317 of the Rules.
Equal protection of laws must mean the protection of equal laws for all persons similarly situated.
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness because a provision which is arbitrary involves the negation of equality.
Even a temporary or officiating service under the State Government has to be reckoned for determining the qualifying service.
It looks to be illogical that the period of service spent by an employee of a work-charged establishment before his regularisation has not been taken into consideration for determining his qualifying service.
The classification which is sought to be made among Government servants who are eligible for pension and those who stated as work-charged employees and their services regularised subsequently, and the others is not based on any intelligible criteria and, therefore, is not sustainable at law.
After the services of a work-charged employee have been regularised, he is a public servant like any other servant.
To deprive him of the pension is not only unjust and inequitable but is hit by the vice of arbitrariles, and for these reasons the provisions of sub rule (ii) of rule 317 of the Rules have to be struck down being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India."
From the above observations of the Full Bench of this Court, it is clear that the entire length of service of an employee including the period spent on work charge basis has to be taken into account while calculating the period for the purpose of pension.
5.
In the instant case as well, the petitioner was working as Chargeman on permanent and regular basis when he was finally allocated to the State of Haryana carrying the pay scale of Rs. 200-450, with effect from 471972, on which post he was promoted by the Superintending Engineer, Mechanical Circle, Nangal Township on 1491972.
6.
Since these cases are covered by the Full Bench decision of this Court in Kesar Chand's case (supra) these writ petitions are allowed accordingly.
The respondents are directed to calculate the period of service of the petitioners from the dates they were allocated to the State of Haryana till the date of their retirement and their pension be calculated on that basis.
The calculation of pension be finalised within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order and within two months thereafter, the arrears be paid to the petitioners alongwith interest at the rate of 15 per cent per annum from the date of amount of arrears fell due.
No costs.
Petition allowed.