S Ravindra Bhat, J - The petitioner, in these proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks appropriate directions to the respondents to consider her candidature to, and promote her as Officiating Principal in the respondent school.
2.
The third respondent is an aided school, (hereafter "the school") established and administered by the Christian minority community.
The petitioner, a postgraduate in Sanskrit, was appointed in the school, initially as a part-time post-graduate teacher, in 1970; she was later confirmed as a regular PGT (Sanskrit) with effect from 1571972.
It is averred that the petitioner performed her duties diligently, and ensured excellent academic results.
The incumbent Principal, Ms. S Nath retired from services on 31st March, 1997.
The seniormost PGT, Ms. Kumar was promoted to that post.
The petitioner was immediately below in seniority to Ms. Kumar; she was also officiating as Principal during her absence.
3.
Ms. Kumar was scheduled to retire from the services as Principal on 31st August, 1999.
It is alleged that in anticipation of the event, there was some discussion that the fifth respondent would succeed Ms. Kumar, on her retirement; the fifth respondent is alleged to be far too junior to the petitioner.
It is alleged that she is being considered for the post of officiating Principal on the ground of her being a Christian.
The petitioner represented to the Managing Committee, on 9th and 25th August, 1999, drawing to its notice that the existing guidelines, of 1970 permitted the appointment of only the seniormost PGT as Principal.
Reliance has also been placed on a letter/circular of the Directorate of Education dated 2951996 which reiterated the position that officiating charge of the post of Principal should be given to the seniormost teacher.
4.
The petitioner avers that the school being a recognized Government aided school is in reality not a minority school; even if it is assumed that it is a minority school, nevertheless, it is bound by the provisions of the Delhi School Education Act (hereinafter called "the Act") and rules framed under the Act ("the Rules").
It is averred that the power to issue instructions and directions is contained in Rule 43 and the school being a recognized Institution, is bound by those instructions.
5.
The petitioner places reliance of a decision of this Court reported as Mrs. Shakuntala Sharma v. SM Jain Senior Secondary School, 1998(1) SCT 104 (Delhi) : 1997(4) A.D. (Delhi) 137 to support the submission that no school, even a minority school can ignore the seniority position while assigning the duties or making appointment to the post of officiating Principal.
6.
The claim, in the proceedings, has been resisted by the School Management; it asserts that its scheme, under Section 5 of the Act, was duly approved by the Directorate.
It relies upon Clause (4) of the Scheme, which describes the composition of the Managing Committee.
The Committee contains 15 members subject to control and supervision of the Trust (i.e. a Baptist Union of North India).
The description of members of the Managing Committee includes, inter alia, the Principal :  "(i) The "Principal, who shall be a Christian, shall be nominated by the Trustee Society."
7.
It is averred that the Scheme of Management was approved by the Directorate on 20101997.
The school has placed on record a copy of the Minutes of the Meeting of the Managing Committee dated 25.9.1999 which considered but rejected the representation of the petitioner in view of the Scheme of Management.
The Resolution proceeded to approve the appointment of the 5th respondent, working as PGT (Economist) as officiating Principal.
8.
The school has asserted that the conditions of service such as qualifications, pay scale, etc. mandated by virtue of the provisions of the Act and relevant regulations would bind it, nevertheless, in matters of internal management, which include the appointment and termination of members of the staff, the Directorate and Government have no right in view of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India.
It is also averred that the 5th respondent, is duly qualified to hold the post and in view of the Scheme of Management she is eligible and suitable in that regard.
Hence she was selected.
9.
Rule was issued in these proceedings and on 3181999 by order dated 1412000 the school was directed to consider the recruitment rules of NCT of Delhi, the policy of the Directorate in the matter of Principal together with the Scheme and consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post.
The DPC, however, was of the view that the matter was sub-judice.
Consequently, a direction was issued on 832002 to make appropriate recommendations and thereafter make appointment on that basis.
10.
The petitioner moved an application, being CM 780/2005, seeking a direction to the respondents to place on record the Minutes of Meeting of the DPC held on 832002 and filled the post of Principal on a regular basis.
She also sought for grant of regular selection grade PGT pay scales with effect from 1999.
That application was subsequently dismissed.
The school subsequently filed CM No. 5517/2005 stating that the DPC had been held on 652002 and 852002.
As per the Minutes of the Meeting which were produced before the Court, three members (which included the Chairman, Manager of the School and one educationist, as per the rules) recommended the case of the 5th respondent for the post of Principal; the other three members being the nominees of the respondent- Directorate, however, recommended the name of the petitioner.
The school also relies upon a Resolution of the Managing Committee dated 852002 by which the 5th respondent's name was finalized for appointment as Principal, in view of its minority status.
A copy of that Resolution was also placed on record.
11.
Mr. RS Tomar, learned Counsel relied upon two circulars as well as Section 5 of the Act, and Rules 98 and 43 of the Act, to contend that the school was bound by the instructions of the Directorate.
Being an aided school, it was under an additional obligation to comply with the Rules and Regulations.
The instructions issued under Rule 43 were binding on all the schools including the respondent school.
Being the senior-most PGT who had worked tirelessly and loyally for 30 years, the petitioner's candidature could not be ignored in preference to that of the 5th respondent who became a PGT much later.
12.
Learned Counsel has placed reliance on Rule 98 of the Rules to contend that no appointment could be finalized by a Managing Committee, to any post in an aided school unless it was approved by the Director.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner relied upon the decision of the Court in Shakuntala Sharma's case (supra) where it was held, inter alia, that the claims of the senior-most Post Graduate Teacher in an aided minority school, fulfilling all the eligibility criteria, for the post of appointment to the Principal cannot be overlooked and that Article 30(1) does not justify appointment of a junior teacher to that post.
13.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner also submitted that there is nothing in the Rules or Regulations of the respondent school that compel it to confine recruitment to the post of Principal from amongst Christian minority candidates.
He submitted that the Clause 4(1) of the Scheme of Management upon which reliance was placed by the school, is merely descriptive of the Managing Committee; it does not prescribe qualifications and the eligibility criteria for the post of Principal.
Those conditions are governed by the general law of the land, contained in the instructions of the Department and Rules, which have to necessarily be followed by the school, being a cent percent aided school.
14.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner also relied upon the judgment reported as Frank Anthony Public School Employees Association v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 311 to contend that the management of a minority education institution is not permitted, under the guise of fundamental rights under Article 30(1) to oppress or exploit its employees.
It is, therefore, subject to the general law of the land, which requires that senior-most teachers in aided schools have to be considered and appointed as Principal.
15.
Mr. Arun Sukhija, learned Counsel for the school and the Managing Committee, on the other hand, contended that the core, or the essential and inherent content of the right to establish and administer educational institutions, is the choice of the management to employ personnel.
It was contended that the post of Principal or Head of School is critical, to attainment of the vision of its founders, who exclusively have the right to make an appointment.
This right, it was submitted, has been recognized as an integral part of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India; it cannot be displaced by circulars, rules or even legislation.
Reliance has been placed upon the decision of the Supreme Court in N Ammad v. Emjay High School, 1998(4) SCT 313 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 50.
Learned Counsel also placed reliance upon a decision of the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court reported as Aldo Maria Patroni v. EC Kesavan, AIR 1965 Ker 75.
It was contended that neither the two circulars relied upon nor the directives of the official respondents in regard to the choice of personnel to fill up the post of Principal can bind the school; its autonomy in that regard is almost complete, so long as the basic qualification of the candidate, to hold the post are fulfilled.
In this case the 5th respondent fulfilled the eligibility criteria.
Hence, there could be no further investigation into the matter by the Court.
16.
Learned Counsel for the respondent Nos. 1 & 4, Ms. Meenakshi Singh contends that Rule 98 does not apply in the case of minority aided schools.
She relied upon the Second Proviso to Rule 98(2), which excepts operation of the main provision, requiring approval of appointments, to minority aided schools.
She also contended that as per Rule 96(3-A) the nominees and educationist required to serve as part of the Selection Committee for the appointment of Head of School, under Sub-rule (3)(a) can act only as advisers and would not have power to actually control the selection of an employee.
In this view it was contended that the disagreement by the official nominees was not binding upon the school management which could choose its own candidate as per the management.
The action of the school in appointing the 5th respondent, therefore, did not violate any rule and was in accordance with its rights under Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India.
Learned Counsel also placed reliance on the recent eleven-judge Bench decision of the Supreme Court in TMA Pai Foundation v. Union of India, VI (2002) SLT 313 : IV (2002) CLT 172 (SC) : 2002 (8) SCC 481.
17.
In this case, the petitioner was working since 1992 as a regular PGT.
There is no doubt that she was senior to 5th respondent in that capacity.
The question, however, is whether the respondent school's stand about its school/Principal, in terms of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India is justified and legal.
18.
Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India reads as follows :-  "30.
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice."
The provision has been interpreted time and again by the Courts.
The first significant decision in the context of the Presidential Reference under Article 43 of the Constitution, about the validity of various clauses of the Kerala Education Bill; the Supreme Court articulated the scope and content of the provision in that reference (In re : Kerala Education Bill, AIR 1958 SC 956).
The meaning and content of the expression "administer according to its choice" fell for consideration in several other judgments, some of them, Constitution Benches; the entire law was reconsidered in this case reported as Ahmedabad St Xavier's College Society v. State of Gujarat, 1974(1) SCC 717.
The entire matter was re-examined by the eleven Judge Bench decision in TMA Pai Foundation case (supra).
19.
The question as to the right or exclusive autonomy of an institution to nominate its own candidate for the post of Head of School/Principal was considered in Patroni's case (supra).
Apparently that judgment was endorsed in subsequent rulings of the Supreme Court.
There is some reference on this issue in the judgments in Ahmedabad's St Xavier's School itself.
20.
Counsel for the respondents have relied upon N Ammad's case (supra) where it was held as follows :-  "18.
Selection and appointment of Headmaster in a school (or Principal of a College) are of prime importance in administration of that educational institution.
The Headmaster is the key post in the running of the school.
He is the hub on which all the spokes of the school are set around whom they rotate to generate result.
A school is personified through its Headmaster and he is the focal point on which outsiders look at the school.
A bad Headmaster can spoil the entire institution, an efficient and honest Headmaster can improve it by leaps and bounds.
The functional efficacy of a school very much depends upon the efficiency and dedication of its Headmaster.
This pristine precept remains unchanged despite many changes taking place in the structural patterns of education over the years.
19.
How important is the post of Headmaster of a school has been pithily stated by a Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in Aldo Maria Patroni v. EC Kesavan, AIR 1965 Ker 75.
Chief justice MS Menon has, in a style which is inimitable, stated thus:-  "The post of the Headmaster is of pivotal importance in the life of a school.
Around him wheels the tone and temper of the institution; on him depends the continuity of its traditions, the maintenance of discipline and the efficiency of its teaching.
The right to choose the Headmaster is perhaps the most important facet of the right to administer a school, and we must hold that the imposition of any trammel thereon - except to the extent of prescribing the requisite qualifications and experience - cannot but be considered as a violation of the right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
To hold otherwise will be to make the right 'a teasing illusion, a promise of unreality."
20.
The importance of the key role which a Headmaster plays in the school cannot be better delineated than that.
The nine-judge Bench in the Ahmedabad St Xavier's College Society, 1974(1) SCC 717 has highlighted the importance of the role of the Principal of a college.
In support of majority view in that decision KK Mathew, J has observed thus : (SCC pp. 815-16, para 182)  "182.
It is upon the principal and teachers of a college that the tone and temper of an educational institution depend.
On them would depend its reputation, the maintenance of discipline and its efficiency in teaching.
The right to choose the Principal and to have the teaching conducted by teachers appointed by the management after an overall assessment of their outlook and philosophy is perhaps the most important facet of the right to administer an educational institution."
21.
HR Khanna, J has adopted a still broader view that even selection of teachers is of great importance in the right to manage a school.
Learned Judge has stated thus : (SCC p. 789, para 103)  "The selection and appointment of teachers for an educational institution is one of the essential ingredients of the right to manage an educational institution and the minorities can plainly be not denied such right of selection and appointment without infringing Article 30(1)."
22.
Krishna Iyer, J who dissented from the majority view in Gandhi Faiz-E-Am College v. University of Agra, 1975(2) SCC 283 has, nevertheless, emphasised the importance of the post of the Principal in the following words : (SCC p. 293, para 21) '21.
An activist principal is an asset in discharging these duties which are inextricably interlaced with academic functions.
The principal is an invaluable insider - the Management's own choice - not an outsider answerable to the Vice-Chancellor.
He brings into the work of the Managing Committee that intimate acquaintance with educational operations and that necessary expression of student-teacher aspirations and complaints which are so essential for the minority institution to achieve a happy marriage between individuality and excellence.'
23.
Whatever is said about the importance of the post of Principal of a college vis-a-vis the administration of the institution would in para materia apply to the Headmaster of a school with equal force.
24.
If management of the school is not given very wide freedom to choose the personnel for holding such a key post, subject of course to the restrictions regarding qualifications to be prescribed by the State, the right to administer the school would get much diminished.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 28.
Thus the management's right to choose a qualified person as the Headmaster of the School is well insulated by the protective cover of Article 30(1) of the Constitution and it cannot be chiselled out through any legislative act or executive rule except for fixing up the qualifications and conditions of service for the post.
Any such statutory or executive fiat would be violative of the fundamental right enshrined in the aforesaid article and would hence be void."
21.
Earlier, the Supreme Court had occasion to consider the very same issue as to the choice of a minority education institution to appoint principals, uninfluenced or unhindered by the directives of State Governments/Director.
In a case arising from Delhi in terms of the Act, where the post in question was that of Vice-Principal in a linguistic, aided minority school in Delhi, the Court upheld the stipulation of the Management that the candidate must have knowledge of Malayalam as an essential qualification.
In Virender Nath Gupta v. Delhi Administration, 1990(2) SCC 307 the Supreme Court held as follows :-  "The management of the institution acted within its right in prescribing an additional essential qualification regarding knowledge of Malayalam and no exception can be taken to the same as it is the constitutional right of the linguistic minority to insist on the knowledge of the language, on the basis of which the linguistic minority is recognised.
The provisions of the Act and the Rules are subject to the guarantees of constitutional rights of the minorities' institutions.
In our opinion, the management acted within its constitutional right in insisting on the knowledge of Malayalam as an essential qualification for the post of Vice-Principal."
22.
Subsequently, in the judgment reported as Board of Secondary Education and Teachers Training v. Joint Director Public Instructions, 1998(8) SCC 555 the Supreme Court again reiterated the position after considering the judgments in Ahmedabad St Xavier's case (supra) and other rulings.
It was held that even though the State can regulate affairs of the minority educational institutions in the interest of excellence, nevertheless the right to select and appoint its own candidate as Principal cannot be taken away even if the Institution is 100% aided by the State; the Court held as follows :-  "3.
The decisions of this Court make it clear that in the matter of appointment of the Principal, the management of a minority educational institution has a choice.
It has been held that one of the incidents of the right to administer a minority educational institution is the selection of the Principal.
Any rules which take away this right of the management have been held to be interfering with the right guaranteed by Article 30 of the Constitution.
In this case, both Julius Prasad selected by the management and the third respondent are qualified and eligible for appointment as Principal according to rules.
The question is whether the management is not entitled to select a person of their choice.
The decisions of this Court including the decision in State of Kerala v. Very Rev.
Mother Provincial and Ahmedabad St Xavier's College Society v. State of Gujarat make it clear that this right of the minority educational institution cannot be taken away by any rules or regulations or by any enactment made by the State.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the High Court was not right in holding otherwise.
The State has undoubtedly the power to regulate the affairs of the minority educational institutions also in the interest of discipline and excellence.
But in that process, the aforesaid right of the management cannot be taken away, even if the Government is giving hundred per cent grant.
We need not go into any other question in this appeal."
23.
The judgment in Shakuntala Sharma's case has taken into consideration certain passages in the Frank Anthony case, the judgment in Kerala Education Bill as well as the observations of Khanna, J in Ahmedabad St Xavier's case.
The Court also considered Rules 98 and 100 of the Delhi School Education Rules.
24.
After going through the judgment in Shankuntala Sharma's case, I am of the view that the reasoning contained therein can no longer be considered as a binding precedent.
The Court had not considered two specific passages in Ahmedabad St Xavier's judgment, including the judgment of Mathew, J and Khanna, J himself.
In fact Khanna, J had held that selection and appointment of teachers for an educational institution is one of the essential ingredients of the right to manage and that the minorities cannot be denied such right of selection and appointments.
25.
The Court, in Shakuntala Sharma did not have the benefit of the reasoning in N Ammad's case and the Board of Secondary Education case (supra) which were apparently rendered subsequently.
They were not considered or referred to in the judgment.
In normal circumstances, the doctrine of precedents by a co- ordinate bench would have impelled this Court to refer this petition for decision by a Division Bench, the view expressed here being contrary to that in Shakuntala Sharma's case.
However, the imperative of Article 141 obviates that course of action; as held in CN Rudramurthy v. K Barkathulla Khan, VIII (1998) SLT 176 : (1998) 8 SCC 275 :  "....mandate of Article 141 of the Constitution is not based on any doctrine of precedents, but is an imprimatur to all Courts that the law declared by this Court is binding on them."
The Supreme Court had, in that judgment, held that it was not open to the High Court to follow its own earlier view, when the Supreme Court had expressed its view, and declared the law on the issue, in a later judgment.
26.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the right to select and appoint a Principal who fulfils the essential eligibility conditions laid down by law, is an integral, inalienable part of Article 30(1) of the Constitution irrespective of whether the institution is aided or not.
27.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner had contended that no stipulation was brought to the notice of the Court, which required, the Principal to be exclusively selected from amongst Christians.
As I see it, this contention is not tenable; although the provision relied upon is a part of the Scheme of Management, nevertheless the intent is manifestly clear.
Clause 4(1) categorically provides that the principal has to be a Christian.
28.
In view of the above conclusions, I am of the view that no relief can be granted in this petition.
No fault or infirmity can be found in the action of the school in choosing the 5th respondent as Principal and in subsequently appointing her to that post.
29.
The writ petition and all interim applications are accordingly dismissed.
Rule discharged.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.