GC Mittal and Amarjeet Chaudhary, JJ.
- In view of the decision of this Court reported in 1990(1) Recent Service Judgment 405 no reservation can be made for wards of management and staff of an institute.
For the academic year 1990-91 admissions to the extent of 7 per cent were made for the wards of management and staff of the institute and the same was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 12424 of 1990.
2.
This matter came up for consideration.
On behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 an argument was raised that the petitioner got only 66 marks and even if reservation is quashed he would not get admission and since no student with 66 or below 66 marks granted admission it would be futile to go into this question but at the same time we made the following observations :  "......In case a student of the impugned reserved category having less than 56 marks is admitted by the respondent institute it will have to give admission to the petitioner who has secured 66 marks."
Thereafter the same petitioner filed the present writ petition and pin-pointed that Mr. Malwinder Pal Singh who had secured 42 marks, Mr. Jagmohan Jairath who had got 42 marks and Mr. Madhu Chadha who had got 63 marks were given admission under the reserved category meant for the wards of management and staff of the institute.
3.
Notice of motion was issued and in reply to para 6 of the writ petition, wherein the aforesaid averments are made, the following submission is made :  "That para No. 6 of the writ petition is correct that the father of the petitioner Shri Hari Ram Bajaj, approached the respondent No. 3, who advised him to approach the Managing Committee which has only the jurisdiction to give admission in accordance with the directions of the honorable Court.
It is also corrected that Mr. Malwinder Pal Singh, Mr. Jagmohan Jairath, Mr. Madhu Sudan, and Mr. Mohnish Chadha were admitted."
A reading of the aforesaid para shows that the stand taken by the petitioner is not disputed.
Rather through his father he was advised to approach the Managing Committee to seek admission.
4.
In view of the state of affairs as are before us, we are of the opinion that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 committed a grave error in giving admission to the four students and also misrepresented before us when the case was heard in the previous writ petition.
We deprecate their effort to mislead this Court.
5.
We quash the reservation of 7 per cent of the wards of management and a staff of the institute without disturbing the admissions already made.
We also direct that in the next year or in the ensuing years no such reservation shall be made by the respondents for this category and if any such admission is made then we will look what action is to be taken against the institute.
6.
We also direct respondent Nos. 3 and 4 by issuing a writ of mandamus to grant admission to the petitioner forthwith and if for doing this extra seat is to be created then they will make effort with the Director of Technical Education unless they want to cancel the admission of any candidate who has less marks in the entrance test.
The admission should be granted to the petitioner within ten days from today.
7.
With the aforesaid order and direction the writ petition stands disposed of.
Orders accordingly.