JV Gupta, CJ and RS Mongia, J - The petitioners, 11 in number, were appointed in the Animal Husbandry Department of the State of Haryana between the years 1969 to 1982 on various posts, such as peons, Clerks, Veterinary Surgeon, Veterinary Livestock Development Assistants, on regular basis.
Some of them have also been confirmed on their responsive posts.
In the year 1985, the petitioners were posted in the Government Progeny Testing Bull Farm, Hissar (hereinafter called the Bull farm) which was run by the Animal Husbandary Department.
According to the petitioners, they are not the junior most persons in their respective cadre in the Animal Husbandary Department and there are many persons junior to them.
2.
Vide order dated 1st February, 1985, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi (in short ICAR) established a Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, and the Government Bull Farm, Hissar was taken over by the ICAR and one of the conditions of taking over the Bull farm, was that the entire staff working in the Bull Farm, Hissar, would be taken over by the ICAR and the staff shall not be given any deputation allowance what so ever, since the petitioners and some other staff were working at the relevant time with the Bull Farm, they were taken over by the ICAR  3.
The grievance of the petitioners is that no options were taken from the petitioners as to whether they would wish to work with the Animal Husbandary Department or would like to be absorbed by the ICAR In absence of their potions they could not be transferred to an autonomous body as they happened to be regular/permanent employees of the Haryana Government.
They had made a representation to the Authorities that without taking their consent they could not be transferred to the Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-6.
Since their representation was not decided, they filed a writ petition in this Court being C.W.P.
No. 15607 of 1989, which was disposed of on December 4, 1989 at the motion stage, by directing the respondents to consider and decided the representation of the petitioners by passing a speaking order in accordance with law a period of three months.
The Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Animal Husbandary Department, Chandigarh, has rejected the said representation vide order dated 26th April, 1990 (Annexure P-8 to the writ petition).
It is mentioned in the order, Annexure P-8 that the letter dated 1st February, 1985 vide which the Bull Farm was taken over by the ICAR it is mentioned that the staff which is transferred shall be treated on notional deputation till it is absorbed by the ICAR Moreover such staff would not be entitled to any deputation allowance and till such employees are absorbed they would be governed by the Haryana Government instructions and Service Rules.
Further it is mentioned that the Haryana Government will contribute towards General Insurance Scheme of the Class IV employees.
According to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, the petitioners stood transferred in their respective posts to the ICAR with effect from 1st February, 1985 and, therefore, the question of their reverting back to the Animal Husbandary Department did not arise.
According to this order it was obligatory on the part of the petitioners to opt for ICAR service.
It is this order which has been impugned by the petitioners in the present writ petition.
4.
On notice of motions having been issued, separate written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Respondent No. 3 have been filed.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that they are the Government servants and without asking for their options, they could not be transferred to an autonomous body.
According to the learned counsel, if they do not opt for transfer to and absorbed by the ICAR and if some staff becomes surplus in the Animal Husbandary Department because of the taking over the Bull Farm by the ICAR then the servicers of the junior most officials can be terminated and they do not happen to bee the junior most.
He further submitted that he secretary to the Government Haryana was not correct when he observed in the impugned order, Annexure P-8, that it was obligatory on the part of the petitioners to opt for the ICAR service.
The stand of the State Government in the written statement is the same as indicated in the order, Annuxure P-8 which has already been mentioned above.
As far as the stand of respondent No. 3, the Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Sirsa, is concerned, it has been mentioned in the written statement on its behalf that it has already issued letter dated 21st April, 1990 asking the petitioners and others to give their options whether they wish to be absorbed in the ICAR According to it, the petitioners have opted for repatriation and their cases been sent to the Animal Husbandary Department.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we find that there is considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The petitioners are regular/permanent employees of the Haryana Government in the Animal Husbandary Department.
They cannot bee asked to permanently work with an Autonomous body only if they opt for the same.
A similar point arose before the Apex Court in Jawaharlal Nehru University v. Dr. KS Jawatkar, AIR 1989 SC 1526.
A centre of Post-Graduate Studies was set up at Imphal by Jawarharlal Nehru University as an activity of the University.
To give expression to that activity, the University set up and organised the centre at Imphal and appointed teaching and administrative staff to man it.
The incumbent was appointed and confirmed as Assistant Professor at the Centre.
Subsequently, the Centre was transferred to the Manipur University.
It was held that the employment of that Assistant Professor could not be transferred by the Jawarharlal Nehru University to the Manipur University without his consent notwithstanding any statutory provisions to that effect whether in the Manipur University Act or elsewhere.
In view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Apex Court, there is no escape from the conclusion that the petitioners could not have been permanently transferred to the ICAR without their consent.
They will continue to be the employees of the Animal Husbandary Department of the Haryana Government unless they opt for being permanently absorbed by the ICAR If the staff with the Animal Husbandary Department becomes surplus it is always open to the department to dispense with the services of the junior most person.
Respondent No. 3 has acted rightly in asking for the options of the staff whether they would like to be absorbed by the ICAR Those who have not so opted, would remain permanent/regular employees of the Animal Husbandary Department and they can seek their reversion to the said department.
7.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition, quash the impugned order Annexure P-8, and hold that those of the petitioners who do not opt for being permanently absorbed by the ICAR would be at liberty to seek reversion to their parent department i.e.
Animal Husbandary.
We leave the parties to bear own costs.
Petition allowed.