RS Mongia, J - It would be necessary to advert to the facts of the case giving rise to the present Letters Patent Appeal.
2.
The writ petitioner (now appellant) is the Managing Committee of R.R.M.K.
Arya Mahila Mahavidyala, Pathanak which is an affiliated College with the Guru Nanak Dev University respondent No. 4.
The petitioner-College was required by the University to introduce the subject of Punjabi upto the level of graduation and as such a post of Lecturer in Punjabi was created in the College.
Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu, respondent No. 5 was appointed as a Lecturer on temporary basis against this post.
She, however, did not possess the minimum requisite qualifications for the said post.
The petitioner-college later on passed a resolution on March 28, 1975 (Annexure P-1) to the effect that the subject of Panjabi should be abolished as recommended by the Principal since the number of students did not justify the retention of the subject.
This request was however, turned down by the Syndicate of the University vide its resolution dated June 28, 1975 (Annexure P.2).
In the meantime on the expiry of the academic session 1974-75, the College terminated the service of Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu, respondent No. 5.
The petitioner-College advertised the post of Lecturer in Punjabi on September 14, 1975.
Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora, respondent No. 3 applied for the said post and she was duly selected after interview.
She was initially appointed for a limited period from October 16, 1975 to March 31, 1976.
Later, however, vide letter dated January 23, 1976 her appointment was converted into that on probation for one year with effect from her initial date of appointment i.e. October 16, 1975.
This probation period was further extended for one year by the petitioner-College vide its letter dated September 24, 1976 on the ground that her appointment had not been approved by the University so far.
Vide letter dated December 13, 1976, respondent No. 3 Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora, was served with one month's notice by the College stating that her services were no longer required.
It was mentioned therein that the College had been instructed by the University to reinstate Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu, respondent No. 5 as Lecturer in Punjabi and the College had decided to reinstate her with effect from January 16, 1977.
3.
Since according to respondent No. 3 Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora, her services had not been terminated on account of her work or conduct being not satisfactory but on the ground that respondent No. 4 had directed the petitioner to take back Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu in service, respondent No. 3.
Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora treating this order as her removal from service made a representation to the Director Public Instructions (Colleges) under sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974 (hereinafter called the Act).
The Director Public Instructions (Colleges) accepted her representation vide his order dated March 8, 1977 and held that Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora having been selected for the post of Lecturer in Punjabi and having been appointed on probation had a right to continue and be considered for confirmation after the composition of the probationary period.
The order of termination of her services was held violative of the provisions of Section 4 of the Act.
The Director Public Instructions also observed that the termination order has been passed on some extraneous influence and not on merits of the case.
The Director Public Instructions refused to accord approval to the proposed removal of Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora.
She was to be treated in continuous service despite order dated December 13, 1976 passed by the College authorities.
The College authorities filed an appeal against the order of the Director Public Instructions before the District Judge, Gurdaspur but the same was dismissed as withdrawn.
Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora was taken back in services in pursuance of the order of the Director Public Instructions before the District Judge, Gurdaspur but the same was dismissed as withdrawn.
Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora was taken back in services in pursuance of the order of the Director Public Instructions dated March 8, 1977.
4.
The Registrar of the University went on exerting pressure on the petitioner-college to reinstate Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu as would be evident from the letters dated October 15, 1975 and January 15, 1977 (Annexures P3 and P4).
It would be relevant to quote the contents of letter addressed by the petitioner-college to the University dated March 16, 1976 (Annexure R 3/1 with the written statement of Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora) to the effect that the College authorities could not reinstate Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu for the following reasons :-  (a) That her results were poor; (b) That during her stay the number of students had started reducing as she could not inspire students to opt Punjabi as one of there elective subjects and the number dwindle down to twelve only; (c) That she never contributed anything in the co-curricular activities of the College for promoting Punjabi language; (d) That Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu had been appointed on probation and since her work had not been found satisfactory, her services were terminated; (e) That the new lecturer Mrs. Paramjit Kaur appointed by the College to reach Punjabi was trying her best to inspire students to opt Punjabi.
She was taking keen interest in the Punjabi language and a number of her articles had been published in Gurbani magazine : (f) That Mrs. Paramjit Kaur had passed Sanskrit as an additional optional subject and as such qualified to be an approval Lecturer of Panjabi whereas Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu had not so far qualified in additional optional subject; (g) That Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora was also doing her PhD in Punjabi and had five years teaching experience and was more qualified than Harjit Kaur Sandhu.
5.
In spite of the above, the College authorities vide order dated September 10, 1977 (Annexure P5) purported to be under Section 6(ii) of the Act, terminated the services of Mrs. Paramjit Kaur respondent No. 3 on the ground that the University had not approved her appointment and besides her conduct had been unsatisfactory.
The services were dispensed with immediate effect.
The order of termination by the college was challenged before the Director Public instructions under the provisions of the Act by Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora.
The Director Public Instructions held the order to be in violation of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
It is further held that the order of termination was mala fide and an act of victimisation.
This order is dated May 30, 1978 (Annexure P6).
It was directed that respondent No. 3 Paramjit Kaur shall continue to be in service of the petitioner-college.
6.
The college authorities preferred an appeal before the District Judge, Gurdaspur against the order of the Director Public Instructions dated May 30, 1978.
It was held by the District Judge vide his judgment dated August 22, 1979 (Annexure P7) that Paramjit Kaur Arora could not take the benefit of the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act despite stigma of unsatisfactory conduct cast on her by the order of termination in which it was mentioned that her conduct had been unsatisfactory.
The implication of the order of the District Judge was that Paramjit Kaur, respondent No. 3 could not seek remedy under the provisions of the Act and approach the Director Public Instructions.
At the same time, the District Judge observed that the services of Mrs. Paramjit Kaur had been terminated by the College authorities casting a stigma and that her entire career had been marred.
Since according to the District Judge the provisions of the Act were not attracted, no appeal was competent and the same was dismissed.
7.
The petitioner-College approached this Court by way of the writ petition challenging the order of the Director Public Instructions dated May 30, 1978 (Annexure P6) as well as the order of the District Judge passed in appeal dated August 22, 1979 (Annexure P7) and prayed that both the orders should be quashed.
8.
It would be advantageous to note the order passed by this Court on March 12, 1980 when the writ petition was fixed for motion hearing :-  "At the stage of arguments, the learned counsel for respondent No. 3 has stated that the respondent is prepared to forego the past salary for the period regarding which the salary was paid to respondent No. 5 by the Management, if she is allowed to be continued in service.
Mr. GR Majithia may get instructions from the Management Committee in this respect.
Adjourned to April 3, 1980."
9.
It is mentioned in the writ petition itself that Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu who had been appointed by terminating the services of Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora had since resigned.
The grievance made in paragraph 5 of the writ petition was that the petitioner had already paid the entire salary due to respondent No. 5 Harjit Kaur Sandhu who had since resigned and the petitioner College has no source from which it could meet the financial implications, arising out of the reinstatement of respondent No. 3 Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora.
It was also mentioned that it is the State Government which is to meet 95% of the total budget deficit of the petitioner College.
Now if that was the only grievance of the petitioner it had been amply met by the offer of the learned counsel for Mrs. Paramjit Kaur as is evident from the order of this Court dated March 12, 1980 quoted above.
However, for the reasons best known to the College authorities the offer made by the learned counsel for Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora was not accepted.
The writ petition though was ordered to be heard within the month of October, 1980 it was heard after more than eight years.
10.
The learned Single Judge after going through the above mentioned facts and the provisions of the Act came to the conclusion that the order of the Director, Public Instructions (Annexure P6) was perfectly legal and justified.
The learned Single Judge further held that Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora, respondent No. 3 was entitled to approach the Director, Public Instructions under the provisions of the Act and petitioner could file an appeal against the order of the Director Public Instructions to the District Judge.
The learned Single Judge further felt that since he was finding that the order of the Director Public Instruction (Annexure P6) was quite legal and proper he did not feel it necessary to remand the case to the District Judge to decide the appeal of the petitioner on merits.
Dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the petitioner College has filed the present appeal.
At this stage, the provisions of Sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Act may be noticed :-  3.
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank not to be ordered except after inquiry.
No teacher shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an enquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
4.
Procedure to be observed before dismissal and removal - (1) The penalty of dismissal or removal from service shall not be imposed unless the same is approved by the Director.
(2) Where after the inquiry referred to in Section 3, it is proposed to impose the penalty of dismissal or removal from service the proposal shall be referred to the Director along with relevant record and intimation about the proposal having been so referred shall be sent to the teacher concerned also simultaneously.
(3) The teacher may, within a period of thirty days of the receipt of the intimation referred to in sub-section (2), make a representation against the proposed penalty to the Director who may, after examining the record and giving to the parties an opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing, give his approval to the imposition of the proposed penalty of dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, or refuse to give approval if the proposal is found to be mala fide or by way of victimisation or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
(4) Any party aggrieved by an order of Director under Sub-Section (2) may file an appeal to the District Judge who may, after giving to the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as he may deem fit.
6.
Sections 3, 4 and 5 not to apply in certain cases.
- The provisions of Sections 3, 4 and 5 shall not apply :- (i) to the termination of service of any teacher who is appointed for a temporary period only; (ii) to the termination of service of any teacher appointed on probation during or at the end of the period of probation on account of his work or conduct being unsatisfactory; and  (iii) to a teacher who is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge."
11.
The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant which was raised before the learned Single Judge as well is that the order of the dispensing with the services of respondent No. 3 was passed during the period of probation which was on account of her work and conduct being unsatisfactory as mentioned in the order of termination (Annexure P5) and the same squarely falls under the provision of Section 6(ii) of the Act and the question of applying the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 did not arise.
We are in complete agreement with the reasoning of the learned Single Judge while respelling this contention that on one hand respondent No. 3 Paramjit Kaur's work was appreciated vide letter dated March 16,1976 (to which reference has been made above) but on the other hand but suddenly her services were terminated saying that her conduct had been unsatisfactory.
It is evident that this was just a ruse to terminate the services of respondent No. 3.
This order of termination was in fact and substance an order of removal from service which had been passed by way of punishment and could not have been passed without complying with the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act.
The Director, Public Instructions, was right in passing the order Annexure P-6 that the order of termination was violative of the provisions of Section 3 and 4 of the Act and was by way of victimisation.
12.
The learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that through the District Judge has technically dismissed the appeal yet he had held that the provisions of the Act were not applicable and Mrs. Paramjit Kaur Arora could not approach the Director, Public Instructions, under the provisions of the Act, therefore, respondent No. 3 in the writ petition could not be given any relief as she had not challenged the order of the District Judge.
We find no force in this argument.
Firstly, the District Judge held that the appeal of the College authorities did not lie, so anything said in that order is meaningless.
In fact that is why the petitioner had challenged that order as well in the writ petition.
Moreover, if the College authorities had not filed the writ petition challenging the orders of the District Judge and the Director, Public Instructions, Mrs. Paramjit Kaur, respondent No. 3 could get the order of the Director, Public Instructions, executed.
Furthermore, in view of the findings of the learned Single Judge that in fact the provisions of the Act were applicable and the order of the Director, Public Instructions was perfectly legal while holding that the termination of services of Mrs. Paramjit Kaur was in violation of the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act, the above contention of the learned counsel has no legs to stand.
13.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this appeal which is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
14.
Before parting with the judgment, we may observe that there was no stay regarding reinstatement of respondent No. 3 Paramjit Kaur, when the writ petition was admitted.
We have been informed by her counsel that in spite of there being no stay, she was not reinstated by the College authorities.
However, the Bench while admitted the Letters Patent Appeal, had stayed the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
The College authorities should now reinstate Paramjit Kaur Arora, respondent No. 3, immediately and give her entire arrears of salary from the date of termination of her service.
However, respondents No. 3 would not be entitled to the arrears of salary for the period regarding which the salary was paid to Mrs. Harjit Kaur Sandhu by the College authorities.