KP Bhandari, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 5173 and 13611 of 1989 as the questions of fact and law in both the writ petitions are common.
For the purpose of decision it is sufficient to state the facts from CWP No. 5173 of 1989.
2.
The short question that arises for determination in these cases is as to whether a work-charged employee who was handicapped is entitled to conveyance allowance.
Both the petitioners are working as work-charged employees.
Admittedly petitioner No. 1 joined as a daily wage worker on 1121981.
He is currently working as a Chawkidar in the scale of Rs. 300-430.
Till date he continues to be a daily worker.
He has stated in the writ petition that his right upper limb of the elbow joint was amputated.
A copy of the certificate issued by the Civil Surgeon, Ludhiana (Annexure P1) reads as follows :-  "No. GM/81/408 Dated 10.11.87.
Certified that I have examined Shri Jit Ram s/o Shri Mela Ram, resident of village Katani Khurd, Distt.
Ludhiana today.
He has got amputation of Right Upper Limb at elbow joint.
Thus he is physically handicapped person.
His signatures are given below.
Sd/-  Civil Surgeon, Ludhiana.
3.
It is claimed that petitioner No. 2 joined the Board on 331986.
He is working in the scale of Rs. 400-600 as Work Munshi.
It is settled in the writ petition that he got contracture of all the fingers of right hand.
He has produced certificate from Civil Surgeon, Sangrur (Annexure P.2) which reads as under :  "Certified that I have examined Shri Jagar Singh son of Shri Jangir Singh of Village Salimpura.
He has got contracture of all the fingers of right hand.
Hence he is physically handicapped."
4.
It is claimed that according to the instructions issued, vide Annexure P.3, by the Punjab Government, conveyance (conveyance ?)
allowance is granted to government employees who are orthopaedically handicapped at the rate of 10% of the basic pay and in case of blind employees the conveyance allowance was fixed minimum at the rate of Rs. 50/- per month.
These instructions of the Government have been adopted by the Marketing Board vide Endorsement dated 2091982.
The fact that the petitioners in both the writ petitions are handicapped is not in dispute.
5.
The respondent has filed written statement through Administrative Officer, Punjab Mandi Board, on 3181989.
The only stand taken by the respondent in the written statement is that the conveyance allowance is paid to the regular employees only who are handicapped and this allowance according to the rules is not admissible to the work-charged employees.
In the matter of grant of emoluments or allowance the Government cannot make any distinction between the regular employees and the work-charged employees.
Now it is firmly established by the decision of the Supreme Court in Randhir Singh v. Union of India and others, AIR 1982 Supreme Court 879 and PK Ramchandran Iyer and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 541, that equal pay for equal work must be paid.
Work-charged employees or daily wage workers discharge the same duty and responsibility as the regular employees.
There is no rational basis for the discrimination between the regular employee and the work-charged employees for payment of the conveyance allowance.
The action of the respondent in not granting the conveyance allowance to the petitioners-handicapped employee is plainly discriminatory and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
In this view of the matter, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 5173 and 13611 of 1989 are allowed and the respondents are directed to pay conveyance allowance to the petitioners from the date the instructions were issued vide Annexure P-3.
The arrears of conveyance allowance be paid within three months.
No costs.
Petition allowed.