VK Bali, J - Without touching the judgment of learned Single Judge on the issues that came to be focussed by learned Single Judge and on which decision was rendered, the same is yet called in question on the basis of two decisions of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bank of India v. OP Swarnakar, (2003)2 Supreme Court Cases 721 and Punjab & Sind Bank and another v. S Ranveer Singh Bawa and another, (2004) 4 Supreme Court Cases 484, on the ground that the petitioner in original lis and respondent in the present Letters Patent Appeal filed under Clause X of the Letters Patent is estopped by his conduct to challenge the impugned orders accepting his voluntary retirement despite the fact that the said request was withdrawn before it could be accepted.
Before, however, the solitary ground seeking setting aside the order passed by learned Single Judge dated 3052003, allowing the writ petition and setting aside impugned order rematurely retiring the petitioner is examined, it would be useful to give factual matrix of facts constraining the petitioner to invoke writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in successfully challenging orders dated 2621993, Annexure P-2, 21.4.1993, Annexure P-4) and 26.5.1993, Annexure P-6.
2.
The petitioner claiming of a high service profile and a decorated officer in the Indian Army, challenged order dated 21.4.1993, Annexure P-4, rejecting his request for withdrawal of premature retirement as also order dated 2621993, Annexure P-2, approving his premature retirement as also order dated 26.5.1993, Annexure P-6, retiring him from service.
To prop-up his case seeking reliefs in setting aside an orders aforesaid, he pleaded that he was selected by the Union Public Service Commission and graduated from National Defence Academy (Khadakwasla), Pune.
He specialised in Army Training at Indian Military Academy, Dehradun for one year.
He was then commissioned in the Indian Army on 13121980 as a Permanent Regular Commissioned Officer.
During his service career, he qualified various courses and successfully cleared all the promotion examinations entitling him to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
He was a highly motivated officer of the Indian Army and as a young Lieutenant was awarded the Sanya Sewa Medal for his dedication towards his duty during his active service in J & K He also successfully participated in the active Army Operations such as "Operation Trident" in Punjab from 2711987 to 11.4.1987 and "Operation Rakshak" in Jammu and Kashmir from 25.7.1990 to 11.11.1992.
At young age of 33 years in the year 1992, he became Officer Commanding of an Army Sub Unit when he was posted as Officer Commanding of Trawl Squardon 16 (Independent) Armoured Brigade stationed at Mamun Cantt., Pathankot.
While serving there, on account of some compelling domestic circumstances beyond his control, he sought premature retirement from service with his entitlement at the earliest.
Vide order dated 2621993, Annexure P-2, his request was approved and he was informed that he would be relieved of his duties and struck off the strength as early as possible but not later than 90 days of the issue of the said order/letter.
He had yet not been relieved from service when on 2331993, Annexure P- 3, he addressed a letter to the concerned authorities requesting withdrawal of his application for premature retirement.
He stated in the letter aforesaid that the circumstances on which he had sought retirement had changed.
He, thus, requested for cancellation of his premature retirement order.
This request was recommended by his Brigade Commander with the remarks that the officer is a competent, good, dedicated and regimental officer and besides this there has been a change in his family circumstances and he now wanted to stay in the Army.
In the interest of service, his retention was strongly recommended.
The same was, however, considered and rejected by the competent authority vide order dated 21.4.1993, Annexure P-4, constraining him, thus, to file the present petition with the result indicated above.
3.
The appellant-Union of India, arrayed as respondent in the original lis, entered defence and contested the matter by pleading delay of two years in challenging the impugned orders and further that by his act and conduct, he was estopped from challenging the same as retirement was ordered on his own request.
Admitting the career graph of the petitioner, as pleaded in the writ petition.
It was, however, denied that there was any promotional examination for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel and as regards Sanya Sewa Medal, it was given to every person subject to Army Act of any rank, who serves in a particular area for a specified period and it was not an individual decoration or award for distinguished service.
With regard to participation in various operations by the petitioner, it was pleaded that the same was a routine.
4.
The petitioner, in the replication filed by him, denied being remiss on any count in approaching this Court at a later stage by pleading that he was relieved from his duties vide order dated 26.5.1993, Annexure P-6.
Whereafter, he made numerous representations some of which are 261994 and 131995, Annexure P-8 and P-9 respectively, and requested the authorities that he be retained in service as he had already withdrawn his request for premature retirement.
Besides that, he had been put on RRO (Regular Reserve officer) for a period of five years within which, he could be recalled to serve the nation in the armed forces on 72 hours notice, issued through Radio, TV or any other communication.
He, thus, pleaded that if the authorities could put him on RRO and call him to serve the nation at any time, there was no reason that he be not kept in service, specially when he had withdrawn his request for retirement.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, as culled out above, learned Single Judge framed following questions for adjudication :-  (1) Whether the request for premature retirement made by the petitioner, an Army Officer, can be withdrawn after its approval but before it became effective ?
(2) Whether the Army Headquarters can be said to be the competent authority to reject the request for withdrawing the premature retirement, in exercise of its delegated powers under Section 8(2) of the Army Act, and the instructions dated 631993?
(3) Whether the impugned order rejecting the request for premature retirement in any case is arbitrary inasmuch as all the relevant factors in, the decision making process have not been taken into account?"
6.
While dealing with the first question, as mentioned above, learned Single Judge, while relying upon Rules 16-B and 18 of the Army Rules, 1954 and Regulations 104 and 105 of the Defence Services Regulations as also policy decision dated 31121990, reproduced in the judgment itself, inter-alia, observed as follows :-  "I have considered the said contention.
It may be noticed that 2621993 is not the effective date of retirement of the petitioner.
The perusal of the order dated 2621993 (Annexure P-2) shows that it is only an approval of request for the premature retirement.
It is specifically provided therein that the petitioner would be relieved of his duties and struck off the strength as early as possible but not later than 90 days of the issue of the said letter.
Besides Rule 18(1) of the Army Rules specifically provides therein that the retirement of an officer shall take effect from the date specified in the official Gazette.
The Gazette Notification dated 931996 has been placed on record which depicts the date of retirement of the petitioner as 25.5.1993 (AN).
It is provided that the President of India is pleaded to permit the officers mentioned therein to retire from army services with effect from the dates mentioned against them, earlier than their normal age of retirement at their own request for their personal reasons and transfer them to Regular Reservice of Officers (Class X) under 10/S/63 as amended.
The name of the petitioner is at serial No. 54 and the date of retirement against his name is 25.5.1993.
Therefore, it is this date of retirement, i.e. 25.5.1993, which is the effective date of retirement when read in context of Rule 18(1) of the Army Rules.
Besides, Rule 18(3) of the Army Rules also provides that retirement of a person subject to the Act shall not be retrospective.
Not only this, even in the written statement filed by the respondents while taking the plea of laches in para No1 of the preliminary objections, it has been stated that the petitioner was retired from army with effect from 25.5.1993.
Even in the order dated 26.5.1993 (Annexure P-6) against the date 25.5.1993, it is recorded "Retirement from army service" and against the date dated 26.5.1993, it is recorded "SOS/SORS" (i.e., struck off the strength/struck off ration strength).
Therefore, it is evident that the effective date of retirement of the petitioner for all intents and purposes is 25.5.1993 and not 2621993 as is sought to be contended by Shri Rathee.
The application making a request for withdrawal of premature retirement was made on 2331993, Annexure P-3, i.e., before 25.5.1993.
Therefore, admittedly, the request for withdrawing the request for premature retirement was made before the order became effective on 25.5.1993."
7.
Learned Single Judge then considered whether such a request as made by the petitioner could at all be made and considered.
While discussing elaborately the case law on the point and in particular, Judicial precedents in Balram Gupta v. Union of India and another, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 2354, Raj Kumar v. Union of India, AIR 1969 Supreme Court 180, Union of India and others v. Gopal Chandra Misra and others, (1978)2 SCC 301, Bank of India v. OP Swarnakar, (2003)2 SCC 721 and Brig.
BS Gill v. Union of India and others, relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner and Civil Writ Petition No. 392 of 2001, decided on 13.2.2002 by Rajasthan High Court and P Kasilingam v. P.S.G.
College of Technology, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 789, cited on behalf of the appellant, held as under :  "Therefore, keeping in view the above position, it is evident that the petitioner could withdraw his request for retirement after its approval or acceptance and it was for the Central Government to consider the same in accordance with its discretion.
Therefore, question No. 1 is answered in the affirmative that any army officer can withdraw his request for premature retirement after its approval or acceptance but before it became effective."
8.
While considering the second proposition of law, as formulated and mentioned above, learned Single Judge, while relying upon Rule 16-8(2) of the Army Rules and Section 8 of the Army Act as also instructions dated 631993 and judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Roop Chand v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 1503, Datta Ria v. State of Bombay, AIR 1952 SC 181 and Chitar Lekha v. State of Mysore, AIR 1964 SC 1823, held as under :-  "Therefore, question No.2 as framed is answered by holding that the power to consider the request for withdrawal of application for premature requirement in respect of the Army Officer is vested in the Central Government and in the absence of any statutory provisions or rules to the contrary that power cannot be delegated to the Army Headquarters and that too by issuance of administrative instructions."
9.
The third question of law, as formulated above, came to be discussed in the light of the correspondence that exchanged between the petitioner and the appellant by observing as follows :-  "To say the least the rejection is bereft of any reason.
The settled legal position is to record reasons in support of an administrative decision which entails evil consequences for an employee.
The recording of reasons in support of a decision is an accepted fact of the principles of natural justice.
According to this, a party has not only the right to know the result of the decision but also the reasons in support thereof.
his has been found to be a salutary rule.
The recording of reasons introduces clarity and rules out arbitrariness.
Besides, its judicial review is to be effective the recording of reasons is necessary.
For an effective judicial review, which affects the rights of a citizen, it has been considered desirable that reasons should be recorded.
However, by not recording reasons in support of the order, does not vitiate the action but at the same time, does leave an impression that the test of reasonableness which requires consideration of all relevant materials and exclusion of all irrelevant materials has not been complied with.
The decision dated 21.4.1993 (Annexure P-4) even if it is assumed to have been taken by the competent authority (though I have already held while considering question No. 2 that the Central Government could not delegate it's functions to the Army Headquarters) in that eventuality even, it may be noticed that the material on record has not been considered by the authorities.
The reasons given of changed circumstances for withdrawing the request for premature retirement were relevant circumstances in the decision making process.
The reasons have been indicated in the application dated 2331993 (annexure P-3) while making request for withdrawal of premature retirement.
The recommendations of the Reviewing Officer, which are at the foot of the said application (Annexure P-3) was also an important circumstances which was to be considered.
The said recommendations of the Brigadier Commander of the petitioner are to be the following effect : "RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE REVIEWING OFFICER  The officer is a competent, good, dedicated Regimental Officer.
As there is a change in his family's circumstances and now he wants to stay, in the interest of the service his retention is strongly recommended."
Station : C/o 56 APO Sd/- Date : 23 Mar 93 (Arjun Singh) Brig.
Cdr."
Two affidavits dated 1931993, Annexure P3/1 and Annexure P3/2 of the brother's of the petitioner, were also necessary documents which were necessary to be considered in the decision making process.
Besides, the certificate dated 2051993 (Annexure P-5) given by the Brigadier Commander of the petitioner which required consideration of the competent authority in reaching the decision.
The pen picture of the petitioner was also a relevant factor that was liable to be taken into account while considering the request of the petitioner seeking withdrawal of the request for premature retirement.
The pen picture has been depicted in the following manner :"Pen Picture :  "The officer has above average intelligence and clarity of thought.
Is practical in his approach and manages his resources excellently.
Has a clear perception and plans his work well.
His integrity and loyalty are unquestionable and can be relied upon to work without supervision.
His honesty and man management are his strength and would serve the organisation he joins in good stead."
Therefore, the failure of the authorities to take into consideration the relevant factors in the decision making process does vitiate the decision.
It appears that the Army Headquarters has rejected the application of the petitioner for withdrawing the request for premature retirement primarily in view of the instructions dated 631993 issued by the Central Government, reference to which has been made above.
Therefore, question No. 3 as framed is answered by holding that the decision of the army authority, assuming that it had jurisdiction to pass such an order, is arbitrary inasmuch as there is an error of jurisdiction in the decision making process by not taking into account the relevant material which was liable to be taken into consideration."
10.
Besides giving findings on the three questions of law, learned Single Judge also considered the plea of the appellant pertaining to delay and ]aches and observed as follows :  "Another aspect that requires consideration is the ]aches raised by the counsel for the respondents.
It is contended that the order rejecting the request for premature retirement was passed on 21.4.1993 (Annexure P-4) and the petitioner was retired from army with effect from 25.5.1993 (Annexure P-6) and he filed the writ petition on 2181995.
The petitioner has explained this delay in his replication inasmuch as that before he actually retired on 25.5.1993, he submitted his application dated 2331993 (Annexure P-3) requesting for withdrawal of his request for premature retirement but despite that he was relieved from duties.
Thereafter, the petitioner made representation dated 351993 (annexure P-7) or reconsideration of his request for premature retirement.
Beside, immediately after the release of the petitioner on 26.5.1993, he submitted another representation dated 261994 (Annexure P-8) for reconsideration of his request for withdrawing the request for premature retirement.
This was followed by another representation dated 131995 (Annexure P-9).
Therefore, it is not a case where the petitioner had been dorant or was not agitating his rights.
Rather there was inaction on the part of the authorities to respond to the representations.
Even otherwise, the plea of laches is a technical in nature.
The petitioner has filed a writ petition within the period of limitation in case he had filed the civil suit for declaration for the same relief.
Therefore, keeping in view the above circumstances and the technical nature of the plea raised, which as per the settled law is that where technical consideration and substantive justice are pitted against each other the cause of substantive justice is to prevail.
Therefore, in my view, the plea of laches urged by the respondents is without any merit."
11.
We have already mentioned in the very beginning of the judgment that Mr. Mohan Parasaran, learned Additional Solicitor General, who appears in support of this appeal, has not challenged any of the findings, either of the parties or for that matter, the findings on the plea raised by the appellant pertaining to delay and laches.
In all fairness, he rather stated, at the out set, that learned Single Judge had correctly decided the crucial issues as debated by the rival parties.
He, however, vehemently contends that the impugned judgment of learned Single Judge still deserves to be set aside as the petitioner when relieved vide order dated 26.5.1993, received all benefits that he was entitled to on 26.5.1993, while prior in point of time giving a signed undertaking on 10.5.1993 and was, thus, estopped by his conduct in challenging the impugned orders.
This point, however, he concedes was not raised either in the pleadings or during the course of arguments before learned Single Judge.
He, however, refers to paragraph 2 of preliminary objections of written statement to contend that a plea disentitling the petitioner by his conduct to challenge the order was, however, taken even though in a different context.
Paragraph 2 of preliminary objections of written statement, referred to by learned counsel representing appellant, reads thus :  "That the petitioner by his act, conduct and acquiesce is stopped from challenging the impugned order as the petitioner was retired on his own request and he had submitted his withdrawal application after the order dated 2621993of his premature retirement was passed wherein it was specifically stated that he be relieved of his duties and struck off strength as early as possible."
12.
Confronted with the position that even though plea that the petitioner is estopped from challenging the impugned order in view of his conduct but the said plea has been taken in the context that he retired on his own request and had submitted his withdrawal application after order dated 26.5.1993 of his premature retirement was passed and not in the context that he was relieved vide order dated 26.5.1993 and received all benefits that he was entitled to, prior in point of time giving a signed undertaking.
Mr. Parasaran state that the plea raised on behalf of the appellant to the effect aforesaid is legal and arises from the admitted facts, and, therefore, the same can be raised at any stage.
13.
There cannot be any exception to the contention raised by Mr. Parasaran that a legal issue, based upon admitted facts, can be pressed into service at any stage during the pendency of the lis before the original Court or before the Appellate Forum.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel representing the petitioner, without disputing the proposition of law as such, however, vehemently contends that merely because the petitioner accepted post retiral dues, which he was entitled to in any case and which cannot partake the character of benefits, he cannot be said to be estoped by his conduct in challenging the order of his premature retirement.
14.
We have heard learned counsel representing the parties and with their assistance, examined the records of the case.
Plea of estoppel by conduct of the petitioner sought to be buttressed from the two judicial precedents of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bank of India v. OP Swamakar and Punjab and Sind Bank and another v. S Ranveer Singh Bawa and another (supra), in our cannot possibly be sustained.
It is not a case where pursuant to some scheme formulated by the Union of India giving some incentives to an employee, if he was to seek his premature retirement, that the petitioner accepted such benefits.
If he sought premature retirement under the rules and withdrew his request for premature retirement also under the rules, on such premature retirement, he was necessarily to get some post retiral dues, which alone, concededly, were given to him.
In considered view of this Court, Judicial precedent sought to be relied upon by the Court, judicial precedent sought to be relied upon by the counsel for the appellant would not be applicable to the facts of the present case at all.
15.
Facts giving rise to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in State Bank of India versus OP Swamakar (supra) reveal that the banks were said to be overstaffed and for the purpose of effective management, manpower planning was contemplated by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, pursuant whereto and in furtherance whereof, the Government considered the desirability of introducing voluntary retirement scheme to help the banks to right size their force.
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said purported policy decision, State Bank of India and nationalised banks, adopted the Scheme known as "Employees Voluntary Retirement Scheme."
The said Scheme was applicable in relation to employee, who on the date of application had completed 15 years of service or 40 years of age.
The period during which the said Scheme was to remain operative varied from bank to bank.
However, as far as Punjab National Bank was concerned, said Scheme was to remain in operation from 1.
112000 to 30.112000.
In terms of the said Scheme, those who sought for voluntary retirement were entitled to exgratia payments as specified therein as also other benefits, which were as follows:  "Amount of ex gratia:-  An employee seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme will be entitled to the ex gratia amount mentioned below in para (a) or (b), whichever is less :  (a) 60 days' salary (pay plus stagnation increments plus special pay plus dearness relief) for each completed year of service;  or  (b) salary for the number of months of service left;  Other benefits  An employee seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme will be eligible for the following benefits in addition to the ex gratia amount mentioned in para 6 above of this Scheme:  (i) Gratuity as per the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 or gratuity payable under the Service Rules, as the case may be, as per existing rules.
(ii) (a) Pension (including value of pension) as per PNB (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995.  or Bank's contribution towards PF as per existing rules.
(iii) Leave encashment as per existing rules."
16.
Application for offer to seek voluntary retirement from service of the bank contained a clause by virtue of which, the applicant was to accept the terms and conditions stipulated in the PNB Employees Voluntary Retirement Scheme, 2000, unconditionally and irrevocably.
A large number of employees submitted their applications out of whom, a small number of employees withdrew their offer.
Despite withdrawal of their offer, the same was, however, accepted, thus, constraining the employees to file writ petitions in this Court as also Bombay High Court and Uttranchal High Court.
This Court, inter- alia, held that VR Scheme as framed is not a valid piece of subordinate legislation inasmuch as, the provision of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub- clause (4) of the Act have not been complied with and has, therefore, to be set aside.
It was also held that even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that the Scheme is validly framed, it would be open to an employee to withdraw his option before the same has been accepted and effectively enforced.
Judgment of this Court was challenged on variety of grounds, inclusive of that as each of the employees had made irrevocable and unconditional offer of terms and conditions laid down in the Scheme, they could not have withdrawn therefrom and particularly as some of them accepted the ex-gratia payment and thus, they having elected for the Scheme, were estopped and precluded from questioning the same.
Those employees, who accepted ex gratia payment, could not have been permitted by the High Court to approbate and reprobate.
17.
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that proposal of the employee when accepted by the bank would constitute a promise within the meaning of Section 2(b) of the Act and only then the promise becomes an enforceable contract.
In the instant case, the banks when floating the Scheme did not signify that on the employees assenting thereto a concluded contract would come into being in terms whereof they would be permitted to retire voluntarily and get the benefits thereunder.
Question of estoppel pertaining to those, who had accepted the ex gratia payment or any other benefits under the Scheme, could not have resiled therefrom as the Scheme was contractual in nature and the contractual right derived by the employees concerned, therefore, could be waived and that the employees concerned having accepted a part of the benefit could not be permitted to approbate and reprobate nor they can be permitted to resile from their earlier stand.
A reading of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in State Bank of India and others v. OP Swarnakar and others (supra), in the context of the facts and circumstances of the said case, would clearly manifest that the petitioners in the said case were estopped by their conduct and not permitted to approbate or reprobate for the simple reason that they could not have accepted the benefits that accrued to them only because of their premature retirement from service and not otherwise and yet say that they would withdraw their offer of premature retirement.
18.
Supreme Court in Punjab & Sind Bank and another v. S Ranveer Singh Bawa and another (supra) followed and approved the judgment in State Bank of India and others v. OP Swamakar and others (supra).
Facts of the case aforesaid reveal that pursuant to Voluntary Retirement Scheme, one again with a view to downsize the strength of its staff, the Respondent Renveer Singh Bawa opted for his voluntary retirement on 6122000.
On 22122000, he requested that he be allowed to withdraw his option but he was not permitted to do so and was, thus, relieved from service.
Aggrieved, he filed writ petition in the High Court, which was allowed.
Appeal carried out against the judgment of learned Single Judge was dismissed.
It was urged and proved on behalf of the appellant before the Supreme Court that the respondent had received and accepted payments/benefits under the Scheme and consequently, he was not entitled to withdraw therefrom.
The respondent had two saving bank accounts in which, the bank credited salaries, notice period salary as well as leave encashment benefits under the Scheme, which was never objected to by the respondent.
Credits in the saving bank accounts were used by him to repay his car loan to the bank amounting to Rs. 65,220/- which was one of the conditions prescribed in the Scheme.
Further, the respondent had utilised the credits in the said accounts for investment in fixed deposits.
He had withdrawn his option on 22122000 and yet without any objection, he received three credits in his account on 27122000; 2512001 and 2912001 on account of salary.
Thereafter, he repaid his car loan; invested Rs. 30,000/- in PPF and Rs. 1,42,40640 in fixed deposit for three years, which was a long term investment.
On the facts, as mentioned above, it was held that "one who knowingly accepts the benefit of a contract is estopped from denying the binding effect on him of such contract.
This rule has to be applied to do enquity".
19.
In the case in hand, the authorities, while passing order dated 26.5.1993, Annexure P-6, retiring the petitioner prematurely, mentioned that the petitioner was entitled to encash 88 days, leave standing to his credit at the time of his retirement, in the manner mentioned in the order itself and that he was entitled to accumulated leave for encashment for 88 days.
The undertaking said to have been given by the petitioner is contained in order, Annexure P-2/1, which appears to be a part of Annexure P-2 itself and which is an order of premature retirement.
In paragraph 4 of order, Annexure P-2, it is mentioned that under the provisions of Al 10/5/63 as amended, the officer will be transferred to the Regular Reserve Officers (ROR) Class (X) upto five years from the date of his actual SOS or his superannuation date in present rank, whichever is earlier.
The undertaking said to have been given by the petitioner pertains to certain things to be done by him when he was to be in Regular Reserve of Officers.
He has undertaken that during the period of reserve, if he is to visit foreign country or acquire foreign citizenship, he will obtain prior permission of the Government and will report on duty on the earmarked HQ/Establishment mobilisation within 72 hours after receiving orders on TV/Radio/Letter, whichever is earlier.
He also undertook to inform MS Branch of any change in his permanent residential address.
On premature retirement of the petitioner, he was certainly entitled to some post retiral benefits, including leave encashment.
Payment and receipt of said benefits by the petitioner was not a bounty nor any concession nor anything to which the petitioner might not have been entitled, if he was not to request for premature retirement.
He was, indeed, entitled to all the benefits under the existing rules and beyond that he was paid and received nothing.
It is not, thus, a case where he might have approbated or reprobated.
The only contention raised by Mr. Parasaran, learned Additional Solicitor General, is bereft of any merit and we have no hesitation whatsoever in rejecting the same.
20.
Before we may, however, part with this order, we would like to mention that during the pendency of the appeal, when the matter came up for hearing before us on 1882004, it was urged on behalf of the appellant that reinstatement of the petitioner in armed forces after a gap of more than a decade may not be feasible nor appropriate and even the petitioner himself may not be able to carry out arduous duties assigned to a military personnel.
In the back ground of the aforesaid contention, learned counsel representing the parties mooted out a settlement proposal, which we have recorded in our order of the said date.
Same runs thus :-  "During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the parties have noted out a settlement proposal, by virtue of which it is agreed that if the petitioner, in the original lis and respondent in the present appeal, is paid the monetary benefits, namely, salary upto 21 years of service, naturally excluding salary for the period he had actually serve as also consideration for promotion to the post of Lt.
Colonel (time scale) and further that the petitioner shall be deemed to have retired on completion of 21 years of service, which would entitle him to pension and other benefits as permissible under the rules, he would not insist for further reliefs, like, reinstatement in service, as ordered by learned Single Judge.
To have instructions in the matter, however, learned counsel for appellant seeks adjournment.
List again on 1592004.
A copy of this order be given to learned counsel representing the parties under the signatures of the Court Secretary."
21.
On 1592004, Mr. Anil Rathee, learned counsel representing the appellant, stated that the matter was under active consideration by the concerned authorities and it would take some more time to approve the proposals, as mentioned in our order dated 1882004.
On the request of learned counsel for Union of India, we adjourned the matter to 17112004.
On the adjourned date, we recorded the following order :-  "Mr. Rathee, learned counsel appearing for appellant- Union of India, on the basis of letter dated 16112004, a copy of which is ordered to be place on record, and on further instructions, states that the proposal as mentioned in our order dated 1882004, is under active consideration of the Government of India, in fact, a proposal to that effect has already been sent to the concerned authority and the final decision is awaited, which will be taken soon.
Learned Counsel seeks adjournment for four weeks.
List on 15122004.
The Court is sanguine that in the interregnum, the final decision shall be taken in the matter.
Copy of this order be given to the counsel for the appellant, as desired, under the signatures of the Court Secretary."
22.
When the matter came up for hearing on 15122004, we passed the following order :-  "In view of the request made by Mr. Rathee that this matter is to be argued by Additional Solicitor General and that he shall be available on 17122004, we though reluctantly, in the back ground of orders dated 1882004 and 17112004, adjourn this case to 17122004 with a direction that correspondence resting with the Army authorities in the Government from the date when we passed order dated 1882004 should also be made available for perusal of the Court."
23.
It requires to be mentioned that on 15122004, the Court was given to understand that the Government was not likely to agree to the proposal for settlement as mentioned in our order dated 1882004.
The matter, however, came up for hearing on 17122004.
After giving back drop of the case and reproducing the orders, as mentioned above, we further recorded the following order :-  "When the matter came up for hearing on 15122004, the Court was informed that whereas, Union of India would adhere to the benefits given to Dipinder Singh, as mentioned above in order dated 1882004, he shall not be paid back-wages.
The change in proposal denying back wages is not acceptable to Mr. Dipinder Singh.
That being so, we wanted to hear whatever Mr. Anil Rathee, learned counsel for the appellant might want to say on merits of the controversy.
Mr. Anil Rathee, however, requested for adjournment as learned Additional Solicitor General had to argue the case.
Reluctantly, we had adjourned the case for today.
24.
Mr. Rathee informs the Court that Mr. Mohan Parasaran, Additional Solicitor General reached Delhi last night only and he has not been able to come to this Court today.
He seeks an adjournment.
As mentioned above, arguments at considerable length were heard on 18th of August, 2004, and it is only at the fag end of the arguments that proposal, as reproduced above in our order dated 1882004, came to be mooted.
Reluctantly though, once again, we adjourn this case to 312005 by making it absolutely clear that the Government would bring on record the benefits that it desires or wishes to give to the respondent and if the same may not be acceptable to the respondent, the matter shall certainly stand concluded for us to proceed to decide the matter on merits."
25.
The settlement proposal ultimately failed as the Government is not prepared to give salary to the petitioner for the period, he remained out of service and the petitioner is not prepared to forego his salary but for the period, he states, he learned something.
The Court is not concerned if the parties to the litigation may settle the dispute by way of compromise or not.
We have yet mentioned what transpired during the course of hearing while trying to resolve the matter by settlement of the parties as suggested by them.
26.
Upshot of the discussion made above results into dismissal of this appeal.
Ordered accordingly.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.