Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - This writ petition was taken out alleging inaction on the part of the petitioner's employer, Eastern Coalfields Limited.
He has alleged that his request to undertake review determination of his date of birth was not accepted by his employer.
During pendency of the writ petition, taken out on February 22, 2006, he was superannuated on April 30, 2006.
2.
He was appointed on April 19, 1974.
In the statutory B-Form, signed by him and the authorities, his date of birth was recorded as April 19, 1946.
He was working as an Assistant Foreman (M).
In 1987 important excerpts from his service record were supplied to him calling upon him to record his remarks, if any.
In the document concerned his date of birth was mentioned as April 19, 1946.
While submitting it, after filling in, he recorded his objection that his correct date of birth April 1, 1948 had not been mentioned by the authority.
3.
In 1998, in terms of direction of the authority, he submitted particulars of his family (the document was signed by him), mentioning that his date of birth was April 19, 1946.
In the last pay certificate issued to him by the competent authority on November 16, 2001 his date of birth was shown as April 19, 1946.
The superannuation notice dated November 27, 2005 was issued and served on him informing him that on reaching the age of 60 according to his recorded date of birth April 19, 1946 he would retire from service on April 30, 2006.
4.
By giving a legal notice dated February 11, 2006 he disputed the date of birth mentioned by his employer in the superannuation notice; he asserted that as would appear from the school leaving certificate, and the identity card his date of birth ought to have been mentioned as April 1, 1948.
Since his employer ignored his legal notice, he took out this writ petition.
5.
I do not find any reason to interfere in the matter.
The school leaving certificate dated January 11, 1963 showing that according to admission register of the school ( High School, Bhowra, Dhanbad) his date of birth was April 1, 1948, assuming to be a genuine piece of document, was admittedly in the possession at the time he entered into employment.
It was mentioned in the certificate that at the time he left the school he was reading in class-X.
6.
The statutory B-Form in which his date of birth was recorded as April 19, 1946 was signed by him.
There is nothing to show that though at the time of entry into service he produced the school leaving certificate, his employer concerned declined to accept that.
The identify card issued by the employer concerned never possessed the force statutory or otherwise to override the statutory effect of the facts and figures recorded in the statutory B-Form.
Admitted position is that till 1987 he never asserted in any manner that his date of birth was April 1, 1948.
7.
After 1987 he once again became silent.
Not only that, in 1998, and again in 2001 he accepted the case of his employer that his date of birth was April 19, 1946.
Till before service of the superannuation notice he did not agitate the matter before his employer or before the appropriate Court of law.
Only a few months before his date of retirement, according to the recorded date of birth, he took out this writ petition.
On these facts, I hold that on the ground of delay alone he is not entitled to any relief.
8.
Even otherwise, I do not find any merit in his case.
According to Implementation Instruction No. 76, by which both he and his employer were governed, he would have been entitled to ask his employer to undertake review determination of his date of birth only on the basis of certain certificates, which did not include a school leaving certificate.
Thus relying on the school leaving certificate and the identity card he was not entitled to call upon his employer to undertake review determination of his date of birth.
9.
He was entitled to reply on the school leaving certificate only at the time of his initial appointment.
If it is his case that though he had produced it, his employer did not accept the date of birth recorded therein, he ought to have questioned his employer's action within a reasonable period from April 19, 1974.
He cannot be permitted to question his employer's action, if any, taken at that date after around thirty-two years.
I therefore, do not see any reason to say that his employer acted wrongfully or unfairly or unreasonably by issuing the superannuation notice.
10.
For these reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
11.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.