Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is questioning the order of the disciplinary authority dated September 27, 2005 imposing on him the punishment of dismissal from service.
2.
On August 24, 2001 he obtained a loan of rupees one lakh twenty thousand from the Allahabad Bank, New Alipore Branch, Kolkata.
At that date he was working as an assistant teacher in Bhutnath Mahamaya Institution (Boys' Primary) at 9, Radhanath Chowdhury Road, Kolkata-700 015.
On September 6, 2001 the manager of the bank lodged a first information report with the Alipore Police Station, Kolkata alleging that by giving false declaration regarding his identity and by producing forged documents the petitioner had induced the bank to sanction the loan to him.
Consequently, Alipore PS Case No. 210 dated September 6, 2001 was registered under s 120B/420/467/468/471 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
3.
From September 7, 2001 the petitioner stopped going to the school.
His permanent residence was in Kolkata.
On March 1, 2002 he was arrested by the police from Midnapore : He remained in police custody during the period from March 1, 2002 to March 6, 2002.
Subsequently, he applied for medical leave for the period from September 7, 2001 to March 6, 2002.
With effect from March 1, 2002 he was placed under suspension.
Questioning the order suspending him he moved this Court by filing a writ petition, which (I am told) is pending decision.
He repaid the loan on February 24, 2003.
4.
Thereupon disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him by issuing the charge-sheet dated September 4, 2003.
It was alleged that by getting involved in the criminal case he made himself liable to be proceeded against, that by giving false identity and obtaining loan by producing forged documents he committed misconduct, that by suffering detention in police custody he made himself liable to be proceeded against, and that by remaining unauthorisedly absent during the period from September 7, 2001 to March 6, 2002 he made himself liable to be proceeded against.
He was called upon to submit reply, if any.
In the annexure to the charge memo the documents to be relied on were mentioned.
The list of witnesses was also supplied.
5.
He submitted a reply dated September 29, 2003 contending that unless copies of the documents mentioned in the list were supplied to him he would not be in a position to give appropriate reply to the allegations.
He, however, did not admit any of the allegations.
The disciplinary authority appointed an inquiry officer, who conducted an inquiry in which the manager of the bank and the teacher-incharge of the institute concerned were examined as management witnesses.
Those witnesses were cross-examined by the petitioner who did not examine any witness in defence.
The exhibits in support of the allegations were the loan documents.
6.
The inquiry officer submitted his report recording his findings that charges levelled against the petitioner had been duly proved.
Thereupon the disciplinary authority issued a notice dated September 20, 2005 giving the petitioner an opportunity to appear before him for making submissions.
By letter dated September 28, 2005 the petitioner alleged that though he attended office of the disciplinary authority, he was not called for the personal hearing on the ground that the disciplinary authority was engaged in a meeting.
In the circumstances, the punishment order was issued and served.
7.
In terms of provisions in the rules the petitioner had a statutory remedy of appeal, but he did not prefer one, and instead he took out this writ petition.
It was admitted by order dated April 7, 2006, and hence at this distance of time I do not see any reason to dismiss it on the ground that statutory remedy of appeal was available.
Besides, counsel for the petitioner has rightly said that availability of that remedy was not a bar to the maintainability of this writ petition.
But then remedy of judicial review is available only on limited grounds, and being aware of that counsel has questioned the punishment order on two grounds.
8.
The first ground of challenge is that since copies of documents mentioned in the list annexed to the charge-sheet were not supplied, in spite of demand, it must be held that the petitioner was not given sufficient opportunity of submitting his reply to the charge-sheet.
It is contended that on this ground alone the inquiry proceedings should be quashed.
I am unable to accept the contention.
In the charge-sheet, the allegations were sufficiently explained.
True, it is that by his reply letter the petitioner demanded copies of the documents for dealing with the allegations.
9.
In my view, in the face of the detailed charge-sheet, it cannot be said that in the absence of copies of documents the petitioner was not in a position to deal with the allegations.
It seems to me that his request for supplying copies of the documents was not really for the reason that in their absence he was not in a position to deal with the allegations, but for the reason that he wanted to avoid the requirement of dealing with them.
However, I do not find any reason to say that for not getting copies of the documents at that stage he suffered any real prejudice.
Instead of ventilating his grievance before the appropriate forum chose to participate in the inquiry.
I, therefore, hold that the inquiry proceedings do not call for any interference on this ground.
10.
The second and last point argued by counsel for the petitioner is that the charges were not proved.
He points out that the manager concerned, that is, the person who lodged the first information report, and the headmaster concerned, that is whose signature was allegedly forged while obtaining the loan, having not been examined by the management, there was no scope for the inquiry officer to conclude that the petitioner had either given false declaration regarding his identity, or that he had produced any forged document in support of the loan application.
In support of the contention counsel refers me to the statement of the witness before the inquiry officer.
11.
The fact of obtaining the loan was admitted by the petitioner.
The further admitted position is that he repaid the loan, and that he did after the first information report was lodged by the bank alleging commission of various criminal offences by him.
Immediately after the first information report was lodged he stopped attending the school.
He did not surface to attend the school till after his release on bail.
The fact of his remaining in police custody was not disclosed by him.
In the inquiry he admitted that the loan documents had been signed by him.
12.
In those documents, he described himself as an assistant teacher of Bhutnath Mahamaya Institution ( High School) at 9, Radhanath Chowdhury Road, Kolkata-700 015.
And his monthly salary was shown as Rs. 15017/-.
In support of the loan application he submitted salary certificate and Form 16 (IT), allegedly signed by the headmaster of Bhutnath Mahamaya Institution (Secondary Section).
These documents were produced by the manager of the bank who was examined as a management witness.
Keeping these facts in view, the inquiry officer reached the conclusion that the petitioner had obtained the loan by giving a false declaration.
13.
On the facts of the case, I am unable to accept the contention that charges levelled against the petitioner were not proved.
Admittedly he was not a teacher of the secondary Section of the institute; but he obtained loan by submitting papers signed by him showing that he was an assistant teacher of the secondary Section of the school.
In my view, this admitted fact was sufficient to bring home the charges levelled against him.
As is known, the rest of the proof in disciplinary proceedings is not as strict as in a criminal case.
In disciplinary proceedings preponderance of probability is the test, and not proof beyond all reasonable doubt.
14.
Here the admitted facts were more than sufficient to establish the charges levelled against the petitioner.
Admittedly for the period from September 7, 2001 to March 6, 2002 he was absent from duty.
The first information report was lodged on September 6, 2001.
He repaid the loan on February 24, 2003.
He remained in police custody during the period from March, 2002 to March 6, 2002.
On these facts, in my view, the inquiry officer rightly concluded that by seeking medical leave for the period the petitioner committed misconduct.
He could not have been ill during the period in question.
He was arrested at a place far away from the permanent residence.
Hence, I am unable to hold that charges brought against him were not proved.
15.
For these reasons, I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
16.
Urgent certificate xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.