Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - This writ petition was listed for hearing on July 27, 2006 when none appeared for the petitioner.
It was directed to go out on list.
After giving notice dated November 23, 2006 counsel for the school service commission mentioned the matter for listing.
The notice was duly received by clerk of counsel for the petitioner.
No body appears to represent the petitioner Counsel for the commission files opposition dated June 28, 2006.
He says that copy of the opposition was serviced on counsel for the petitioner on July 3, 2006.
No reply has been filed by the petitioner.
2.
Questioning the decision of the commission dated April 21, 2006 withdrawing the recommendation dated March 01, 2006 whereby the petitioner was recommended to the authority of Gobindapur Milani Vidyapith Junior High School, Purba Medinipur for appointment as an assistant teacher of Mathematics (Hons/PG) SC the petitioner took out this writ petition dated May 10, 2006.
His contention is that after making the recommendation the commission possessed no power to rescind it.
3.
On the ground that in the application submitted to the commission the petitioner gave a false declaration that he obtained a master's degree in mathematics through a regular course, the commission decided to withdraw the recommendation letter.
It decided to withdraw the recommendation the moment it detected that the petitioner had given a false declaration.
Since he had obtained the master's degree through distance education method, and not through any regular course.
4.
It has been stated in the opposition that the moment the false declaration given by the petitioner was detected by the commission, notice dated March 15, 2006 was issued calling upon him to appear before the authority of the commission.
The petitioner participated in the proceedings initiated by the authority for withdrawing the recommendation.
After examining the materials, the authority gave the decision dated April 21, 2006 withdrawing the recommendation.
5.
I fully agree with counsel for the commission that the commission possessed the inherent power to rescind and cancel the recommendation letter, once the fraud exercised by the petitioner was detected by it.
Counsel for the commission has rightly drawn my attention to the declaration given by the petitioner in the application he filed to the commission.
He signed the declaration that if statements made by him were found to be incorrect, then the commission would be empowered to cancel the results and recommendation.
6.
In my view, even in the absence of the declaration given by the petitioner, the commission would have possessed the power to cancel the recommendation on the ground that the petitioner had obtained it by exercising fraud.
The admitted position is that the petitioner gave a false declaration in the application lie had filed to the commission intending to take the examination.
I therefore do not find any reason to interfere with the decision of the commission.
7.
For these reasons, the writ petition is dismissed with costs assessed at rupees ten thousand to be paid by the petitioner to the commission within a fortnight from date.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.