Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J -The petitioner is seeking a mandamus directing the respondents to disburse his retiral benefits including pension with interest at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum.
2.
He was an assistant teacher in Uttarbar High School, Purba Medinipur.
On reaching the age of superannuation he retired from service on October 31 st, 2002.
Alleging that his retiral benefits were not paid by the respondents he took out this writ petition on July 18th, 2005.
The questions for decision are whether he is entitled to get pension, and whether he is entitled to get interest on any other benefit that became payable to him on his retirement.
3.
He has claimed that in terms of government order No. 136 - Edn.
(B) dated May 15th, 1985 (read with government order No. 296(5) Edn.
(B) dated October 7th, 1985), he submitted the requisite option for switching over from contributory provident fund scheme to pension-cum-gratuity scheme on December 31 st, 1985.
His further claim is that on June 28th, 2004 he refunded the employer's share of provident fund contributions for the period from April 1st, 1987 to March 31st, 2004.
He has claimed that his pension papers were submitted by the teacher in charge of the institute under cover of his letter dated March 19th, 2004.
4.
Counsel submits that since in terms of the government orders the petitioner duly exercised the option, though the provident fund contributions were refunded later on, he became entitled to get pensionary benefits.
His further contention is that without any valid reason the authorities withheld payment of gratuity and other benefits, and hence an order should be made directing them to pay those benefits with interest at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum.
5.
By filing opposition the state authorities have said that no pension paper was submitted by the headmaster of the institute who was under the obligation to submit the requisite papers in the office of the district inspector of schools concerned fifteen months before the date of superannuation of the petitioner.
They have further stated that there was no scope for the petitioner to refund the employer's share of provident fund contributions in June 2004, when he had retired from service in October, 2002.
6.
According to the respondents option allegedly submitted by the petitioner in 1985 was not a valid one, and in view of the fact that the requisite papers were not submitted to the appropriate authority, there is no question of granting any interest on any amount, it has remained unpaid.
Their counsel submits that the school authority may be directed to submit the requisite papers in the office of the district inspector of schools, so that it may be examined whether the petitioner is entitled to get any amount.
7.
I fully agree with counsel for the state that the petitioner is not entitled to get benefits on account of pension.
Option allegedly exercised and submitted by him on December 31st, 1985 was not a valid one, since he did not refund the employer's share of provident fund contributions at once.
He was under the unqualified obligation to refund that part of the contributions.
On the contrary, he consciously preferred to remain governed by the contributory provident fund scheme.
8.
Every month contributions were deposited in the fund concerned, and after retirement in October, 2002 he received the whole of the provident fund money.
The respondents are absolutely right in saying that there was no scope at all to refund the employer's share of provident fund contributions for the period from April 1st, 1987 to March 31st, 2004 on June 28th, 2004."
It is not understood how the petitioner decided to refund provident fund contributions even for post retirement period.
It seems to me that with respect to pension he approached this Court with a frivolous claim.
9.
As to the question of other benefits, I find that the papers were not submitted by the authority of the institute in the office of the district inspector of schools who was the authority to release the benefits.
The petitioner remained absolutely silent till July 18th, 2005 when this writ petition was taken out.
Hence I do not find any reason to say that the authorities wrongfully withheld payment of any benefit to him.
I, however, hold that if he is entitled to get any amount on account of retiral benefits, then such amounts should be paid by the district inspector of schools immediately.
10.
For these reasons, I dispose of the writ petition ordering that within a fortnight from the date of communication of this order the district inspector of schools shall direct the authority of the institute to submit the requisite papers in connection with retiral benefits of the petitioner.
Within a fortnight from the date of receipt of the papers, the district inspector of schools shall give the requisite decision regarding the petitioner's entitlement.
If it is found that the petitioner is entitled to get any amount on account of retiral benefits, then the district inspector of schools shall issue the necessary order directing payment.
In that case, all the authorities including the treasury officer and the director of pension, provident fund and group insurance shall take necessary steps for ensuring payment of the amount in questions, and this exercise shall be carried out and completed by the authorities within four weeks from the date of last decision of the district inspector of schools.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
11.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Order accordingly.