SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - Mr. Ajay Pal Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submits that under the Punjab State Electricity Board Security Force Service Regulations, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as `the Regulations') the petitioners are entitled to be considered against the 40% posts of Assistant Security Inspectors.
The claims of the petitioners have been pending with the Board for a large number of years.
In fact, the petitioners have been continuously ignored as the respondent-Board keeps on filling the posts by deputation.
In the case of the petitioners the quota provided under Regulation 6 of the aforesaid Regulations has been totally violated.
This, according to the learned counsel, is against the law settled by the Supreme Court and various High Courts in catena of judgments.
2.
In the written-statement, the respondents have taken the plea that the representation made by the petitioners on 1882004 is under consideration.
Therefore, the writ petition is premature.
3.
Mr. Ajay Pal Singh, however, submits that on the one hand the names of the petitioners are not being considered and at the same time the respondents are continuously filling the posts of Assistant Security Inspectors by deputation.
He makes a reference to the orders dated 2482004 and 2582004 (Annexure P-1 and 2) whereby eight posts have been filled by deputation.
4.
The claim of the petitioners is based on Regulation 6(iii) of the Regulations which reads as under:-  "6.
Recruitment to the Service :- Recruitment to the service shall be made by the Appointing Authority by any of the methods indicated below as may be applicable in each case :- (i) & (ii) xx xx xx xx (iii) Asstt.
Security Inspector : a 40% by promotion from amongst Security Guards.
b.
60% by Direct Recruitment/Deputation of suitable personnel from the State Government.
(iv) xx xx xx xx" A perusal of the above rule shows that 40% of Assistant Security Inspectors are to be appointed by promotion from amongst Security Guards and 60% by direct recruitment/deputation of suitable personnel from the State Government.
Therefore, the deputationists that are appointed are entirely from the different quota and their appointments do not relate to the promotion quota against which the petitioners seek their promotion as Assistant Security Inspectors.
It is not shown by the respondents that it has become impossible for them to adhere to the quota rule in violation of the statutory rules.
In Direct Recruits Class-II Engineering Officers Association v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1990 SC 1607 it was held that when appointments are made from more than one source, and if rules are framed in this regard they must ordinarily be followed strictly.
It is only if it becomes impossible to adhere to the existing quota rule it should be substituted by an appropriate rule to meet the needs of the situation.
No material has been placed on record to show that it has become impossible to adhere to the existing quota rule which would warrant the substitution of the quota rule by an appropriate rule.
Therefore, 40% from amongst the Security Guards are entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Security Inspectors in accordance with Regulation 6(iii)(a) of the Regulations.
Mere pendency of the representation of the petitioners, therefore, would not mean that the petitioners are not to be considered for promotion in accordance with the Regulations against the 40% posts of Assistant Security Inspectors to be filled by promotion.
The grievance, therefore, made by the petitioners, in our opinion, is perfectly legitimate.
5.
The petition is, therefore, allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioners from the dates when the posts became available in the quota of 40% posts which are earmarked for the promotees.
In case any of the petitioners are found suitable for promotion, the respondents shall promote the officials against the posts which are falling to the share of the petitioners.
The petitioners shall also be granted seniority with effect from the dates when they ought to have been promoted by calculating the vacancies strictly on the basis of the quota provided under the Regulations.
The petitioners shall, however, not be entitled to any monetary benefits such as arrears of salary on the promoted posts.
However, their pay shall be fixed by notionally taking into account the service which they would have rendered.
Petition allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.