Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is seeking a mandamus directing the first respondent to permit him to attend the third semester MBA Class of 2007 conducted by one ICFAI Business School, Kolkata (ICFAI stands for: Institute of Chartered Financial Analysis of India).
2.
The business school is absolutely a private body, and it has been sued through its director.
It is a unit of the Institute of Chartered Financial Analysis of India University, which is admittedly a society registered under the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Public Societies Registration Act, 1350F That society is the first respondent in the writ petition.
The first question that has arisen for consideration is whether the first and third respondents are amenable to writ jurisdiction.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner argues that in view of provisions in the ICFAI University Act, 2003, the first respondent discharging public duties is a state within the meaning of art. 12 of the Constitution of India, and hence it and its unit that has been sued through the third respondent both are amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the high courts.
He refers me to the relevant statement made in para 24 of the writ petition.
4.
I find that the contention is misconceived.
The legislation I am referred to has nothing to do with the establishment and functioning of the first respondent.
By the legislation the legislature of the State of Uttaranchal established a university called ICFAI University.
That university was reportedly sponsored by the first respondent society which is known by an identical name.
The legislation did not change the nature and character of the first respondent; that remained a society as before.
5.
As is known, a registered society is not a juristic person.
There is absolutely nothing to show that the first respondent receives any grant from the University Grants Commission.
Even assuming it receives some grant, that alone will not make it a state within the meaning of art. 12 of the Constitution of India.
As a result, there is no reason to say that the business school, represented by the third respondent, for being a unit of the first respondent, is amenable to writ jurisdiction.
6.
The writ has been taken out absolutely against private bodies and persons.
Simply because they are conducting educational courses, writ cannot be issued against them proceeding on the basis that their activities have element of public interest or public duty in them.
I therefore agree with counsel for the contesting respondents that the respondents in this writ petition are not amendable to the writ jurisdiction of this court.
7.
It is necessary to place on record that even on merits there is no reason to interfere with the actions taken by the contesting respondents.
The petitioner is alleging that his registration for the course has been cancelled.
That is not the position.
Counsel for the respondents has produced documents (they are undisputed) to show that his petitioner having adopted unfair means during the first semester terminal examinations, the examination of the subject concerned (quantitative methods) was cancelled.
8.
It has been submitted that taking a lenient view the institute permitted the petitioner to take the second semester terminal examinations on the condition that he would clear the subject concerned of the first semester of the course.
Admitted position is that though he cleared the second semester terminal examinations and the summer internship programme, he is yet to clear the first semester examinations of the course, since he did not take examination for clearing the subject quantitative methods.
9.
I am therefore unable to agree with counsel for the petitioner that having fulfilled all requirements for registration as a student of the third semester, the petitioner is entitled to get such registration.
Counsel for the respondents has clearly stated that the petitioner will be permitted to register himself for the third semester only after he clears the subject concerned of the first semester.
On these facts, I do not see any reason to say that the respondents acted unfairly, unreasonably or arbitrarily.
10.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.