Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is asking for a declaration that any existing rule providing that only twenty names of eligible candidates, chosen according to seniority in registration, should be sponsored by the employment exchanges for a notified vacancy for a non-teaching post in a secondary school, is unconstitutional.
2.
She is also questioning the order of the Employment Officer-in-Charge, DEE, Tamluk dated August 1st, 2006 holding that since candidates registered upto December 1989 had been sponsored for the post in question, there was no scope to sponsor her name registered only on September 25, 1996.
3.
Counsel argues that principle of seniority in registration followed by the employment officer is contrary to the provisions in art. 16 of the constitution.
He says that in view of numerous decisions of courts (none has been cited to me), all eligible persons including the petitioner were to be sponsored by the employment exchanges.
4.
His further submission is that a copy of the rule prescribing that only twenty names are to be sponsored as against one notified vacancy could not be produced with the writ petition, since it was not available with the petitioner.
He prays for an order directing the authority of khandapasara.Deshpran High School, Purba Medinipur, to permit the petitioner to participate in the selection process initiated by that institute for the post of peon.
5.
I do not find any reason to entertain the case.
The order of the employment officer is perfectly justified, since according to the existing provisions of law (the WB Regulation of Recruitment in State Government Establishments and Establishments of Public Undertakings, Statutory Bodies, Government Companies and Local Authority Act, 1999, s. 10), and the requisition, he was to sponsor names of only twenty eligible candidates for one notified vacancy.
6.
The principle of seniority in registration followed by the employment officer, in my view, cannot be said to be violative of arts.
14 and 16 of the constitution, since the authority treated all similarly situated persons equally.
That apart, I do not see any reason to entertain a plea regarding vires of any unspecified and unidentified law.
An order cannot be made by the writ court in the abstract.
It is the obligation of the person questioning the vires of a law to specify and produce it.
7.
There is absolutely no reason to make an order directing the school authority to permit the petitioner to participate in the selection process.
The admitted position is that her name has not been sponsored by any employment exchange in response to the requisition that had been made by the school authority.
According to provisions of the WB Schools (Recruitment of Non-teaching Staff) Rules, 2005 one is entitled to participate in the selection process, only if one's name is sponsored by the employment exchange for the purpose.
8.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.