Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner Union of India, Union Territory, Chandigarh and various officers of the Union Territory Administration have approached this Court challenging the order dated May 18, 2004 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Tribunal).
The aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P-4 with the present petition.
Vide the aforesaid order Annexure P-4, the Tribunal has directed the Director, Public Instructions (Schools), petitioner No. 3 in the present petition, to consider the case of the original applicant Roopa Sekhri, respondent No. 2 in the present petition and ensure that an appointment order is issued to her on the basis of a selection made earlier on the basis of TGT Sanskrit.
2.
The original applicant Roopa Sekhri was initially appointed on contract basis as lecturer in Sanskrit on January 2, 2002 with the education department of Union Territory, Chandigarh.
Later on, an advertisement dated August 10, 2002 was issued for fresh appointments of lecturers on contract basis.
The aforesaid original applicant alongwith other similarly situated contract appointees approached the Tribunal making a grievance with regard to the aforesaid advertisement.
The learned Tribunal held that the contract employees could not be substituted by fresh contract employees and accordingly issued necessary directions.
Thus, Roopa Sekhri continued to work on the post of lecturer.
However, on July 29, 2003, the post of lecturer in Sanskrit was declared surplus.
Accordingly, she was asked to report to District Education Officer for further necessary action.
In this manner, the contractual appointment of Roopa Sekhri came to an end.
In the meantime, while working as a contract teacher, Roopa Sekhri had applied for being considered for appointment to the post of TGT in Sanskrit on contract basis.
She was duly selected for the aforesaid post.
A communication was issued by Headmistress, Government High School, Sector 47, Chandigarh requiring her to report for duty.
This communication was issued in December, 2002.
However, Roopa Sekhri did not join the aforesaid post of TGT, since she was working as a lecturer at that point of time.
3.
On dispensation of her services on July 29, 2003, Roopa Sekhri approached the learned Tribunal through the original application.
Various reliefs were claimed by her.
It was claimed that the declaration of her post of Sanskrit lecturer as surplus was mala fide.
She also claimed various other allowances and arrears of salaries.
Additionally, the original applicant also claimed that since she had been selected as TGT Sanskrit on contract basis in the selection process conducted in the year 2002, therefore, she should be allowed to join the aforesaid post, now after her engagement as lecturer in Sanskrit had come to an end on July 29, 2003.
The learned Tribunal vide order dated May 18, 2004 has allowed the aforesaid claim of the original applicant Roopa Sekhri.
It has been held that having been selected earlier on the post of TGT Sanskrit she was entitled to join the aforesaid post now, after having relinquished the charge of lecturer in Sanskrit with effect from July 29, 2003.
The order of the Tribunal has been assailed by the petitioner on various grounds.
It has been claimed that the original applicant (respondent No. 2) was not entitled to appointment as TGT Sanskrit after the lapse of such a long time when she herself had not chosen to accept the offer of contractual appointment as a TGT Sanskrit in the year 2002.
Additionally, it has been maintained by the petitioners that the aforesaid post of TGT Sanskrit was no more available for appointment on contract basis.
4.
The averments made in the writ petition have been contested by respondent No. 2.
The stand taken by her before the Tribunal has been reiterated.
It has been averred that since at one point of time she had been selected for the post of TGT Sanskrit on contract basis but had chosen not to accept the aforesaid post since she was working on a higher post and, therefore, now after the aforesaid engagement having come to an end she was entitled to accept the aforesaid offer and join on the post of TGT Sanskrit.
5.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival pleas and contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
In our considered opinion, the order passed by the learned Tribunal cannot be sustained.
6.
Facts are not in dispute.
It is the admitted position that at one point of time i.e. in pursuance to the advertisement dated August 10, 2002, respondent No. 2 had applied for being considered for appointment to the post of TGT Sanskrit on contract basis.
She was selected at that time.
A communication in this regard was issued by the authorities to her in December 2002.
On her own volition, respondent No. 2 chose not to accept the aforesaid offer.
May be she was working on a higher post, but the fact remains that the offer of contractual appointment was not accepted by her when it was made.
The natural inference, therefore, is that she had declined the aforesaid offer.
Now after the lapse of such a long period, she cannot be heard to take a somersault and claim that her selection as a contract employee should be renewed and she be permitted to join.
Although the factum of the aforesaid vacancy having been filled up, as claimed by the petitioners, is disputed by respondent No. 2, still we feel that the aforesaid offer having not been accepted by respondent No. 2, for whatever reasons, cannot be kept alive, nor the authorities could be directed to offer an appointment at this late stage.
7.
Accordingly, we have no hesitation in holding that the directions issued by the Tribunal through the order Annexure P-4 are wholly unsustainable and liable to be set.
The same are accordingly set aside.
8.
Before parting with this order, we may notice that the UT Administration would be well within its rights to carry out the selection process for the regular appointments to the TGT Sanskrit post.
When the aforesaid process is taken out, respondent No. 2 would also be entitled to participate, as per the rules and her eligibility.
The present petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petition allowed.