SS Grewal, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the decision of Punjab Technical University Jalandhar (for short, `the University') cancelling his admission in the Bachelor of Engineering course.
2.
The petitioner appeared in the Common Entrance Test (for short, `CET') conducted by the University in May, 1999.
He qualified the test and his name was placed at No. 3425 in the merit list prepared by the University.
He appeared in the first counselling held on 5,81999, but could not get admission because of lower merit.
He claims that the second counselling could not be held due to pendency of litigation in the High Court, but he was admitted in Bachelor of Engineering course (Electrical Branch) against one of the seats earmarked for Non-resident Indians (for short, `NRIs') in Shree Sukhmani Institute of Engineering and Technology, Dera Bassi (respondent No. 1).
He deposited Rs. 68500/-.
At the end of the first semester, he appeared in the examination conducted by the University in January, 2000.
Thereafter, he prosecuted his studies in the second semester up to 1952000 and also appeared in the practical test held in May, 2000.
However, he was not issued roll number for the theory examinations which were to commence on 3152000 and was informed that the University has cancelled his admission.
3.
The petitioner's grievance is that after having allowed him to prosecute studies in first and second semesters against the seat earmarked for NRIs, the University could not cancel his admission and that too without giving action- oriented notice and opportunity of hearing.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been averred that the petitioner was never admitted on the seat of NRI.
According to respondent No. 1, he was admitted on the telephonic direction issued by Shri KK Dhir, the then Registrar of the University against payment seat.
He gave in writing (Annexure R1) dated 16.9.1999 that he be allowed to prosecute his studies at his own risk and responsibility subject to final approval of the University.
It has been further averred that the petitioner was allowed to take first semester examination on the basis of the Admit Card issued by the University, but he was not allowed to appear in the second semester examination on account of non-receipt of Admit Card.
In paragraph 5 of the written statement of respondent No. 1, it has been averred as under :-  "However, when the admit cards for the examination at the end of second semester were received it was discovered that admit card in respect of the petitioner had not been received.
The answering respondent did not inform the petitioner that his admission has been cancelled.
However, it was only informed that the admit card has not been received from the respondent No. 2 and that he would not be permitted to take examination of the second semester."
We have learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.
The petitioner has not controverted the unequivocal stand taken by the respondent No. 1 that he was not admitted against the seat earmarked for NRI, but was as per telephonic direction issued by the then Registrar of the University.
He has also not controverted the fact that he had undertaken to prosecute studies at his own risk and responsibility.
This shows that the petitioner was not admitted in the normal course on the basis of the merit secured in CET conducted by the University.
This must be the reason why the University cancelled his admission and refused to issue Admit Card for second semester examination.
In our opinion, the University did not commit any illegality by declining approval to the patently illegal action of the then registrar to secure admission of the petitioner by-passing the merit of other candidates and a writ in the nature of mandamus cannot be issued directing the respondents to indirectly regularise his admission because that would amount to conferring legitimacy to the illegality committed by the then Registrar of the University and respondent No. 1.
6.
We are further of the view the petitioner cannot invoke doctrine of estoppel for saving his provisional admission because he had undertaken the studies at his own risk and responsibility.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.