Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has filed this petition in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to absorb her in government service on compassionate ground in view of the policy of the State Government.
2.
The petitioner has averred that she is MA in Political Science and B.Ed also.
She got married to late Shri Varinder Singh Chauhan on February 16, 1987.
The husband of the petitioner was working as a Maths Master with the Haryana Education Department.
He joined the service as a Maths Master in Government High School, Sector-7, Faridabad on December 19, 1986.
A copy of the order dated December 15, 1986 passed by the District Education Officer, Faridabad is annexed with the petition as Annexure P-3.
Unfortunately.
The husband of the petitioner was murdered on September 3, 1990 while he was in service of the Haryana Government.
3.
The State of Haryana framed a policy which was circulated vide its letter dated December 22, 1970 wherein ex gratia and other facilities were granted to the families of government employees who die while in service.
It was decided by the State Government that one or more members of the family of the deceased employee will be considered for absorption in government service.
A copy of the instructions dated December 22, 1970 is annexed with the petition as Annexure P-5.
4.
The petitioner filed representation dated December 17, 1990 (Annexure P-6) before the Education Department that she be absorbed as a teacher.
At the time of the death of husband of the petitioner, she had the qualification of B.A.B.Ed.
The District Education Officer, Faridabad (respondent No. 3) vide its letter dated March 19, 1991 (Annexure P-7) recommended the case of the petitioner to the Director Secondary Education, Haryana (respondent No. 2).
No action was taken on the said recommendation.
A number of representations were filed, copies of which are annexed with the petition as Annexures P-9, P-10, P-11 and P-12.
5.
The petitioner has further relied on a 1993(3) SCT 15 (P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No. 3846 of 1994 titled Parmanand v. State of Haryana and others, wherein also an employee of the Haryana Government died while in service and the brother of that employee was appointed on compassionate ground.
A copy of the judgment dated May 10, 1994 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 3846 of 1994 is annexed with the petition as Annexure P-13.
6.
Notice of motion was issued.
7.
Written statement was filed.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the State.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated that there is no provision to absorb the family member of deceased employee.
He has further stated that it is admitted that the husband of the petitioner died while in service, but as he was working on ad hoc basis, thus, the wife of the petitioner is not entitled for any kind of pensionary and other benefits as per the policy (Annexure R-1) of the State Government.
Learned counsel has further stated that the husband of the petitioner was not a resident of the State of Haryana.
He was a resident of village Aligarh which is situated in Uttar Pradesh.
10.
He drew my attention to a government letter No. 1107-3 GS 11/72/10292 dated April 19, 1972 (Annexure R-1) wherein it has been stated that the benefit of employment, ex gratia and other pensionary benefits are to be granted only to the family member of the deceased employee working on regular basis and not on ad hoc basis.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the husband of the petitioner, late Shri Varinder Singh Chauhan, was a resident of State of Haryana and was an employee of the Government of Haryana.
Since this benefit is given to Haryana government employees who are working with the State of Haryana, thus, this cannot be denied to the petitioner.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to a judgment of this Court Vijay Kumar Vashishi v. State of Haryana, Civil Writ Petition No. 8408 of 1991 decided on August 12, 1991 and Kailash Chandra v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(2) SLR 646, wherein it was observed that the instructions of the State Government for appointment on compassionate grounds on account of death of government employee would equally apply to ad hoc employees.
13.
In the light of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed with the direction to the respondents to give employment to the petitioner from the date when the first representation was made by her to the State authorities within a period of two months from the date of passing of this order.
Petition allowed.