Hemant Gupta, J - Petitioner has sought issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing of order dated 16.2.2001, (Annexure P12) whereby petitioner has been held to be ineligible for promotion to the post of Work Experience Teacher.
2.
Petitioner has passed 10+2 examination and two year ITI diploma in the trade of Machinist Composite (Mechanical) and possesses National Trade Certificate.
Petitioner was appointed as Workshop Attendant on 10101994 after his name was sponsored by the employment exchange in Government High School, Surapur.
3.
As per Punjab State Education Class III (School cadre) Service Rules 1978 as amended in 1995, 75% posts are to be filled by direct recruitment and 25% posts are to be filled from amongst Workshop Attendants who fulfill the requisite qualifications as per appendix attached with Rules which reads as under :-  "WORK EXPERIENCE TEACHERS Essential - (i) Matric (ii) Two years certificate course from ITI or National Council of Vocational Training (NCVT) or National Apprenticeship Course (NAC) in Radio and TV Mechanic or +2 Vocational pass in R. & M. of Radio and TV/Mechanical Electrical Furniture Making trade Course from recognised State Board of Education.
Preferential - Three years Teaching/Practical working experience in the concerned trade."
4.
Petitioner claims that though he stands at serial No. 13 in the seniority list yet he is the senior-most eligible candidate for promotion to the post of Work Experience Teacher.
His name was recommended by the District Education Officer for promotion but no promotion in the District Nawanshahar was made although the promotions in all other districts were made to the post of Work Experience Teacher.
Since the respondents were not taking final decision, the petitioner has filed a writ petition No. 17397 of 2000 after serving a notice for consideration of his claim for promotion.
In pursuance of the directions of this Hon'ble Court to take a final decision on the representation filed by the petitioner, the District Education Officer passed an order on 16.2.2001 whereby it has been held that the petitioner is not eligible as he has not fulfilled the qualification as mentioned in paragraph 2 of the rules.
5.
The District Education Officer has held that the petitioner is possessing two year ITI diploma in Machinist trade and, thus, he does not fulfill the requirement of the rules by stating so :  "That the concerned petitioner Sh. Mohinder Singh, Workshop Attendant, Govt. Senior Sec. School, Banga (Nawan Shehar) possessed the qualification of Matric and two years ITI in Machinist trade so the concerned petitioner does not fulfill the required qualification for Work Experience Teacher as mentioned in para 2 of aforesaid rules.
It is further clarified that only those Matric two years ITI Workshop Attendants can be promoted as Work Experience Teacher under the rules who have passed Matric and ITI two years Course in Radio and TV Mechanic trade.
After going through of this the undersigned has come to the conclusion that the concerned petitioner is not entitled to promotion to the post of Work Experience Teacher.
The claim of concerned petitioner Sh. Mohinder Singh, Workshop Attendant for promotion as Works Experience Teacher is rejected."
6.
Mrs. Kapur contended that the petitioner has passed plus two examination and also completed the course of training from ITI Nawan Shehar and also passed the prescribed trade test in the trade of Machinist (C) (Annexure P.2).
It is, thus, contended that he possesses alternative qualification i.e. vocational pass course in the trade of Mechanical.
It has been further contended that the learned District Education Officer has misread the statutory qualification so as to recognise only two years course in Radio & TV Mechanic Trade to be eligible for the post.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, we are of the opinion that the learned District Education Officer has misread the rules.
A reading of the rules would show that the essential qualification for Work Experience Teacher is matric and two years certificate course from ITI or National Council of Vocational Training (NCVT) or National Apprenticeship Course (NAC) in Vocational pass in R&M of Radio and T.V.
Similarly, a candidate holding two years certificate course from ITI or NCVT or NAC either in the trade of Mechanical, Electrical or Furniture Making trade course are eligible to be promoted as Work Experience Teacher.
The petitioner is having two years course from NCVT in the trade of mechanical and thus, he is eligible for promotion.
8.
It is contended by the counsel for the petitioner that the persons holding certificate course in Carpenting namely Malkiat Singh, Balbir Singh and certificate course in electrical namely Harpreet Singh have been appointed in other districts.
9.
The stand of the State counsel that these persons were appointed by way of direct recruitment and not by promotion is not tenable in law inasmuch as the essential qualification for eligibility for promotion as well as for direct recruitment is the same.
10.
Thus, the finding recorded by the District Education Officer that the petitioner is not eligible being not qualified for the course of Work Experience Teacher is misreading of rule and is not sustainable.
11.
In view of the above, we allow the present writ petition and set aside the order dated 16.2.2001 (Annexure P12) and hold that the petitioner is eligible for promotion to the post of Work Experience Teacher.
Therefore, the respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Work Experience Teacher within a period of three months.
Petition allowed.