RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Shri Swaran Singh Jandu has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by the petitioner that the orders dated 2982001 (Annexure P-12 and P-15) be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined as a Sectional Officer in the Department of Town and Country Planning, Punjab on 1721966.
He was confirmed as Sectional Officer.
Thereafter he was promoted as Planning Assistant on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
25101972.
The State of Punjab established Water Supply and Sewerage Board under the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1976 for the purpose of regulation and development of drinking water supply and sewerage in the State of Punjab.
A post of Sub Divisional Engineer was advertised by the Board.
Since the petitioner fulfilled the experience and qualifications for the said post, therefore, he applied for the same through proper channel and his application was duly forwarded by the Chief Town Planner, Punjab vide memo dated 441978.
He was selected and appointed by the Board.
He submitted an application for relieving to join the new post.
Accordingly, he was relieved from his duties on 3111978 enabling him to join the Board.
He joined the Board on 4111978.
According to him, there is no break in his service.
He served the Punjab Government from 1721966 to 3111978.
While working in the Board the amount deducted by the State of Punjab on account of General Provident Fund from 1721966 to 3111978 was transferred in the Board by the Town and Country Planning Department vide letter dated 751982.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Sub Divisional Officer (Asstt.
Corporation Engineer), in Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana by way of transfer.
It was a case of appointment by transfer in the said Municipal Corporation.
Then he was promoted as Corporation Engineer and then Superintending Engineer-cum-Additional Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
He retired on 3152001 after attaining the age of superannuation.
On 28.7.1994, a notification was issued by the State of Punjab to regulate the pension and general provident fund to the employees of the Municipal Corporations in the State and the rules known as "The Punjab Municipal Corporation Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994" were framed for the purpose.
These rules were applicable to all the employees of the Corporations who were appointed on or after 1.4.1990 on whole time regular basis and those who were working immediately before 1.4.1990 on whole time regular basis and opted for these rules.
The case set by the petitioner is that he was appointed in the Corporation vide order dated 24.9.1993.
The said rules became applicable to him automatically.
According to the petitioner, as per Rule 2(k), which defines "Qualifying Service", he is entitled to the benefit of that service which he rendered in the Department of Town and Country Planning, Punjab from 1721966 to 3111978 when he was selected and appointed in the Water Supply and Sewerage Board.
Further, the case of the petitioner is that since he has completed qualifying service, which means any service rendered under the Punjab Government, any Improvement Trust, a Committee or any other public sector undertaking immediately before joining the service, therefore, he is entitled to the pensionary benefits for the period starting from 1721966 to 3111978 when he served in the Town and Country Planning Department.
So much so, the petitioner deposited a sum of Rs. 58,802/-, the pension contribution for the services rendered by him in the Town and Country Planning Department and this amount was accepted by the Municipal Corporation.
Therefore, he is entitled to the benefit of said service.
But, on the contrary, the respondent authorities have passed order Annexure P-12 vide which the earlier decision dated 1532000 vide which the Government had regularised the period of service of the petitioner for pensionary benefits has been withdrawn.
So much so, the Government had passed another order Annexure P-15 vide which he was directed to deposit a sum of Rs. 1,24,964/- which was paid to him on account of gratuity for the service rendered by him in the Town and Country Planning Department.
In short, the case of the petitioner is that by virtue of Rule 2(k), which defines qualifying service, which, according to the petitioner, means the service rendered under the Corporation and includes any service rendered under the Punjab Government, any Improvement Trust, a Committee or any other public sector undertaking immediately before joining the service, is liable to be counted for the purpose of qualifying service.
Therefore, the impugned orders Annexures P-12 and P-15 are liable to be quashed.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and a separate written statement was also filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
The stand taken up by respondents No. 1 to 3 is that the pension scheme for the employees of urban local bodies such as Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils and Improvement Trusts was introduced w.e.f.
1.4.1990 for which three sets of pension rules for each of the three categories/cadres were notified in the official gazette on 2971994.
The petitioner is covered under the Punjab Municipal Corporation Employees pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994.
Under these rules a pension fund was created with the transfer of employees' share of contributions along with the interest accrued thereon standing in the contributory provident fund accounts to the credit of the employees opting for the Pension Rules, 1994 and thereafter the Corporation was required to deposit pension contribution @ 10% of basic pay which has since been increased to 20%.
As per the proviso below Rule 1(3), Rule 5 and 8(2) read with Rule 13.32 (b) of CSR Vol. II, an employee who is subscriber to CPF opts for Pension Rules, 1994 shall be eligible for pension provided the amount of corporation contributions with interest thereon standing to his credit in such CPF shall be credited to the pension fund.
He shall in exchange be entitled to count towards pension such part of the period during which he subscribed to such CPF.
As such the service under the Punjab Government which was not covered by the CPF rules as provided in Chapter XIV of CSR Vol.-II does not qualify for pension under the Pension Rules, 1994.
Moreover, at the time of the joining the post of SDO in the Punjab Water and Sewerage Board the petitioner had resigned from the Government service which stood forfeited under Rule 75(1) of CSR, Vol.I, Part-I.
The petitioner is misinterpreting the provisions of Clause (g) and (i) of Rule 2 of Pension Rules, 1994.
In short, the defence of the answering respondents is that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefits of the period when he was the employee of the Town and Country Planning Department and secondly when he joined the Sewerage Board after resigning from the previous post.
4.
A separate written statement was filed in behalf of respondent No. 4.
It is the categorical stand of this respondent that the petitioner was relieved from his duties from Town and Country Planning Department on 3111978 after- noon since his resignation was accepted by the Chief Town Planner, Punjab.
The joining of the petitioner with the Sewerage Board is a matter of record.
The petitioner was appointed by way of transfer with the answering respondent vide order dated 24.9.1993.
He opted for pension as per the provisions of the Pension Rules, 1994 which came into force w.e.f.
1.4.1990.
The petitioner deposited a sum of Rs. 58,802/- as pension contribution for the service rendered by him in the Town and Country Planning Department from 1721966 to 3111978.
Rule 8(4) lays down that while sanctioning the pension, the sanctioning authority shall ensure that the contribution of the employees for the period reckoned for pension has been duly credited to the fund.
Since the Town and Country Planning Department did not deposit the pension contribution with the answering respondent, the petitioner at his own deposited the said amount.
As per Rule 2(k) of the Pension Rules "qualifying service" means the service rendered under a Corporation for which an employee is paid from the Corporation funds and shall include any service rendered under the Govt. of Punjab, any Improvement Trust, a Committee or any other Public Sector Undertaking immediately before joining the service.
The term `immediately before joining the service' has not been defined in the Pension Rules.
Rule 14 of the Pension Rules says that if any question as to the interpretation of these rules arises, the Govt. shall decide the same and the decision so taken shall be final.
The decision dated 2982001 (Annexure P-12) has become final vide which the earlier decision Annexure P-7 was withdrawn and the petitioner was asked to deposit the amount paid to him in excess.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has relied upon the Pension Rules and submitted that as per Rule 2(k), which defines qualifying service, the petitioner is entitled to the benefits of his previous service which he rendered in the Town and Country Planning Department from 1721966 to 3111978.
Let us examine whether this submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is acceptable.
Rule 2(k) of the Pension Rules lays down as under :-  "Qualifying service means the service rendered under Corporation for which an employee is paid from the Corporation funds and shall include any service rendered under the Government of Punjab, any Improvement Trust, a Committee or any other public sector undertaking immediately before joining the service."
7.
In the present case, first of all, the petitioner joined the service of the Town and Country Planning Department where he served from 1721966 to 3111978.
Then he was appointed and employed in the Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Punjab.
This is the case of the petitioner himself.
In para No. 5 of the writ petition the petitioner himself has alleged that he was selected and appointed by the Board.
He submitted an application for relieving to join the new post.
In what manner he has joined the service of the Board is clear from the written statement of respondents No. 1 to 3 in which it is clearly mentioned that the petitioner resigned from the Town and Country Planning Department and joined the new department on his fresh appointment.
In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot take the benefit of the service from 1721966 to 3111978 when he served the Town and Country Planning Department.
This is the intention of Rule 75 of CSR Vol.
I, Part-I.
The petitioner resigned from the Town and Country Planning Department because the service under the Board offered greener pastures i.e. better service prospects and as such his resignation from the government service was not in public interest for appointment in Board through open compensation.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot take the benefit of his previous service from 1721966 to 3111978.
8.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Division Bench of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Smt. Champa Soni, 2001(4) SCT 219.
This judgment is not helpful to the petitioner.
In the cited case the first department in which the petitioner was working was abolished and the employees of that department were absorbed in the Department of Panchayat and Social Welfare.
In these circumstances, it was held by the Hon'ble Division Bench that previous service of the employees should be counted.
But in the present case the petitioner himself resigned from the Town and Country Planning Department.
His appointment in the Board was a fresh appointment.
The petitioner had already taken the benefit of his previous service from the previous employer, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of previous service.
The second judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is Prof Dr. RR Sharma (Retd.)
v. Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, 2000(1) SCT 565.
This case is also not helpful to the petitioner because the cited case was a case of transfer and with this background it was observed by the High Court that the retiree cannot be denied full pension either for want of qualifying service or for non-contribution of earlier employers.
I have stated above that it is a case of new appointment as the petitioner earlier resigned and took a fresh assignment when he started serving in the Sewerage Board.
It is the pleaded case of the petitioner.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition.
The same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.