SS Sudhalkar, J (Oral) - The petitioner who is working as Sanskrit teacher has prayed for regularization of her services, the prayer which is rejected by the respondents.
The petitioner is BA with Sanskrit as elective subject and BEd.
with Sanskrit as one of the teaching subjects.
2.
The qualifications prescribed for the post of Sanskrit teacher is Shastri, while the petitioner has no such qualification.
It is further contended that the petitioner has taken General English and passed BA examination from Merrut University which has not been considered by the Government of Haryana as an equivalent qualification.
It is also contended that the petitioner has passed BA examination from Merrut University in 1970 with Economics, Hindi and Sanskrit and BEd.
from Merrut University on 13.1.1973.
The petitioner has produced Annexure P-9, an extract of the booklet published by Kurukshetra University in July, 1983 regarding the equivalence of examinations/degrees/diplomas of Universities.
According to Annexure P.9 the item at 65 shows that BA of Merrut University is equivalent to BA of Kurukshetra University.
Annexure P-10 dated 18.3.1975 is regarding recognition of various qualifications for appointments.
It is mentioned in Annexure P10 that degrees and diplomas issued by the recognised Universities and High , Higher Secondary Boards established by the State shall be recognised ipso facto.
This is a letter from the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana in Education Department addressed to all Heads of the Departments.
At annexures P1, its Appendix B of the Haryana State Education School Cadre (Group `C') Service Rules, 1998 which shows that the academic qualifications of OT and Sanskrit is equivalent to BT BEd.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject.
Though Annexure P-11 is of the year 1975, it is not shown that on the date from which the petitioner seeks regularization, these equation of the qualifications are not there.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the judgment in the case of Santosh Kumari v. State of Haryana, 1996(4) SCT 337 (P&H)(DB) : 1997(2) Recent Service Judgments 247, which is a judgment of a learned Single Judge of this court in which it has been held that the person possessing qualification of BA, BEd.
with Sanskrit as one of the subjects in BA Classes have been considered to be more suitable than persons possessing the qualification of Shastri (Honours) with OT The petitioner passed BA in 1970 and BEd.
on 1311979.
The petitioner did have the abovementioned qualification on 111980.
3.
As a result, the petitioner is held to be qualified for purposes of regularization for the post of Sanskrit teacher.
This writ petition is, therefore, allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the regularization of the petitioner with effect from 111980.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
If the petitioner is entitled to the monetary benefits, the same shall be restricted to 3 years and 2 months prior to the filing of this writ petition which was filed on 1191990.
The needful shall be done within three months.
Petition allowed.