Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - By this order, we dispose of C.W.P.
No. 6847 of 1996, Manoj Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(1) SCT 535 (P&H).
and CWP No7625 of 1996 Ashok Kumar and others v. State of Haryana and others, as common question of law and fact is involved in both these writ petitions and the facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 6847 of 1996.
2.
The petitioners, who remained unsuccessful in the selection for the posts of Junior Engineers have filed the present writ petitions against the respondents including the selectees and have prayed for quashing of the selection process for the various post of Junior Engineers which were advertised as back as in the year 1996.
3.
The brief facts of the case are that 126 posts of Junior Engineers were advertised in the year 1996.
Selection of 226 posts of Junior Engineers were made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board in the month of March 1996 and in the month of March 1996 itself the letters of appointment were issued to respondents No. 3 to 113.
Now the petitioners have given the challenge to the said selection after participation on the ground inter alia that the posts were filled beyond the advertised posts; that the criteria adopted by the Board was arbitrary; that the members of the Selection Board were not independent; marks were awarded in an arbitrary manner for the favoured candidates and all recognised procedures have been given good bye in the process of selection.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Three sets of written statements were filed; one by respondents No. 1 and 2 and the other by respondent No. 3 and the third by respondents No. 10 to 122.
5.
So far as the stand of respondents No. 1 and 2 is concerned, it is stated that these respondents issued appointment letters to 129 candidates only consisting of 55 General Category candidates 13 Scheduled Castes Group A, 13 Scheduled Castes Group-B, 21 Backward Classes Group-A, 14 Backward Classes Group-B and 13 Ex-servicemen vide order dated 3031996, 1641996 and 19111996 respectively strictly in order of merit.
Against the requisition of 52 candidates of General Category, 55 candidates have been given appointments on 3031996 and after this date no appointment was given to any candidate of general category.
The High Court placed restrictions on appointment beyond the advertised posts on 1351996, whereas, all the three candidates of General Category in excess of the advertised posts had already been given appointment on 3031996 and they had joined on 941996, 8.4.96 and 241996 respectively.
Moreover, the posts were available and the names of these three persons were also in the select list.
With this defence, the respondents prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
6.
Respondent No. 3 took the stand that all the candidates were recommended on merit.
Respondent No. 3 denied that the Selection Board formulated selection criteria at its own level without any power.
In the present case, no statutory criteria has been provided under the rules.
Therefore, the Selection Board evolved a suitable criteria for the purpose of selection.
The Board has the power to do so.
A reasonable criteria can always be adopted by the Board with regard to the method of recruitment and the principles to be followed in making the appointment to Class III and Class IV posts under the State Government.
It was also pleaded by respondent No. 3 that petitioners are estopped from filing the present writ petition.
According to respondent No. 3, the criteria evolved by it was reasonable.
The marks assigned in the criteria on division basis, were perfectly reasonable and valid justifying its mode of selection.
Respondent No. 3 prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
7.
A joint stand was taken by respondents No. 10 to 122 and they have also adopted the stand of respondent No. 3 by urging that the criteria formulated by the Selection Board was reasonable and no bias has been shown by respondent No. 3 vis-a-vis any candidate.
They have been selected on merit depending on their performance.
At any rate, after their joining the duty they should not be dislodged from their respective posts.
8.
We have heard Shri R.K. Malik, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioners, Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, DAG, Haryana, appearing for respondents No. 1 to 9, Shri JK Sibal, Sr. Advocate, appearing for respondents No. 10 to 123, 125 to 138 and Shri Raman B Garg, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 124 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
9.
This writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the short ground that the private respondents are the selectees of the year 1996.
They are performing their duties to the satisfaction of the department for the last five years.
At this juncture, in a public interest litigation, to dislodge the private respondents from the posts, will be a case of extreme hardship and we are not inclined to invoke the jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
10.
Be that as it may, we have also considered the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the selection is beyond advertised posts; that the element of partiality has been shown; that arbitrary marks have been awarded but we do not find any gross irregularity in the selection.
The three posts, beyond the advertised quota, were filled prior to the interim order and moreover, those appointees were recommended by the Selection Board.
Marginal increase in the present case having regard to the peculiar facts, should not be interfered with at this stage after a lapse of five years.
Though certain other irregularities have been pointed out by the petitioners as a result of inspection of record, yet we do not find them to be so gross as to quash the selections at this stage.
11.
In this view of the matter, we are not inclined to accept these writ petitions and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.