RL Aanand, J - Shr Kuldip Singh Sandhu, Ex-Managing Director, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that directions be given to the respondents to release him the gratuity.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Batala Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd, Batala in December 1963 as Chief Chemist and at that time the rules constituting common cadre of employees had not been framed.
After putting in seven years service, on account of increments earned by him the salary of the petitioner (sic).
When his case for deduction of provident fund on his full salary beyond the limit was put up in the meeting of the Board of Directors of Batala Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd, Batala on 14111970, the same was approved.
Later on, respondent No. 1 constituted a common cadre of employees working in different cooperative sugar mills in the State in the year 1981 and the petitioner was transferred to Morinda Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd, Morinda and then to Batala in the year 1982.
The respondents had been deducting the provident fund from the salary of the petitioner.
Finally, the petitioner retired from service and was re-employed on contractual basis for a period of one year and subsequently the period was extended for another two years.
According to the petitioner, as per the common cadre rules an employee shall be granted gratuity equal to half months pay for each completed year of qualifying service subject to a maximum of 15 months.
On retirement of the petitioner, which took place on 30.4.1990, he was entitled to the gratuity amounting to Rs. 1,15,024/-.
He was issued a cheque for a sum of Rs. 26,315/- which was received by respondent No. 1 from the sugar mill with further assurance that the balance amount of gratuity would be released to him as and when the same is received from the other sugar mills.
The petitioner was also given an assurance that the gratuity would be paid to him after receiving the respective share of sugar mills.
But instead of releasing the balance payment of gratuity, the cheque of part payment of gratuity was also dishonoured.
The petitioner made enquiries why the amount has been withheld and he was told that the same has been withheld on account of certain clarifications required for payment of provident fund.
The petitioner made several representations.
The petitioner further alleges that an amount of Rs. 68,610.09 has been released to him on 16.12.1991 and balance amount of Rs. 46,414/- has not been paid.
He gave a demand notice dated 9.6.1993 but to no effect.
Thus he is entitled to this amount for which directions be given to the respondents.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed and a preliminary objection was taken that the share capital of the members of respondent No. 1 is Rs. 90,16,000/- and the share capital of the Government is only Rs. 20 lacs and as such out of the total share capital of Rs. 1,10,16,000/- the share of the Government is only Rs. 20 lacs which is less than even 20%.
Therefore, the present writ is not maintainable and the remedy of the petitioner lies under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 and under the Employees Provident Fund Misc.
Provisions Act, 1952.
Further it was pointed out by way of preliminary objection that a disputed question of fact has arisen in this case and therefore the proper remedy for the petitioner is not to file the writ petition but to file a civil suit.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 was not enforceable on 2121963 and, therefore, any resolution passed by any cooperative society for the benefit of the petitioner earlier to the enforcement of the Payment of Gratuity Act has no binding force.
The Board of Directors of the Batala Cooperative Sugar Mills was not competent to give any sanction for the continuation of contribution of provident fund.
Thus the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner wanted to calculate the gratuity from 2121963 by invoking the provisions of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 which was not enforceable at the relevant time.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is entitled to the amount as claimed by him.
The learned counsel relied upon the various resolutions passed by the Board of Directors of various Sugar Mills where the petitioner had been serving and it was also submitted by the leaned counsel for the petitioner that at one point of time the petitioner was given to understand that the remaining amount shall be remitted to him on receipt of the shares form other sugar mills where the petitioner had been working from time to time.
A cheque was issued in favour of the petitioner but it bounced.
Therefore, the respondents are liable to pay the remaining amount of gratuity.
6.
The submissions of the learned counsel for the portioner cannot be accepted.
Firstly, a disputed question of fact has arisen in this case with regard to the entitlement of the petitioner to the gratuity.
Moreover, the amount of gratuity is to be paid according to rules and law and the service of the petitioner from 1963 to 1972 could not be taken into consideration for the purpose of calculating the amount of gratuity when he was not governed by the relevant provisions.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.