KA Abdul Gafoor, J - Certain facts are not in dispute.
The petitioner and respondent Nos. 4 onwards and others were applicants to the post of Principal of an institution run by the third respondent, an authority coming within the meaning of `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The requirements regarding qualification, age and experience are governed by Ext.
P1 Govt. Order.
Those are as follows :  1) MA Degree with minimum Second Class in Psychology/Sociology.
2) Degree in Education/Diploma in Guidance and Counselling.
3) Ten years experience in the rehabilitation of the handicapped.
Desirable : Diploma in mental retardation.
4) Age above 35 years.
Ext.
P2 is the notification, which reiterates these requirements mentioned in Ext.
P1.
Ext.
P2 does not speak anything about relaxation from any of those requirements.
Against the post notified, the fourth respondent is appointed.
His appointment is under challenge solely on the ground that the 4th respondent does not satisfy the requirement regarding the qualifications, experience and age contained in Exts.
P1 or P2.
2.
Admittedly by the 4th respondent, he does not have degree in Education/Diploma in Guidance and Counselling.
According to him, all the subjects in Diploma in Guidance are covered by the syllabus of BA Degree in Psychology.
But, it has to be borne in mind that the first qualification required is MA Degree in Psychology/Sociology.
It was in spite of that, a second qualification of Degree in Education/Diploma in Guidance and Counselling is also prescribed.
This is sufficient to denote that one should invariably possess MA Degree in Psychology/Sociology as well as Degree in Education/Diploma in Guidance and Counselling.
Therefore, that contention of the 4th respondent does not stand.
Thus, the 4th respondent does not satisfy the requirement of the second qualification, admittedly.
There is also dispute as regards whether the 4th respondent satisfies the third qualification of 10 years experience in rehabilitation of the handicapped.
Anyhow, I am not deciding on that as it is immaterial in the light of so finding concerning the second qualification.
3.
Another requirement to be satisfied by a candidate in terms of Exts.
P1 and P2 is that he should be above the age of 35 years, obviously because the post notified is of Principal.
4.
The 4th respondent is, admittedly, below 35 years of age.
Thus, he does not satisfy that requirement as well, but, it is contended that taking into account the performance of the 4th respondent, relaxation from the requirement of age is given to him by Government.
His contention also cannot be accepted for two reasons.
At first, there is no provision for relaxation of age in Ext.
P1 prescribing such essential requirement.
When an executive order prescribes the qualification and other requirement for the post, when the order does not specify anything regarding relaxation and when there are no other general rules providing for such relaxation from age, the appointing authority is disabled from relaxing that qualification.
Secondly, even if the appointing authority is enabled to relax that requirement, it is incumbent on the appointing authority to mention that intention in the notification, so that others, perhaps more suitable and eligible than the 4th respondent, also can submit their application.
The purpose of the very notification for appointment in public authorities is to ensure quality of opportunity as guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
In such circumstances, it may be possible that a person satisfying all the requirements of qualifications mentioned as 1 to 3 and better than the 4th respondent, but below the age of 35 years might not have applied.
If relaxation is made mention of in the notification, such a candidate could have submitted his application.
Now, a relaxation is given beyond the notification to the 4th respondent, who did not satisfy the requirements in Exts.
P1 and P2.
It will offend the right for equal consideration guaranteed to other qualified hands.
It has been held in Swaran Lata v. Union of India, 1979(3) SCC 165 : 1980 Lab IC NOC 8 that  "..................No relaxation in qualification can be made when an advertisement has duly been issued inviting applications and the persons possessing the qualifications advertised as prescribed by the rules, are available and have submitted their applications.
If a relaxation has to be made, there is a duty cast to re-advertise the post.
It is more so when the notification does not speak of the intention to grant relaxation.
This decision squarely applies to the requirements regarding age as well.
The Full Bench of the Delhi High Court in Kuldip Chand v. Union of India, 1970 Serv LR 406 held that in the absence of indication in the notification that persons not conforming to the requirements of qualification also can apply, any relaxation without a fresh notification indicating the intention for relaxation would offend the rights guaranteed in article 16(1) of the Constitution of India of others who would have been eligible according to the relaxed standards.
Therefore, that relaxation claimed cannot improve the case of the 4th respondent."
5.
Thus, it is proved conclusively that the 4th respondent is not qualified, to the post of Principal and that he does not conform to the requirement regarding age either in terms of Exts.
P1 or P2.
Consequently, his appointment is bad.
It is quashed.
Consequences follow.
The original petition is allowed as above.
Petition allowed.