VK Bali, J - Jaswinder Kaur Uppal, a Block Education Officer employed by the Government of Haryana through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash her transfer order Annexure P-2 said to have been passed by the Government and respondent No. 2 Director Secondary Education, Haryana.
2.
The facts on which the relief asked for are sought to rest reveal that petitioner joined as SS Mistress on 4.7.1973 and at the time when she filed the present petition, she was appointed as Block Education Officer.
It is the case of the petitioner that the Government of Haryana has banned transfer for one year w.e.f.
3031999.
The decision was taken by the Council of Ministers.
Respondents No. 1 and 2, however, transferred her from Narwana to Ghaso Kalan (Jind) as Head Mistress.
It is further pleaded that it was a case of out of turn transfer which was unjust and illegal inasmuch as the same was made on the request of Nafe Singh who wanted to joined B.E.O.
Narwana.
The said Nafe Singh was close to Ram Bhaj M.L.A.
of HVP and exerted lot of influence in the corridors of power.
Nafe Singh made a request which was accepted by the respondent and on the recommendation made by Ram Bhaj MLA and to make a ground of transfer out of turn, a complaint by fictitious name was fabricated by the MLA in collusion with Nafe Singh.
The MLA was also annoyed with the petitioner because the petitioner did not accept the illegal recommendation of the said MLA.
It is then pleaded that petitioner is single lady of 51 years and has 75 years old mother to look after.
The mother is suffering from heart diseases and remained admitted in the Civil Hospital, Narwana, for a month.
No doctor is available at the new place of posting of the petitioner.
It is not possible for the petitioner to shift her mother from Narwana to Ghaso Kalan and it is not possible for the petitioner as well to shuttle down every day at the place of her present posting.
3.
When the matter was before the DB at the motion stage on oral prayer made by the Counsel for the petitioner, he has allowed to join Nafe Singh and Ram Bhaj as respondents 4 and 5 respectively.
Amended memorandum of parties was filed in the due course of time.
4.
Three separate written statements; one by respondents No. 1 to 3, another by respondent No. 4 and yet another by respondent No. 5 have been filed in opposing the case of the petitioner.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3, it has been pleaded that the petitioner was transferred on administrative grounds in public interest.
She was working as Block Education Officer, Narwana and was transferred to the post of Headmaster, Govt. High School, Ghaso Kalan (Jind) on the basis of complaint received in the office of respondent No. 1.
On receipt of the complaint, an enquiry was conducted by the District Primary Education Officer, Jind.
In the enquiry report, copy whereof has been placed on record as Annexure R-I, it was proved that the petitioner collected money from students as well as from primary teachers for different purposes, but no account was maintained by the petitioner and it was evident from these facts that being an officer, the financial irregularities were made by the petitioner.
In addition to this, for the year 1997, the petitioner was placed under suspension on receipt of complaint from Shri Surinder Singh Parmar, Advocate, Narwana.
She did not receive the suspension orders knowingly and remained on the post of Block Education Officer until reinstatement.
Thus, she did not obey the orders of the higher authorities.
It has, however, been admitted that the petitioner was transferred on the basis of complaint made against her.
The allegations of mala fide have been denied.
Respondents 4 and 5 in the separate written statements filed on their behalf have also denied allegations of mala fide made against them.
5.
Counsel representing the petitioner vehemently contends that it is admitted position that the petitioner was transferred on the basis of complaint but the said complaint was filed by one Darpok Singh who did not exist.
As a matter of fact, this complaint was manipulated so that the petitioner is transferred and Nafe Singh respondent No. 4 is accommodated.
In so far as transfers order Annexure P-2 is concerned, it is no doubt true that only two transfers were effected on 751999; whereas petitioner was posted at Ghaso Kalan (Jind), Nafe Singh swapped place with petitioner Jaswinder Kaur where she was posted at that time as B.E.O.
Narwana (Jind).
The respondents have themselves placed on record the inquiry report which was on the complaint made by Darpok Singh wherein it is clearly mentioned that complainant Darpok Singh was not available and that one fake Darpok Singh lodged the complaint.
It is interesting to note that after referring to various charges that were made, statements made by students, teachers and petitioner herself on the said charges, District Primary Education Officer, Jind concluded as follows :  "I conclude that this complaint has been lodged by some people under a fake name of Darpok Singh whereas there is no person of this name in Narwana.
Preparing progress report, conducting 3rd and 4th class examination at the block level are good steps taken by Block Education Officer, Narwana for the purpose of qualitative improvement in Education.
It is known through reliable sources that the amount allegedly collected was not that much and whatever amount was collected was utilized as well.
But the negligence has been shown by not recording income and expenditure.
The report is submitted for further necessary action."
6.
While dealing with the various charges in the earlier part of the inquiry report, it has nowhere been mentioned that which is that income and expenditure which has not been recorded.
On the charges referred to above, it rather appears that she was not held guilty of any one of these.
It has certainly not been specifically held anywhere that the petitioner is guilty of any charge as such.
In ultimate analysis, the petitioner has been appreciated having taken good steps for the purpose of qualitative improvement in education.
7.
No doubt, the employer is well within his right to transfer an employee on a receipt of a complaint but if the inquiry is made and the same turns in favour of an employee, surely, such a complaint cannot be made the base for a transfer.
It is admitted position that the petitioner came to be transferred only on account of complaint reference whereof has been given above.
The Inquiry Officer only recorded that the said complaint was made by a fictitious person and no Darpok Singh was at all available.
It was a fake name.
Despite the report of Primary Education Officer, Jind, if petitioner was still transferred, the assertion of the petitioner that it was done at the instance of respondents No. 4 and 5 cannot be styled to be imaginary or fake.
There is, however, no need to give a definite finding on this issue but for to reiterate that vide impugned orders it is Nafe Singh respondent No. 4 only who swapped place with the petitioner but inasmuch as the very basis of transfer has been found to be false, this Court is of the view that the petitioner would deserve relief in the present case.
The impugned order of transferring petitioner dated 751999 is, thus, quashed and it is directed that she shall be posted from where she was transferred i.e. at Narwana.
Inasmuch as no interim direction was passed in this case, the said direction be complied forthwith.
Before I may part with this order, I would like to mention that petitioner can be transferred else where as and when the respondents might think and, in particular, when general transfers are ordered.
Her order of transfer has been quashed on the grounds as fully detailed above but does not mean that, on administrative ground, she can never be posted out from the place where she has been asked to join now.
The writ petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 2,000/-.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.