OP Sharma, J - The only question of law that arises in this case is whether the petitioner has been dismissed from the service in accordance with law and the rules applicable to the conduct of enquiry.
The admitted facts of the case are that the petitioner was recruited as a constable in Central Industrial Security Force (hereinafter CISF) in the year 1971.
While posted in Salal Hydro Electric Project, Jyotipuram, he proceeded on seven days medical rest with effect from 24.6.93 which was extended upto 28893.
He did not report for duty after expiry of the leave and remained absent without leave.
Since he failed to resume duty, the departmental enquiry was held and he was dismissed from service by order dated 18294 passed by respondent No. 2.
His appeal against the order of removal from service was partly allowed by respondent-1 by substituting compulsory retirement from service by order dated 17594.
2.
The petitioner challenges the order mainly on the ground that the enquiry was held in his absence as no show-cause notice was served upon him before imposing punishment.
The order of compulsory retirement is challenged on the ground that it also reduces the pension and the gratuity which amounts to double punishment.
3.
Respondents have controverted the averment that the petitioner was not informed of the enquiry or before the punishment was imposed because according to them he was not only directed to resume duty, but was also served with the charge-sheet of proposed punishment of removal from service.
He, however, did not respond to these notices and, therefore, the disciplinary authority proceeded with the enquiry in his absence.
4.
The contention of Mr. Salaria is that the petitioner was neither informed of the grounds of holding enquiry nor served with the charge-sheet in the absence of which punishment imposed is illegal.
He also argued that it was mandatory for the respondents to have given him show-cause notice after the conclusion of the enquiry before passing the final order, but even this rule has not been observed.
He also argued that the respondents should have ensured his service before proceeding with the enquiry because his service before proceeding with the enquiry because he has been suffering from mental disorder and heart ailment which prevented him from resuming duty.
The contention of Mr. Sawhney, however, is that failure of the petitioner to resume duty despite notice left the respondents with no option, but to hold departmental enquiry.
Since he did not respond to the charge-sheet framed against him and the notice proposing punishment of removal, the disciplinary authority imposed the punishment of removal from service which was reduced by the appellate authority to that of compulsory retirement with reduced pension.
Since the order of compulsory retirement with reduced pension does not suffer from any infirmity, the petition according to him is liable to be dismissed.
5.
The question involved for consideration is whether the petitioner was absent from duty and if so the enquiry was conducted in accordance with the rules.
It is admitted by the petitioner that he did not apply for leave or intimate about the reason for his absence with effect from 29993 to 8.11.93.
According to the respondents he did not resume duty even after he was asked to do so vide notice dated 7.10.93 which was sent to him at his family quarter No. D-337 at Jyotipuram.
According to the report of the official who went to deliver the call-up notice, he was not found at his place though his family members were informed.
Since he did not resume duty, charge sheet was issued to him on 9.11.93, but as he was absent from the quarter, so its copy was pasted on the outer door of his quarter on 241194 asking him to submit his reply within ten days.
Since he did not comply, the authority concerned appointed Inspector KK Tyagi, as the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer also issued notice to petitioner for attending the enquiry, but the notices were returned by the postal authorities with remarks that the quarter was always found locked when the postman visited for delivery of the letter.
The Enquiry Officer made another attempt by sending a call-up notice dated 17194 both at his quarter and also at his permanent place of residence.
While notice sent on the address of his quarter was returned with the endorsement that he has left without address the other notice was returned with the endorsement that he had left for duty.
All these three notices dated 31.12.93, 7194 and 17194 issued by the Enquiry Officer are annexed with the counter-affidavit.
After failing to get any response from the petitioner, the Enquiry Officer held the enquiry and found the charge of unauthorised absence established against him.
Finally, the enquiry report as well as documents relied upon by him were again despatched to the petitioner, but these were also returned with the endorsement that the addressee had left without the address.
So both the disciplinary authority as well as Enquiry Officer did everything possible to inform the petitioner about the proposed enquiry.
The charge-sheet was properly served upon him, but his absence from the place of ordinary residence and failure of his family members to inform him had left the Enquiry Officer and the disciplinary authority with no option, but to proceed with the enquiry in his absence.
In such circumstances nothing more was required to be done because Articles 311 only provides for giving sufficient opportunity to explain the conduct.
Once the opportunity is afforded, it is upto the delinquent to avail the same.
Since he has not availed of the opportunity afforded to him the question is whether the mandate of Article 311 is complied.
In the case of Shahoodul Haque v. Registrar Co-operative Societies, Bihar, AIR 1974 SC 1896 the facts were as under :-  "3.......It is stated in the counter-affidavit that the communication sent to him by regd.
post was returned as he could not be found.
After that two other communications dated 591964 were sent to him asking him to explain his conduct, but he did not care to reply to them.
Hence, he had to be removed from service for having left his post of duty without any authority for a very long period.
The appellant did not attempt to explain his omissions satisfactorily even in his affidavits filed in the High Court...." On these facts their Lordships held as under :-  "4..... After having been taken through the assertions made by both sides, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that even if the appellant was being punished, so that Article 311 could apply, he had been in the circumstances of the case, given sufficient opportunity to explain his conduct.
He had failed to avail of that opportunity.
It could not, therefore, be said that the requirements of natural justice or of Article 311 of the Constitution had been contravened.
In any case, on the facts before us, we think that it will be useless to afford any further opportunity to the appellant to show cause why he should not be removed from service.
The undenied and un-deniable fact that the appellant had actually abandoned his post of duty for an exceedingly long period, without sufficient grounds for his absence, is so glaring that giving him further opportunity to disprove what he practically admits could serve no useful purpose.
It could not benefit him or make any difference to the order which could be and has been passed against him.
It would only prolong his agony."
6.
So the petitioner had been provided sufficient opportunity to explain his conduct, but he failed to avail the same.
So no fault can be found with the enquiry.
7.
The next question is whether the punishment awarded by the appellate authority is commensurate with the proved charge of mis-conduct.
The petitioner has been in service for more than 20 years and it is admitted by him that he has been suffering both from some heart ailment as well as mental dis-order.
The appellate authority considered the charge of absence and decided to modify the same.
Compulsory retirement from service in this case has been under rule-40 of the Central Civil Service Pension Rules.
Since the petitioner has been punished on the basis of enquiry, therefore, the order of compulsory retirement with reduced pension speaks of the judicious approach adopted by Shri AS Gill, the then Deputy Inspector General of the Force.
The order being quite fair and just requires no interference because the punishment is quite commensurate with the proved charge of misconduct of the petitioner.
There is thus no substance in this petition which is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.