JS Narang, J - The petitioner was initially appointed as Physical Training Instructor (P.T.I.)
on February 16, 1974 on ad hoc basis in Shree Krishan Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra in the pay scale of Rs. 250-500 which was subsequently revised to Rs. 300-600 and, thereafter to Rs. 700-1250 with effect from 1.4.1979.
During this period, the services of the petitioner were also regularised.
2.
In the year 1980, the said College was taken over the Government of Haryana and as per the terms of taking over, the petitioner was absorbed in the Government Service as P.T.I.
with effect from 141980 vide order dated 15101980 and was placed in the pay scale of Rs. 300-25-600 (old scale).
In all the Government Colleges in the State of Haryana and also the State aided private colleges in Haryana, the post of Physical Training Instructor was designated as Director, Physical Education (D.P.E.)
and so far as the post ofP.T.I.
is concerned, the same existed only in the High and Higher Secondary Schools in Haryana.
The qualification prescribed for post of Director, Physical Education by the Government as well as by the Universities is M.P.Ed.
(Master in Physical Education).
The petitioner had acquired the said qualification of M.P.Ed.
alongwith the qualifications of BA (Hons.)
and Diploma in Physical Education.
3.
The petitioner, after the taking over had been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 (Old Scale) in the rank of PTI, which was the pay scale for the post of D.P.Es.
in Colleges and for the PTI, which was still designated as PTI after the taking over as well.
The pay scale for D.P.Es.
was later on revised to Rs. 700-1600 (UGC) vide letter No. 5/4/81-Edu.-1(I) dated 2121985 (This letter has not been annexed as Annexure with the writ petition nor had been brought on record by the respondent-State, however, the letter was produced during the course of arguments which has been taken on record and has been embarked (marked ?)
as Annexure P-10).
The persual of this letter showed that there two scales which were prevailing after revision i.e., Rs. 700-1100 and Rs. 550-900 under the Head of Directors of Physical Education in Government/Private Affiliated Colleges.
It looks that different scales were being applied in Government Colleges and Private Affiliated Colleges but with effect from 2121985, the scales of both, i.e., in Government Colleges and Private Affiliated Colleges were brought equal, i.e. Rs. 700-40-1600.
4.
Since after the taking over, the petitioner had also become a Government Servant and, therefore, his designation as P.T.I.
needed to be redesignated as Director, Physical Education and was entitled to be brought into the scale of Rs. 700-1600.
The petitioner submitted a representation dated 1731986 to the Secretary to Government of Haryana, Health Department for changing the nomenclature of his post from that of PTI to DPE and also placing him in the new scale as has been revised vide communication dated 2121985.
5.
The Director, Ayurveda, Haryana recommended the case of the petitioner and submitted justification in detail vide communication dated 2271986.
It was also highlighted that at the time of merger, the petitioner was in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1250 whereas the scale of DPEs which has been revised, was Rs. 700-1100 in Government College and Rs. 550-900 in Private Affiliated Colleges and both were revised to Rs. 700-1600.
Apart from this, the petitioner fulfils the requisite qualifications prescribed for the post of DPE.
It looks that the pay of the petitioner was protected at the time of merger and if he was to be placed in the revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1600, the additional expenditure which would have to be incurred, would be only Rs. 40/- per month.
The Government, however, accorded sanction for the change of designation of the post of Director, Physical Education (DPE) existing in the Colleges of Haryana to that of Lecturer in Physical Education with immediate effect vide communication dated 481987, copy Annexure P-4.
It is thereafter, that the change of designation of the post of PTI existing in the College, which has been taken over by the Government to that of Lecturer, Physical Education with immediate effect subject to the condition that the official would not demand U.G.C.
grade after changing the designation of the post and that the qualification would be equivalent to that of Lecturer in Physical Education, copy of which is Annexure P-5.
Subsequently, Government of Haryana revised the pay scales of DPEs since designated as Lecturer in Physical Education and the said revision was made effective vide Letter No. 5/2/87- Edu.1(5) dated 8th March, 1989 and the existing pay scale of Lecturer in Physical Education were revised from Rs. 700-1600 to Rs. 2200-75-2800-100-4000 with effect from 111986, copy Annexure P-6.
6.
The petitioner again made a representation for grant of the revised pay scale vide letter dated 831989 (supra).
The petitioner did not receive any reply from the Government upon the representation made in respect of letter dated 711988, copy Annexure P-5 subject matter of challenge and also seeking mandamus to the Government for revising his pay scale finally to the pay scale as communicated vide letter dated 831989.
The petition was finally admitted vide order dated 2451994, after the written statement had been filed by the Government.
7.
The stand of the Government is that the post of Lecturer in Physical Education held by the petitioner and the post of Lecturer in Physical Education as existing in the Education Department/University are borne on different cadres and are governed by different set of service rules and as such no parity can be claimed.
It is also the stand of the Government that UGC scales are applicable to the persons of the Educational Institutions which are given grant by the University Grants Commission but this facility is not available to this department as no UGC scales are given to the employees of Government Ayurveda College, Kurukshetra, as such the petitioner is not entitled for UGC pay scales.
8.
I am afraid that both the contentions of the respondents deserve to be rejected.
It is an admitted case that Shree Krishan Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra has been taken over by the Government and the petitioner was absorbed along with the post with effect from 141980 vide order dated 15101980 and at that time, the petitioner was in the pay scale of Rs. 700- 1250 which have been made effective with effect from 1.4.1979.
It is vide letter dated 2121985 that the pay scales of DPEs in Government/Private Affiliated Colleges had been revised to Rs. 700-1600 by taking into consideration the different scales being in existence in Government College and Private Affiliated Colleges.
In the said communication, no distinction has been provided to the effect that the said scale shall not be applicable to Government Ayurvedic College.
Likewise, while changing the designation of post of PTI existing in the College which had been taken over to that of Lecturer in Physical Education, no distinction between the two posts have been drawn but a rider has been provided that the official would not demand UGC grade upon the change of designation of the post.
Such kind of rider/condition is not sustainable.
It is admitted case that the qualification, duties and the post is the same in the Government Colleges and the Private Affiliated Colleges where the scales had been revised vide communication dated 2121985.
The State has not been able to make good his submission as to why such conditions have been imposed in the impugned communication, copy Annexure P-5.
9.
The State also has not been able to disclose as to on what basis, the post of Lecturer in Physical Education held by the petitioner and the post of Lecturer in Physical Education in the other Departments/Universities can be said to be borne on different cadres nor any document has been placed on record with the written statement.
The State also has not been able to substantiate the submissions to the effect that the UGC grade are not applicable to Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra, but the conditions seems to have been imposed upon the petitioner without any justification.
However, to the contrary, it looks that the designation was being changed with the condition that the official would not demand UGC grade after changing designation of the post, one can definitely infer that the UGC grades were applicable but changing the designation of the petitioner was made a pre- condition to the effect that he shall not demand the said grades.
The stand of the Government is not sustainable.
10.
Consequently, I allow the petition with the direction that the condition imposed upon the petitioner vide impugned communication dated 7188 Annexure P-5, to the effect that he would not demand UGC Grade after the changing of the designation of the post is quashed and as a sequel thereto, he shall be entitled to the pay scale applicable to Lecturer in Physical Education, i.e. Rs. 700-1600 from the date when it become effective.
He shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
However, the arrears so calculated shall be restricted to three years and two months prior to the date of filing of the writ petition which was filed on 2.11.1993 and shall also be entitled to subsequent revisions in the pay scale which were made effective from time to time alongwith the arrears flowing therefrom.
However, no interest shall be payable upon the said amount.
It is further directed that the above directions be carried out by the respondents within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof supplied by the petitioner, whichever is earlier.
It is made clear that if these directions are not carried out within the period so specified, the amount so calculated shall incur interest at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of expiry of the said period of three months and shall be recovered from the salary or the person or persons who may be responsible in causing delay thereon.
If the said amount of interest becomes recoverable and is recovered, the same shall not be reimbursed to the said person or persons by the Government in any manner under any head whatsoever.
Petition allowed.