SS Nijjar, J - The petitioner belongs to the Reserved Category of Scheduled Castes.
Respondent No. 4 belongs to the Reserved Category of Backward Classes.
The undisputed dates of appointments and promotions of the two employees to various posts in the Market Committee, Jagraon (respondent No. 3) have been set out in the petition as under :-  Petitioner Respondent No. 4 (SC Category) (BC Category) 1.
Appointed as Clerk on 5101982 1.
Appointed as Record Keeper on 191976.
2.
Promoted as Auction Recorder on 3031983.
2.
Promoted as Auction Recorder on 1031992 3.
Promoted as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on 451987 (Against reserve roster point No. 6 of roster of Scheduled Caste Category) 3.
Promoted as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on 1031982 (Against reserve roster point No. 15 point of Backward Caste Category) 4.
Though petitioner due for promotion as Accountant, he was not considered despite being senior to the respondent No. 4 as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector by five years.
4.
Promoted as Accountant on 15102001 by wrongly declaring him as senior.
3.
It is also not disputed that Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board- respondent No. 2 is bound to follow the instructions issued by the State of Punjab with regard to reservation of posts issued under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India.
The promotion and service conditions to different posts in Class III Category in the service of respondents No. 2 and 3 are governed by the Punjab Market Committee Class III Service Rules, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as "the Class III Rules").
Relevant extract of the aforesaid Class III Rules may be reproduced as under :-  "8.
Method of Recruitment and Qualifications : (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (4), appointments to the service shall be made in the manner specified in Appendix "B".
(2) No person shall be appointed to a post in the service unless he possesses the qualifications and experience as specified against that post in Appendix "B".
(3) All appointments by promotion to the service shall be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
(4) The following percentage of posts in the Service shall be reserved for each method of appointment indicated for categories mentioned thereunder, namely :- (a) By direct appointment - (i) for members of Scheduled Castes : 25 per cent (ii) for members of Backward Class : 25 per cent (b) By promotion - (i) for members of Scheduled Castes : 20 per cent (ii) for members of Backward Castes : 2 per cent xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 10.
Seniority of Members of Service.
- The seniority inter se of the members of the service in each cadre of the Service shall be determined Committee-wise by the length of continuous service on a post in that cadre of the service.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and" 4.
It is also not disputed that the post of Accountant would be filled 100 per cent by promotion from the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector with a minimum of three years experience.
The candidate also has to qualify the departmental examination to be specified by respondent No. 2 from time to time.
The post of Accountant fell vacant on 152000.
According to the respondents, the post was vacated by Jalwinder Singh, Accountant on 2442001.
On that date, both the employees were eligible to be considered for promotion.
After considering the claim of both the employees, respondent No. 3 passed the following resolution :-  "Final Resolution : The unanimous recommendation of the Secretary was considered by the Market Committee and the record was examined and discussed.
The decision in Ajit Singh Janjua's case was looked into.
The Committee unanimously came to the conclusion that in the case of employees who have availed the benefit of promotion on the basis of reservation more than once, if at the time of their subsequent promotions, a senior employee in the previous cadre has become entitled for promotion in that cadre, then, he will be declared senior and will be entitled for promotion.
She Amarjit Singh ranks senior to Sh. Hakam Singh in the cadre of Auction Recorder.
Therefore, leaving Sh. Hakam Singh, Sh. Amarjit Singh Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fees Collector is promoted to the post of Accountant in the pay scale 5800-9200+160 rupees Special Pay on a probation period of two years after linking it with the decision of Writ Petition No. 3368/01.
Approval under Section 20(2) is granted to this promotion.
Sd/- Chairman
Market Committee,
Jagraon."
5.
The petitioner challenged the aforesaid resolution by way of appeal before respondent No. 1.
The appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed by order dated 18.8.2003 (Annexure P-4).
The Appellate Authority in dismissing the appeal of the petitioner gave the following reasons :-  "I have heard the parties at length and also gone through the record placed on the file carefully.
Admittedly, respondent Sh. Amarjit Singh was employed by the market committee, Jagraon much prior to the appellant.
He was also promoted to the post of Auction Recorder on 1791977 whereas according to appellant he was promoted as Auction Recorder on 3031983 but as per resolution No. 3 dated 18121986 and promotion order No. 11063 dated 18121986 he was promoted to the post of Auction Recorder on 18121986 and the committee has illegally assigned him seniority w.e.f.
3031983.
The appellant Sh. Hakam Singh was promoted to the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on 261987 on the basis of reservation superseding his seniors including respondent Sh. Amarjit Singh.
As such both the appellant and respondent reached to the same level i.e. to the cadre of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector.
Therefore, in view of the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court delivered in Ajit Singh Janjua's case and instructions dated 22101999 issued by the Govt. of Punjab which have been adopted by the Board, Sh. Amarjit Singh who was senior to the appellant in the cadre of Auction Recorders has regained his seniority in the cadre of Mandi Supervisors-cum-Fee Collectors.
The Punjab Govt. has not yet issued any instruction in view of amended Article 16(4-A) of Constitution of India, therefore, the claim put forward by the appellant on the basis of same cannot be accepted.
In view of these facts, the claim of seniority being made by the appellant under Rule 10 of the Service Rules is without any merit.
It is admitted case of the parties that in Market Committee, Jagraon, there is only one post of Accountant; therefore, the claim of the appellant for getting promotion to the said post on the basis of reservation is unfounded because a single post cannot be reserved.
In view of the above facts, circumstances and provisions of law, the present appeal is without any merit as such the same is dismissed.
The arguments in this case were heard on 1282003 and adjourned to 18.8.2003 for orders.
Order announced.
Send copy of the same to the parties.
Chandigarh Sd/- Dated : 18.8.2003 Secretary Endst.
No. : Administration/45023 Dated : 592003" 6.
Although further remedy of revision petition was available to the petitioner under Section 42 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the "1961 Act") before the State Government, the petitioner did not avail of the same.
He has chosen to file the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
7.
The respondents have filed written statements.
They have taken a preliminary objection that the writ petition is not maintainable as the petitioner has not cared to avail the remedy of revision before filing the present writ petition.
The decision of the authorities in promoting respondent No. 4 was justified on the ground that he was senior to the petitioner on the post of Auction Recorder.
Respondent No. 4 was promoted on the post of Auction Recorder on 1791977 whereas the petitioner joined as Clerk on 5101982 and promoted on the post of Auction Recorder on 3031983.
The petitioner was promoted earlier to respondent No. 4 on the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on 451987 against Roster Point No. 6 reserved for the Scheduled Castes Category.
It is, however, not disputed that respondent No. 4 was promoted as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on 10.3.1992 against Roster Point No. 15 reserved for the Backward Class Category.
According to the respondents, once respondent No. 4 reached the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum- Fee Collector, he would be senior to the petitioner as he was senior on the post of Auction Recorder.
This justification is sought to be given on the basis of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Janjua and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 2000(1) S.C.T.
770 : AIR 1999 Supreme Court 3471 and the instructions dated 22101999 issued by the Punjab Government, pursuant to the aforesaid judgment.
As is apparent from the reasoning given in the Resolution and the reasoning adopted by the Appellate Authority, the decision is based on the interpretation of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Janjua (supra).
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
9.
Mr. Anil Malhotra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the ratio of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Janjua (supra) and the instructions issued pursuant thereto, are not applicable to the case of the petitioner and respondent No. 4.
Both the employees belong to the reserved categories.
Therefore, the official respondents have erroneously denied the benefit of the seniority to the petitioner.
He submits that the seniority has to be determined committee-wise by the length of continuous service on a post.
The petitioner was senior to respondent No. 4 in the feeder cadre of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector.
The promotions are to be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum- merit.
The petitioner was 5 years senior to respondent No. 4 as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector.
He was, therefore, entitled to be considered for promotion on the basis that he was senior to respondent No. 4.
10.
Learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the petitioner had gained an advantage over respondent No. 4, on the basis of reservation.
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Janjua's case (supra), the seniority of respondent No. 4 had to be restored on his promotion on the post of Accountant.
Learned counsel for the respondents rely on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Sudam Singh v. State of Haryana, 2004(1) SCT 292, in support of the aforesaid submission.
11.
We have given thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
The Supreme Court in Janjua's case (supra) clarified the law laid down in the cases of RK Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, 1995(2) SCT 646 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 1371 and Ajit Singh Janjua v. State of Punjab, 1996(2) SCT 278 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1189.
The clarification was given by the Supreme Court in three interlocutory applications filed by the State of Punjab for clarification of the judgments rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Janjua v. State of Punjab, AIR 1996 SC 1189.
The controversy therein related to a dispute relating to seniority of reserved category candidates and general category candidates.
The Supreme Court considered only the limited question relating to seniority of reserved candidates promoted at Roster Points.
Thus, the Supreme Court had considered only the limited question as to whether the judgments in the cases of Union of India v. Virpal Singh, 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 448 and Ajit Singh Janjua v. State of Punjab, AIR 1996 SC 1189 which were earlier decided in favour of the general candidates, were to be affirmed or whether the latter deviation made in Jagdish Lal v. State of Haryana, 1998(1) SCT 26 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2366 against the general candidates, is to be accepted.
On the basis of the submissions made, the Supreme Court formulated the following four points for consideration :-  "13.
On the above contentions, the following four main points arise for consideration : (1) Can the roster point promotees (reserved category) count their seniority in the promoted category from the date of their continuous officiation vis-a- vis general candidates who were senior to them in the lower category and who were later promoted to the same level ?
(2) Have Virpal, Ajit Singh been correctly decided and has Jagdish Lal been correctly decided ?
(3) whether the `catch-up' principles contended for by the general candidates are tenable ?
(4) What is the meaning of the `perspective' operation of Sabharwal and to what extent can Ajit Singh be prospective."
Answering points 1 and 2 which are relevant for the controversy in the present case, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  "76.
We, therefore, hold that the roster point promotees (reserved category) cannot count their seniority in the promoted category from the date of their continuous officiating in the promoted post, vis-a-vis the general candidates who were senior to them in the lower category and who were later promoted.
(Emphasis supplied).
On the other hand, the senior general candidate at the lower level, if he reaches the promotional level later but before the further promotion of the reserved candidate, he will have to be treated as senior, at the promotional level, to the reserved candidate even if the reserved candidate was earlier promoted to that level.
We shall explain this further under Point No. 3.
We also hold that Virpal and Ajit Singh have been correctly decided and that Jagdish Lal is not correctly decided.
Points 1 and 2 are decided accordingly."
12.
On the basis of the aforesaid observations, the State of Punjab has issued the instructions dated 22101999.
These instructions merely reiterate the law laid down by the Supreme Court (supra).
It becomes apparent from the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court that respondent No. 4 could not be treated senior to the petitioner on the basis that he was senior on the post of Auction Recorder as both the petitioner and respondent No. 4 belong to reserved categories.
The petitioner belongs to the reserved category of Scheduled Castes.
Respondent No. 4 belongs to the reserved category of backward class.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was promoted on the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector on Roster Point No. 6 which was reserved for the Scheduled Castes Category.
Similarly, respondent No. 4 was promoted on the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector against the Roster Point No. 15 reserved for the Backward Class Category.
Both of them could claim to belong to the general category at the time when they were given promotion on roster points, on the basis of reservation.
Therefore, respondent No. 4 cannot, under any circumstances, claim that the petitioner has stolen a march over respondent No. 4.
In fact both the petitioner and respondent No. 4 have superseded their seniors in the general category at the time when they were promoted on the basis of reservation as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector.
The reasoning adopted by the official respondents in denying the promotion to the petitioner is wholly fallacious and is contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra).
As noticed above, the only reason given for superseding the petitioner is that respondent No. 4 was given his original seniority on being appointed on the post of Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector.
This conclusion, in our opinion, is wholly erroneous and cannot be accepted or approved.
The petitioner was entitled to be considered for promotion on the basis that he was senior to respondent No. 4.
Under Rule 8, promotions in the service are to be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The rule of seniority-cum-merit had been interpreted by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Kerala and another v. NM Thomas and others, 1976(1) SLR 805.
In this case, the Supreme Court has held that senior-most eligible person be selected for promotion irrespective of the better merit of his juniors.
The relevant observations are as under :-  "The principle of equality is applicable to employment at all stages and in all respects namely, initially recruitment, promotion, retirement, payment of pension and gratuity.
With regard to promotion, the normal principles are either merit-cum-seniority or seniority-cum-merit.
Seniority- cum-merit means that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration, the senior though the less meritorious shall have priority.
This will not violate Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2).
A rule which provides that given the necessary requisite merit, a member of the backward class shall get priority to ensure adequate representation will not similarly violate Article 14 or Articles 16(1) and (2).
The relevant touchstone of validity is to find out whether the rule of preference secures adequate representation for the unrepresented backward community or goes beyond it."
13.
A Division Bench of the Mysore High Court in the case of N Srinath, MA Somashekar, Assistant Director Industries v. The State of Mysore and others, 1972 SLR 449 considered a similar proposition.
In paragraph 13 of the aforesaid judgment, it has been observed as follows :-  "13.
Another aspect of the matter is that whether the promotion be on seniority-cum-merit basis or by selection, it is impossible to promote a junior without considering the case of a senior.
In the case of the first type of promotions, it is obvious that a senior must be considered first and that when he is found unfit, the case of the next junior may be considered.
In the second category of promotions, the Promoting Authority must consider a sufficient number of persons in the lower cadre or a number which, in relation to promotional vacancies to be filled, is reasonably sufficient, at the top of the lower cadre for consideration.
They should take the number from persons at the top, because both according to well-known notions of merit in Government service and according to the express provisions of Rule 4 of the Mysore Civil Services (General Recruitment) Rules, seniority is an element in the assessment of merit, and even in cases where promotion is by selection, due regard must be had from seniority also.
The record of three employees who were considered for promotion in the Resolution No. 7 dated 15102001 (Annexure P-1) has been reproduced.
The opinion of the Secretary was as under :-  "Opinion of the Secretary : Under Rule 8 of the Punjab Market Committees Class III Service Rules, 1989, those Mandi Supervisors-cum-Fee Collectors who have 3 years experience as Mandi Supervisor-cum-Fee Collector and those who have passed the Departmental test conducted by the Punjab Mandi Board, are eligible to the considered for promotion to the post of Accountant.
According to the report of the Superintendent, the undermentioned 3 employees come in the panel who fulfil the conditions prescribed in the service rules : Sr. No. Name Joining Date Confidential Reports 1.
Hardev Singh 10.3.1970 Very Good 2.
Hakam Singh 13.10.1982 Good 3.
Amarjit Singh 191976 Very Good" The employee mentioned at Serial No. 1 Sh. Hardev Singh Mandi Supervisor-cum- Fee Collector has given a statement on oath to the Market Committee with a request that he does not want promotion to the post of Accountant."
From the above, it becomes apparent that after Hardev Singh having given up his claim for promotion, the petitioner was entitled to be promoted on the basis of the record, irrespective of the "very good" record of respondent No. 4.
The petitioner, in our opinion, has been arbitrarily denied promotion and respondent No. 4 has been illegally promoted resulting in supersession of the petitioner.
14.
We may now consider the preliminary objection raised by the respondents.
The respondents had taken a preliminary objection that the petitioner should be dismissed as the petitioner had failed to avail the remedy of revision provided under Section 42 of the 1961 Act.
Existence of an alternative efficacious remedy is generally a bar for entertainment of the writ petition in case the petitioner approaches the High Court without the availing alternative remedy.
But this is a rule of practice and caution adopted by the High Court in exercise of its extraordinary writ jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The jurisdiction being extraordinary in nature is normally not exercised in frivolous cases or in cases where the petitioner fails to exhaust the alternative remedy available.
However, the aforesaid bar is not absolute.
In deserving cases, the writ petition can be entertained, especially in cases where there is a breach of constitutional provisions or in cases where the exercise of the statutory power by the authorities is found to be unconscionable, arbitrary, or capricious.
In the present case, the official respondents have blatantly disregarded the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Janjua's case (supra).
The resolution No. 3 dated 18121986 is contrary even to the statutory instructions issued by the State of Punjab.
The reasoning adopted by the Appellate Authority is also contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court as well as the statutory instructions, noticed above.
The decision of the Market Committee- respondent No. 3 and the order in appeal would act as a precedent in numerous other cases.
It was, therefore, absolutely necessary to entertain the present writ petition, without relegating the petitioner to the revisional authority.
We, therefore, reject the preliminary objection taken by the respondents.
15.
Now we come to the question of relief that could be granted to the petitioner.
In normal circumstances, he would only be entitled to a direction for re-consideration of his case for promotion, in accordance with law.
In the present case, however, in view of the peculiar facts and on the basis of settled principles, we are of the opinion that a case is made out for issuing a direction to the official respondents to promote the petitioner from the date respondent No. 4 was illegally promoted resulting in illegal supersession of the petitioner.
The petitioner has already been considered.
His record is good.
The principle on which the promotion is to be made, is seniority-cum- merit.
His record being good, he could not have been superseded by respondent No. 4 on the ground that he has a better record.
He has been superseded on the erroneous ground that respondent No. 4 would rank senior to the petitioner by restoration of the seniority of respondent No. 4.
The petitioner is, therefore, entitled to be promoted with effect from the date, respondent No. 4 was illegally promoted.
This view of ours will find support from the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of The District Registrar, Palghat and another v. MB Koyakutty and others, 1979(1) SLR 628.
In paragraph 30 of the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "30.
The last point for consideration is, whether it was proper for the High Court to issue a positive direction requiring the appellant to promote the respondent to the Upper Division and thereafter to determine his rank in the cadre of Upper Division Clerks.
Ordinarily, the Court does not issue a direction in such positive terms; but the peculiar feature of this case is that it has not been disputed that Koyakutty respondent satisfied the two-fold criterion for promotion laid down in the statutory Rule 28(b)(ii).
Indeed, the District Registrar, Palghat, who was impleaded as respondent No. 3 in the writ petition, expressly admitted in paragraph 8 of his counter- affidavit filed before the High Court "that the seniority of service is the basis of promotion from the ranks of Lower Division Clerks to the ranks of Upper Division Clerks provided they are fully qualified by passing the departmental tests for the purpose."
It was never the case of the Registrar that Koyakutty was not otherwise fit for promotion.
Indeed, even in the grounds of appeal to this Court, incorporated in the Special Leave Petition, it is not alleged that Koyakutty did not satisfy the criterion of seniority- cum-fitness prescribed by Rule 28(b)(ii).
The position taken by the appellant, throughout, was that this Rule should be deemed to have been "supplemented" by the impugned Government Notification.
It is not correct that the impugned Notification merely "supplements" or fills up a gap in the statutory rules.
It tends to superadd or superimpose by an Executive flat (fiat ?)
on the statutory rules something inconsistent with the same.
Since the existence of both the criteria viz., seniority and fitness for promotion to the Upper Division prescribed by the statutory Rule 28(b)(ii), in the case of Koyakutty was not disputed, the High Court was justified in issuing the direction, it did."
We are conscious of the fact that promotion of the petitioner from the date when respondent No. 4 was promoted, would mean that two persons would be holding the same post.
Respondent No. 4 has actually held the post of Accountant since his illegal promotion on 12.10.2001.
The petitioner would be deemed to have held the post notionally from the date it was actually held by respondent No. 4.
It would also mean that the respondents will have to pay the salary to the petitioner from the date he is notionally promoted.
Merely because it would now cause financial complications would not preclude this Court from granting the necessary relief.
16.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition.
Resolution dated 15102001 (Annexure P-1) and the order of the Appellate Authority dated 18.8.2003 (Annexure P-4) are hereby quashed.
The petitioner is held entitled to be promoted from the date respondent No. 4 was promoted i.e. on the post of Accountant.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits, such as arrears of salary on the promotional post, increments, seniority and any other benefits to which he would be entitled under the Rules.
Let the consequential relief be granted to the petitioner within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.