VK Bali, J (Oral) - Challenge herein is to the selection and appointment of Gulshan Kumar Bajaj-respondent No. 4 for the post of PG Teacher in Computer Science.
Prayer of the petitioner is to set aside selection and appointment of respondent aforesaid.
2.
Brief facts of the case, as projected in the petition, reveal that petitioner was appointed as Assistant Teacher in Mathematics in the University Campus School-respondent No. 3 on 4.9.1990 and was assigned the work of Computer w.e.f.
141995 to 31101995 and till date he is working as Technical Assistant in the Computer Centre in MD University, Rohtak.University Campus School, Rohtak, vide its letter dated 1771996 requested the Head Computer Centre and University Rohtak to avail the services of the petitioner who was working in Computer Centre and his case was recommended by the Vice Chancellor of MD University, Rohtak vide Annexure P6.
Petitioner was directed vide letter Annexure P8 dated 281996 to work from 9 am to 11 am daily till further orders in the school of the University.
The petitioner, however, was relieved on 1851998.
Respondent- University advertised the post of PG Teacher in Computer Science on 28101997 in the Hindustan Times.
Pursuant to the said advertisement, petitioner made his application for the post under contention.
He was called for interview on 741998.
It is the case of the petitioner that even though Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Science and Applications of the private respondent is not recognised by the respondent-University yet respondent No. 4 who had done the said course was preferred over and above the petitioner who answered the eligibility criteria provided in the advertisement and pursuant to the said interview the respondent No. 4 was selected while petitioner was ignored.
3.
Mr. Laler, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that the degree obtained by respondent No. 4 is not recognised by respondent No. 1 and, therefore, respondent 4 could not be selected and appointed on the post under contention.
It is further the case of the petitioner that Ajay Bhardwaj who was one of the experts who constituted the Selection Committee was not an expert as he was not having any Post Graduate qualifications.
4.
Pursuant to the notice issued by this Court respondents have entered defence.
Two separate written statements one on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and another by respondent No. 4 - have been filed.
5.
It is inter alia pleaded on behalf of the respondents No. 1 to 3 that the respondent-University established the University Campus School for imparting education to the wards of the University employees as well as the general public and is fully competent to maintain/look after the administration of the school.
The University had advertised the post of PG Teacher in Computer Science vide advertisement No. 2/97 in response to which the University received 17 applications.
Out of these 17 applications, the Screening Committee comprising of Dr. Manohar Lal, Head of Department of Computer Science and Dr. I.M.S. Hattar, Director, University Campus School, Rohtak recommended only seven candidates for interview.
All the seven eligible candidates were called to appear before the duly constituted Establishment Committee as provided in Chapter IV of MDU Calender Vo.
III for interview on 741998.
The Establishment Committee after interviewing the candidates appeared before it recommended the name of respondent No. 4 for appointment as PGT (Computer Science).
The selection was made by the Establishment Committee on the basis of laid down qualifications by the University, which were mandatory.
The academic records of the applicants, experience and their performance was assessed by the Establishment Committee.
The Members of the Establishment Committee were of a very high stature and the outside expert is the eminent scholar of his field whose presence was must at the time of selection.
The same procedure is allowed (followed ?)
in all the Universities throughout the State.
While answering the basic charge of the petitioner, it has been pleaded that as regards recognition of PG Diploma awarded by Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidyalaya, Hardwar the same being not recognised by this University is concerned, respondent-University while advertising the posts made it clear that PG Diploma in Computer Science is required to be passed from a recognised University and, here, in the present case the Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidalya, Hardwar is a recognised University from where respondent No. 4 passed PG Diploma Course.
The advertisement dealing with the qualifications, reads as under :-  Name of the Post,  Qualifications Post Graduate Teacher (Computer Science) (a) Master's degree in the subject of Mathematics or Statistics or Physics or Chemistry from a recognised University with at least 50% marks.
.....(Emphasis supplied) (b) PG Diploma in Computer Science from recognised University or three months full time or six months part-time course from an Institute of National Importance such as: (i) I.I.Ts OR (ii) Regional Engineering College OR (iii) Universities OR (iv) Regional Computer Centres run by the State Governments.
OR (v) any other nationally approved professional organisation that caters to the Computer Science Discipline with particular emphasis on the course/syllabus laid down by CBSE (c) B.Ed.
degree from a recognised University and capable of teaching Senior Secondary Classes in English Medium.
6.
In the context of the facts as have been pleaded in the written statement as also the advertisement, Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Senior Advocate vehemently contends that the requirement was that PG Diploma in Computer Science should have been obtained from a recognised University and respondent No. 4 had passed the aforesaid diploma from a recognised University.
He did answer the qualifications prescribed in the advertisement.
Mr. Laler, however, on the basis of the courses recognised by the MD University, Rohtak, list whereof has been given in para 12 of the petition, vehemently contends the diploma obtained by the petitioner is not recognised by the respondent-University.
List of the examinations recognised by the University has been detailed in para 12 of the writ petition.
The opening part thereof reads as under :-  The eligibility for admission to a particular course may be determined on the basis of equivalence shown in the said list and the detailed conditions given in the Admission Brochure and the relevant Ordinances.
7.
Mr. Aggarwal representing the respondents contends that in so far as list of recognised course as given in para 12 of the petition is concerned, the same is for the purpose of admission in a particular course on the basis of equivalence and not for the purpose of providing a job or making appointments.
This stand has been clarified in the reply to the replication.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and, have gone through the record with their assistance.
We do not find any substance in the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
9.
It has been demonstrated before us that in so far as the examinations recognised by MD University are concerned, it has been mentioned in para 12 of the petition that the same are for the purpose of admission to a particular course on the basis of equivalence and which is not for making appointments in the University.
In so far as the appointments are concerned, the only pre- condition as provided in the advertisement is of a recognised University from where a person has obtained diploma and it is positive case of the respondents that respondent No. 4 has obtained his diploma from a recognised University.
In so far as the contention of the learned counsel with regard to qualification of Mr. Ajay Bhardwaj is concerned, we do not find any merit in this contention.
Mr. Ajay Bhardwaj is a B Tech.
in Computer Science and a qualified teacher and the qualification held by him is higher than the Diploma in Computer for the purpose of PG Teacher in Computer.
For the reasons recorded aforesaid, we find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.