GS Singhvi, J - The only question which arises for determination in this case is whether the petitioner is eligible to be appointed as Social Science Mistress in the service of the Government of Punjab.
2.
There is no dispute between the parties that by order Annexure-P2 dated 28111997, the Director, Public Instruction (Schools), Punjab appointed the petitioner as Social Science Mistress in the grade of Rs. 1650-2925 and posted her at Government High School, Chahan, Ludhiana but she was not allowed to join duty by the concerned District Education Officer.
3.
The respondents have tried to justify their decision not to allow the petitioner to join duty on the ground that she does not possess the qualifications specified in the advertisement Annexure-P1.
To be precise, their case is that the petitioner is not eligible to be appointed as Social Science Mistress because she has not passed B.Ed.
with Social Studies as a teaching subject.
4.
Shri HK Arora argued that the qualifications specified in the advertisement issued by the Departmental Selection Committee cannot be made basis for determination of petitioner's eligibility because the same were not in conformity with the Punjab State Education Class III (School Cadre) Service Rules, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1978 Rules') (as amended vide notification dated July, 8, 1995).
Learned counsel pointed out that B.Ed.
with teaching of Social Science/Social Studies is not one of the prescribed qualifications for appointment as Social Science Mistress and, therefore, the requirement of B.Ed.
with Social Science as one of the teaching subjects could not have been incorporated in the advertisement as a condition of eligibility and in any case the petitioner cannot be deprived of the fruit of her selection on the basis of advertisement because she possesses the qualifications prescribed in the 1978 Rules.
Learned counsel assailed the decision of the respondents not to allow the petitioner to join duty by describing it as arbitrary, capricious and unconscionable.
5.
Shri Rupinder Khosla, learned Deputy Advocate General produced a typed copy of the note dated 1911995 recorded by the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching), which is shown to have been approved by the Education Secretary and the Education Minister on 1911995 and 23.1.1995 respectively and submitted that the petitioner is not eligible to be appointed as Social Science Mistress because she has not passed BA with two out of the seven subjects specified in the note.
6.
After having thoughtfully considered the respective contentions urged by the learned counsel, we are of the opinion that the decision of the respondents not to allow the petitioner to join duty deserves to be nullified on the ground that it is arbitrary and violative of her legal and fundamental rights.
7.
The qualifications for recruitment of Masters/Mistresses, as prescribed in Rule 5 of the Rules read with Appendix-B read as under :-  APPENDIX `B' (See rule 5) Sr. No.
Designation of posts Minimum qualifications and teaching experience Method of recruitment + Direct Appointment, Promotion 3(1)(a) Masters/Mistresses Graduate of recognised University with BT or B.Ed.
75% 25% OR B.Sc.
with BT or B.Ed.
Senior Basic Trained with any two of the four subjectsB.Sc.
namely, Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology,  (i) 15% from trained graduate amongst J.BT or ETT; and OR BA with Mathematics `A' course and Physics or Geography or BT or B.Ed.
or Senior Basic trained.
(ii) Ten per cent from trained graduate from amongst the classical and vernacular teachers (b) Punjabi Master/Mistress (i) Graduate from a recognised university with Punjabi as a subject(ii) B.Ed.
with teaching of Punjabi in B.Ed.
(c)Hindi Masters/Mistress (i) Graduate with Hindi as a subject;(ii) B.Ed.
with teaching of Hindi in B.Ed.
(d) Sanskrit Master/Mistress (i) Graduate from a recognised university with Sanskrit as one of the subjects in Graduation; and (e) Urdu Master/Mistress (i) Graduate from a recognised university with Urdu as one of the subject in Graduation; and(ii) B.Ed.
with teaching of Urdu in B.Ed.
(f)Mathematics Master/Mistress Graduate with Mathematics as one of the elective subject in Graduation OR BA with Physics and Mathematics A Course with BT or B.Ed.
or Senior Basic trained (g) Social Studies Master/Mistress BA with subject Combination as approved by Government from time to time with BT or B.Ed.
OR Senior Basic Trained (including service of D.P.Ed.
and BPEd.
as Master/Mistress with at least three years actual teaching experience) (h) Agriculture Master B.Sc.
(Agriculture) from a recognised University.
(i) Commerce Master/Mistress B.Com.
from a recognised University.
(j)PhysicalTraining Master/Mistress (D.P.E.)
Graduate from a recognised University with training in advance physical training course degree or diploma 8.
The educational qualifications specified in the advertisement for the posts of Social Studies Masters/Mistresses were :-  "BA/B.Ed.
with the combination of two subjects out of the following seven subjects : History-Economics-Political Science-Geography-Public Administration-Psycology-Sociology with relevant teaching subject in B.Ed."
9.
The note dated 191,1995 on which reliance has been placed by Shri Khosla reads as under :-  "Sub : Review/amendment for the eligibility of combination of subjects for the posts of Social Studies Masters/Mistresses.
For the posts of Social Studies Masters/Mistresses, the Government had approved the following combination in 1986 :-  Any two subjects out of the following four subjects : (a) History, Economics, Political Science and Geography.
(b) Applicant must have relevant teaching subject in B.Ed.
Due to the change of faculties in Social Sciences number of allied Social Science subjects have been introduced in senior secondary schools i.e. +1 & +2.
These Social Science subjects have great impact on the social subjects at the lower stage of teachers.
Therefore, with the change of social scenario, the need of the hour is to enhance the scope of subject combination for the selection of teachers of Social Studies.
It is, therefore, proposed that following more subjects may be included as to form combination from the requisite qualifications of Social Studies Masters/Mistresses :-  (i) Public Administration; (ii) Psychology; and (iii) Sociology  By this way a candidate who would be possessing two subjects out of seven subjects may be considered for the post of Social Study Master/Mistress.
These new subjects may be allowed to make the fresh combination for the eligibility for the post of Social Studies Master/Mistress.
Permission may also be granted for issuing of corrigendum to this effect.
Sd/- 1911995 Chairman  Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching), S.C.O.
130-131 Sector 34-A, Chandigarh.
DPI (S) Punjab Sd/- 1911995  Hon'ble Secretary Education :  May kindly approve Sd/- 1911995 E.S.
U.O.
No. 1/1-94-Recruitment (1)  Dated : Chandigarh, the January 19, 1995  Sd/- 1911995 E.M." 10.
A careful analysis of the 1978 Rules shows that teaching in the concerned subject has been prescribed as one of the essential qualifications for the post of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses, Hindi Masters/Mistress, Sanskrit Master/Mistress and Urdu Master/Mistress.
For the general post of Masters/Mistresses, Mathematics Masters/Mistress, Social Studies Masters/Mistresses, Agriculture Master, Commerce Master/Mistress and Physical Training Master/Mistress (D.P.E.
), B.Ed.
with teaching in the concerned subject has not been prescribed as an essential qualification.
For the post of Agriculture Master, Commerce Master/Mistress and Physical Training Master/Mistress, even the qualification of B.Ed.
has not been prescribed as an essential qualification.
11.
In our opinion, the prescription of different qualifications for different posts is clearly indicative of the intention of the rule making authority not to prescribed B.Ed.
With Social Science as a teaching subject as an essential qualification for appointment as Social Science Master/Mistress.
This should be sufficient to negative the respondents' plea that the petitioner is not eligible to be appointed as Social Science Mistress.
As a logical corollary, their decision not to allow her to join duty is liable to be nullified.
12.
It is true that in terms of the advertisement, a candidate could be treated eligible for recruitment as Social Studies Master or Mistress only if he/she had passed BA/B.Ed.
With the combination of two subjects out of the seven subjects with relevant teaching subject in B.Ed.
but in view of the fact that B.Ed.
with Social Science as one of the teaching subjects is not the prescribed qualification, the same could not have been made the touch-stone for determining the petitioner's eligibility.
The Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee did not have the authority to directly or indirectly amend the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Therefore, he should have directed issuance of advertisement containing qualifications other than those prescribed in the Rules.
13.
The note on which Shri Khosla has placed reliance for non-suiting the petitioner by contending that she has not passed BA with the subject combination specified therein has no bearing on the issue of the petitioner's eligibility because there is no dispute between the parties that she has passed BA with two out of the seven subjects enumerated in the advertisement.
The decision recorded on the file to change the subject combination cannot be made basis for holding that the petitioner is not qualified because the contents thereof have not been reflected in the recruitment rules and the advertisement.
14.
Before concluding, we may mention that while reserving the order on February 12, 1999, we had given liberty to the learned Deputy Advocate General to produce the amendment, if any, in the Rules.
However, no such amendment has been brought to our notice and as a matter of fact, Shri Khosla informed the Court that the Rules have not have amended after July 7, 1995 and B.Ed.
with Social Science as one of the teaching subjects has not been prescribed as an essential qualification.
15.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the refusal of the respondents to allow the petitioner to join duty is tainted with arbitrariness and the same is also violative of her fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment.
16.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to accept the joining report submitted by the petitioner.
She shall be deemed to have joined service with effect from the date of making herself available for service after this date.
Copy of this order be given dasti on payment of free prescribed for urgent applications.
Petition allowed.