RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Can an employer keep the Departmental enquiry or enquiries pending against a delinquent official indefinitely and on that ground ignore the case from consideration for promotion is the question raised by learned counsel for the petitioner in the present writ petition.
2.
Brief facts of the case may be noticed.
The petitioner was appointed as a Junior Engineer in the year 1969 and as per the statutory rules, he became entitled for consideration for promotion as an Assistant Engineer after 10 years of service as a Junior Engineer i.e. he became eligible in the year 1979.
It is further stated that petitioner was given the proficiency step-up after completion of 8 and 18 years of service.
It is not disputed before us that some Junior Engineers who were lower in the seniority list than the petitioner were promoted on 2151997 (copy Annexure P-7) and on 1731998 (copy Annexure P-4).
The case of the petitioner was not considered for promotion as according to the respondents some Departmental enquiries were pending against him.
3.
Apart from raising the question as posed in the opening paragraph of the judgment, learned counsel for the petitioner also referred to the promotion order dated 30.12.1996 (copy Annexure P-1) to highlight that some Junior Engineers (though senior to the petitioner) were promoted as Assistant Engineers though Departmental enquiries were pending against them.
The enquiries which were/are pending against the petitioner are as follows :  (1) A charge-sheet was served on the petitioner dated 10101990.
According to the petitioner, the charge-sheet related to the alleged omissions/commissions by the petitioner in January, 1979.
The petitioner filed the reply on 11.11.1990.
In the written statement, it has been averred that since the charges levelled against the petitioner were not substantiated so the Chief Engineer (GW) vide his office order dated 14101998 has dropped the charge-sheet.
(ii) The second charge-sheet is dated 361994.
In the written statement on behalf of the respondents, this charge-sheet does not exist in the record of the Chief Engineer/Government.
(iii) The third charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner on January 16, 1995 (according to the respondents, the charge-sheet is dated 9121994 and not 1611995), which according to him relates to alleged omission/commission by the petitioner in the year 1984.
The enquiry is stated to have been completed in December, 1997 but no further action thereon has been taken so far.
As per the respondents, the enquiry report has been sent to MD, Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board vide Government letter dated 17.6.1998 for his comments which are still awaited.
(iv) Another charge-sheet dated 1921997 is stated to have been served on the petitioner, which according to him relates to the period June, 1982.
The reply to the said charge-sheet has already been submitted by the petitioner on 3131997 and the matter, according to the petitioner, rests there.
As per the reply, the case is still pending for final decision and the Enquiry Officer has been appointed.
4.
From the aforesaid narration of facts, it would be evident that the only charge-sheets which are pending against the petitioner, as per the written statement, are the one which were issued on 9121994 and 1921997.
In the first enquiry, enquiry report has since been submitted on 9121997.
More than 11 months have passed.
The further action thereon, which is stated to have been taken as per the written statement, is that the enquiry report has been forwarded to the MD, Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board on 17.6.1998.
It can be seen that it took more than six months before the respondents even sent the enquiry report to the MD, Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board for whatever purpose it was required.
More than five months have passed since then.
Nothing further is stated before us which might have happened after submitting the enquiry report to the MD Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board on 17.6.1998.
So far as the second enquiry is concerned for which charge-sheet is stated to have been served on February 19, 1997, to which reply was filed in March, 1997, more than one year and eight months have passed since then and the written statement of the respondents is that Enquiry Officer has now been appointed.
It is not understood as to why it took almost one year and eight months or thereabout for the respondents to consider the reply of the petitioner and appoint an Enquiry Officer.
5.
No doubt, if an enquiry is pending against a delinquent official, he can be ignored for promotion for the time being till the enquiry is over or his case can be considered under sealed cover method if permissible.
However, in a given case where an enquiry is kept pending for a long time without any tangible step being taken on part of the respondents, can under such circumstances the consideration for promotion be withheld ?
If the delinquent official is found guilty, no doubt he can be punished but in the circumstances, as aforesaid, can the consideration be withheld even during pendency of the enquiry ?
We are of the view that in such circumstances where the respondents themselves take more than one and half years just to decide whether Enquiry Officer should be appointed or not and no final decision is taken in the matter where the enquiry report has been submitted in December, 1997, under facts and circumstances of this case the petitioner's right of consideration granted under Article 16 of the Constitution of India is unnecessarily being denied.
The official respondents cannot take their own time to decide the matter pertaining to the departmental enquiry because the official against whom a Departmental enquiry is pending is left high and dry for such a long period when the enquiry is pending and his case is kept pending for promotion.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, in the facts and circumstances of the case as culled out above, we allow this petition and direct the official respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as Assistant Engineer/Sub-Divisional Engineer from the date his juniors were so promoted on the same terms and conditions without taking into consideration the pendency of the enquiries against the petitioner.
In case the petitioner is promoted, necessary consequential benefits shall flow therefrom.
Needless to mention that in case the petitioner is found guilty of the charges and is awarded some punishment then necessary consequences of the punishment shall follow.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of two months.
7.
A copy of this order, attested by Special Secretary of this Court, be given to Mr. Chhinna for onward transmission to the concerned quarters.
Petition allowed.