GS Singhvi, J - Aggrieved by the cancellation of his admission to the BDS course, the petitioner has filed this petition and has prayed for quashing of the letter Annexure P-5 dated 1671996 and for directing the respondent no. 2 to admit him to the BDS course.
2.
There is no dispute between the parties that on the basis of his claim of having passed Intermediate examination in Science from Bihar Intermediate Education Council, Patna, the petitioner succeeded in securing admission in the BDS course by paying a sum of Rs. 7,00,000/-.
After he had studied for some time, the respondent No. 2 gave notice to the petitioner to show cause as to why his admission be not cancelled because the Intermediate certificate produced by him was found to be incorrect.
As the petitioner did not respond to the notice Annexure P-3, the respondent No. 2 directed the Principal of the respondent No. 1 to cancel the admission granted to the petitioner and to register a criminal case against him.
Soon thereafter the impugned communication was sent to the petitioner cancelling his admission.
3.
By placing reliance on the representation Annexure P-6 submitted by the petitioner along with the mark sheet Annexure P-7 issued by the respondent No. 4 and the certificate Annexure P-8, Shri Jasbir Singh argued that even though the document produced by the petitioner in the first instance for claiming eligibility to be admitted to the BDS course may not be correct, the documents produced by him subsequently clearly prove that he had in fact studied Intermediate Course from a college attached to Bihar Intermediate Education Council and as such the admission granted to the petitioner should be declared to be valid and a direction be given to the respondents No. 1 and 2 to revive the same.
On the other hand, Shri Sharda argued that the provisional admission granted to the petitioner had to be cancelled in view of the letter Annexure R2/1 dated 14.5.1996 sent by the respondent No. 3.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 4 supported the cancellation of the petitioner's admission on the ground that the mark sheet produced by the petitioner for securing admission to the BDS Course is incorrect.
4.
After considering the rival contentions and perusing the record of the case, we are convinced that the decision of the respondent No. 2 to direct the cancellation of the provisional admission granted to the petitioner and the consequential action taken by the respondent No. 1 do not suffer from any jurisdictional or other error warranting exercise of writ jurisdiction by the High Court.
A careful reading of the record produced by the respondent No. 4 and Annexure R-2/1 shows that the petitioner succeeded in securing admission on the basis of fake/forged mark sheet showing him to have passed Intermediate examination conducted by the respondent No. 3.
This appears to be the precise reason why the petitioner did not respond to the notice Annexure P-3 issued by the University.
This also appears to be the reason why the petitioner failed to produce the documents to which reference has been made in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the return filed by the respondent No. 3.
The documents could have enabled the respondent No. 3 to examine and decide whether Annexures P-7 and P-8 are genuine or not.
However, a future enquiry into the genuineness of Annexures P-7 and P-8 cannot detain us from recording the conclusion that the decision taken by the respondents No. 1 and 2 to cancel the admission granted to the petitioner is perfectly legal and justified.
They took prompt steps in the right direction to curb the growing evil among the educated class to seek admission to the higher classes by producing forged/fake mark sheets, certificates etc.
The petitioner has failed to establish that the mark sheet and the certificate on the strength of which he secured the admission are genuine and the same have been issued by the respondent No. 4.
He has not questioned the correctness of Annexure R-2/1.
Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that the petitioner had polluted the system of education by adopting foul means.
In our opinion, there is no reason or justification to show any indulgence to the petitioner and exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 by directing his admission to the BDS course on the basis of Annexure P-7 and P-8.
5.
However, there is some substance in Shri Singh's plea that a direction be issued to the respondent No. 1 to refund a part of the amount deposited by the petitioner.
Having regard to the fact that the petitioner had paid Rs. 7,00,000/- to the respondent No. 1 for the purpose of admission to BDS course and he had only completed 1/4th of course till the cancellation of the admission we deem it appropriate to direct the refund of 60% of the amount deposited by the petitioner.
6.
In the result, we dismiss the writ petition subject to the direction that the respondent No. 1 shall refund 60% of the amount deposited by the petitioner within a period of 3 months from today.
Petition dismissed.