Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner complains that the Director of Public Instructions has arbitrarily refused to approve his appointment on the post of Sanskrit Teacher.
Is it so ?
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed the Shastri examination in July 1983.
He then qualified the Acharya Part II Examination from the Panjab University on August 25, 1986.
Thereafter, he passed the Shiksha Shastri examination in September 1992.
On this basis, the petitioner claims to have the qualification of MA Sanskrit with Shiksha Shastri which is, according to him, equivalent to B.Ed.
3.
In April 1993, Arya High School, Phagwara, advertised certain posts of Sanskrit Teachers.
The petitioner applied.
He was selected.
Vide letter dated nil, which appears to have been issued on July 12, 1993, the petitioner was offered appointment as a Sanskrit teacher.
His case was sent for approval to the Department of Education.
On August 9, 1994, the Director of Public Instructions informed the District Education Officer that "approval cannot be granted in respect of grant-in-aid case of the employee who is working on the post of Sanskrit Teacher because of the required educational qualifications".
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-13 with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The petitioner maintains that he fulfils the qualifications and prays that the order passed by the Director be quashed.
4.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the official and private respondents.
In the reply filed on behalf of the Department, it has been admitted that the petitioner possesses the qualifications of MA Sanskrit and Shiksha.
Yet, it is maintained that he is not qualified as he has not passed BA and B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a compulsory subject.
5.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It has been inter alia pointed out that a person with the qualifications of "Matric, Shastri (Honours in Sanskrit) training of OT Certificate" is eligible for appointment as a Sanskrit teacher under the provisions of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
Still further, it has been pointed out that even for appointment to the posts of Sanskrit Teachers in Government Schools, the qualifications were modified vide notification dated July 8, 1995.
The requirement of passing BA B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a compulsory subject was laid down by the notification dated July 8, 1995.
On this basis, it is urged that the qualification could not have been retrospectively applied to persons who were appointed in the year 1993.
6.
A rejoinder to this replication has been filed.
The factual position as stated by the petitioner with regard to the qualifications for the post of Sanskrit teacher and the issue of notification dated July 8, 1995 has not been controverted.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Did the petitioner fulfil the qualifications prescribed for the post of Sanskrit teacher ?
8.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner has passed the examinations of Acharya and Shiksha Shastri.
Vide memorandum dated July 18, 1972, the Government of India had declared that the qualification of Acharya is equivalent to MA while the qualification of Shiksha Shastri was treated at par with B.Ed.
Admittedly, the petitioner possesses both these qualifications.
The petitioner's averment that he has the qualification of MA in Sanskrit and Shiksha Shastri has not been controverted.
A person who has a post-graduate degree of MA in Sanskrit cannot be said to be less qualified than a person who has passed the BA or B.Ed.
examination with Sanskrit as a compulsory subject.
Secondly, it has already been held by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 810 of 1983 (Sham Sunder and others v. The State of Punjab) decided on March 11, 1983 that "Shiksha Shastri is a degree of Bachelor in teaching of different subjects including languages like Sanskrit and Hindi".
Thus, it appears that the petitioner possesses the qualifications of MA B.Ed.
In view of the decision of the Division Bench of Sham Sunder's case (supra), it cannot be said that he was not qualified for appointment to the post of Sanskrit Teacher.
9.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The appointment to the post of Sanskrit teacher is governed by the provisions of the Punjab Privately-Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
Rule 6 inter alia provides that no person shall be appointed to an aided post unless "he possesses the qualifications and experience as specified against that post in the Appendix to these rules."
In the Appendix, the post of Sanskrit teacher appears at Sr. No. 15 and the prescribed qualification is - "Matric, Shastri with OT."
The petitioner's qualifications are admittedly much higher.
Yet, his appointment was not approved by the Director on the ground that he did not fulfil the qualifications.
According to the written statement, these qualifications had been laid down vide instructions issued vide letter dated November 30, 1990.
The rules have been framed under the provisions of the Security of Service Act, 1979.
These are statutory.
The statutory rules cannot be amended by an executive order.
Thus, the instructions issued by the department cannot override the provisions of the statutory rules.
Resultantly, the petitioner who was fully qualified according to the rules could not be said to be ineligible.
In fact, the petitioner fulfils even the higher qualifications as prescribed for the post of a Master.
10.
No other point has been raised.
11.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned action is set aside.
The petitioner shall be taken back on duty and he shall be reinstated in service.
The respondent-department shall release the aid in respect of the post of the petitioner.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.