Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Sushila and four other petitioners were appointed on different posts in the Punjab High School, Sariana in District Hoshiarpur.
At the time of their appointment, it was a private school.
On May 29, 1986, the school-Management executed a gift deed in favour of the Government.
As a result, the school was taken over by the State Government.
The writ petitioners were, however, not absorbed.
Aggrieved by the action of the State Government, they approached this Court with a prayer that at writ of Mandamus be issued directing the State Government to absorb them in the school with effect from the date of taking over viz. January 12, 1987.
2.
On November 28, 1987, the Division Bench admitted the writ petition and directed the issue of notice regarding stay.
The matter was then placed before the learned Single Judge.
Vide order dated April 27, 1988, the following directions were given :-  "Reply has been filed.
After considering the arguments, respondents are directed to take back the petitioners in the school and if there is no vacancy in that school, absorb them, in any of the schools in the State of Punjab.
This order should be complied with within two weeks.
April 27, 1988.
Sd/- Judge."
3.
Aggrieved by this order, the State of Punjab and the officers have filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 869 of 1988.
4.
Vide order dated August 22, 1988, the Division Bench admitted the appeal.
It was further directed that there shall be interim stay of operation of the impugned order.
Notice regarding stay was given to the writ petitioners for August 30, 1988.
It appears that C.M.
No. 9922 of 1988 in which prayer for the stay of the operation of the order of the learned Single Judge had been made, was listed before the Division Bench on September 28, 1988.
The Bench passed the following order :-  "An order to be made in the civil miscellaneous application has been made in the writ petition, therefore, the order could not be sustained.
However, we think that the same order could now be treated as made in the civil miscellaneous application itself pending writ petition No. 6832 of 1987.
Accordingly, the appellants herein are directed to take back the petitioners in the school pending writ petition and if there is no vacancy in that school, absorb them in any other school in the State of Punjab, pending disposal of the main writ petition.
There will be an order accordingly in this application.
The result is that the writ petition is pending and will have to be disposed of on merits."
5.
A perusal of the above order would show that the directions given by the learned Single Judge were reiterated by the Division Bench.
It was also observed that the order is only in the misc. application and that the writ petition is still pending.
6.
At the request of counsel for both the parties, the writ petition No. 6832 of 1987 as well as LPA No. 869 of 1988 are taken up for hearing.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
8.
Admittedly, the writ petitioners were employed with the school before it was actually taken over.
They were, however, not absorbed in Government Service on account of the fact that the management had appointed them after it had submitted the application for taking over the school.
It has also been contended by Mrs. Charu Tuli, that the subject of Art and Craft for which the three out of the five petitioners had been recruited, was no longer in the curriculum.
Consequently, they could not be absorbed.
It is, however, not disputed that in pursuance of the directions given by the learned Single Judge vide order dated April 27, 1988, the writ petitioners have in fact been absorbed on different posts in different schools.
It is also not disputed that they are now borne on the rolls of the Department of Education.
It is further clear that the order passed by the learned Single Judge which was the subject matter of the LPA was actually affirmed by the Division Bench vide order dated September 28, 1988.
Taking the circumstances cumulatively, it appears that the writ petitioners have been in service for the last about 13 years.
Now on account of their age, they would not be eligible for any fresh appointment in any State.
It would not be just and fair to uproot them.
9.
Resultantly, the writ petition is disposed of as having been rendered infructuous.
Still further, the directions given by the learned Single Judge having been reiterated by the Division Bench, the LPA also does not survive.
Both are, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.
Order accordingly.