Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases viz. Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 14702 and 14589 of 1995, pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider their claim for admission to the Four Years' course in Engineering.
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in CWP No. 14702 of 1995.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner is a member of the Scheduled Castes.
He passed the 10+2 examination in the year 1995.
On June 4, 1995, he appeared in the entrance test conducted by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra for admission to the various degree courses in different Engineering Colleges in the State.
The petitioner appeared in the test.
The result was declared on July 10, 1995.
He qualified the test.
He was placed at No. 11442 in order of merit.
3.
The result as declared by respondent No. 3 was challenged through several writ petitions in this court including CWP No. 9328 of 1995.
It was alleged that the marks had been unilaterally altered and that the result was not based on a fair assessment of the answer sheets.
These writ petitions were heard and dismissed vide order dated August 11, 1995.
4.
Since there was an element of uncertainty about the admissions to Engineering Courses, the petitioner with the obvious object of saving an academic year, sought admission to the BA Part I class at the Government Post Graduate College, Hissar.
He was admitted on July 17, 1995.
Along with his application form, he submitted the original certificate of the 10+2 examination.
However, after the dismissal of the Civil Writ Petition No. 9328 of 1995, the petitioner submitted an application dated September 9, 1995 to the Principal of his college with a request that the original certificate produced by him be returned.
While this application was pending, the petitioner received a letter dated September 12, 1995 from the Chairman of the Admission Committee, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, calling upon him to appear for interview which was fixed for September 26, 1995.
He, on receipt of this letter, made another attempt to get the original certificate from the college.
He even submitted a written request on September 24, 1995.
A copy of this representation has also been produced on record as Annexure P-5.
However, the Principal of the Collage informed him that "the original certificate of 10+2 of the applicant had been sent to KUK (Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra) for registration purpose".
Consequently, he did not get the certificate.
However, he appeared in the interview on September 26, 1995.
He was denied admission on the ground that he had failed to produce the original certificate.
5.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
However, the facts as averred in the writ petition have not been seriously disputed.
It has been pointed out that the respondents have followed the rules strictly and not made any exception in case of a candidate who had failed to produce the original certificate.
It has also been pointed out that the interview was held on September 27 and October 7, 1995.
Since the petitioner had not produced the original certificate, he was not eligible to be considered for admission.
Consequently, the respondents pray that the writ petition has no merit and may be dismissed.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner had admittedly passed the 10+2 examination.
He had secured the requisite percentage of marks, as a result of which he was eligible to appear in the entrance test.
These facts were duly verified by the respondents before he was permitted to take the test.
Having been placed in the merit list, he had a right to be considered for admission.
According to the counsel, a number of persons who were below him in order of merit, in so far as it related to the category of Scheduled Castes, have in fact been admitted.
As a result, there had been denial of equality of opportunity so far as the petitioner is concerned.
On these premises, the counsel submits that the respondents should be directed to consider the petitioner's claim and admit him.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted on the solitary ground that he had failed to produce the certificate at the time to interview on September 26, 1995 or even thereafter till the last candidates was admitted.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the petitioner not entitled to admission merely on the ground that he had failed to produce the original certificate ?
8.
Admittedly, the petitioner had produced a certified copy of the certificate dated June 6, 1995 showing that he had qualified the 10+2 examination.
Even with the writ petition, a copy of this certificate has been produced as Annexure P-6.
The respondents have not disputed the authenticity of the copy of the certificate produced by the petitioner.
It has not been suggested that he had not passed the examination or that they entertained any doubt about his eligibility.
Once it is admitted that the petitioner had qualified the 10+2 examination, the production of the original certificate was a technical formality.
It did not make the petitioner ineligible to be considered for admission.
9.
It is true that there can be a case where a person may seek admission on the basis of a forged or false certificate.
It is also possible that the Institution may entertain a doubt the correctness of the statement made by the candidate in his application form.
Production of the original certificate helps to clarify the doubts.
However, in the present case there is not even a suggestion that there was any doubt regarding the correctness of the statement made by the petitioner or that in fact, he had not passed the examination.
In such a situation, the action of the respondents in denying admission to the petitioner cannot be said to be just and fair.
10.
It also deserves mention that the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 11442 in order of merit.
It is not high .
The petitioner is not an outstanding candidate.
However, the fact remains that at least three candidates who were below him in order of merit and had been placed at Sr. Nos. 11671, 14271 and 13850 in the merit list have in fact been admitted.
If a candidate who is far below the petitioner in order of merit, has been admitted, the grievance made by him that he has been denied equality of opportunity, is well-founded.
11.
Admission to every educational course should be primarily on merit.
In a case where reservation is made, the Institution should insist on admitting candidates strictly in order of merit.
If on account of reasons entirely beyond his control, the petitioner was unable to produce the original certificate, the respondents could have granted him provisional admission subject to the production of the certificate within a specified time.
In any event, the College where he had been admitted to BA Part I Class, had forwarded the certificate to the University itself.
The college could have verified the factual position from the University.
It could have even asked the University to furnish the original certificate.
If that was not practicable, it could have given the petitioner an opportunity to procure the certificate and produce it.
On his own, the petitioner had made more than one attempt.
He had represented to the Principal for the return of the certificate.
He had been informed that the certificate had been forwarded to the University for registration purpose.
The petitioner had done all that was within his reach.
He cannot be accused of any negligence.
Resultantly, the action of the respondents in denying him admission was not just and fair.
12.
Even in the connected writ petition, the position is stated to be similar.
The candidate therein belongs to the category of Backward Class.
Admittedly, the candidates below him in order of merit have been admitted to the course.
13.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it does not appear to be in the interest of justice to deny admission to the petitioners.
Consequently, the respondents are directed to consider the claim of the two petitioners in these cases for admission to the degree course in Engineering.
Since candidates who are below them in order of merit have already been admitted, it would be open to the Institution to either admit them against the seats, if any, available or ask the candidate last in order of merit to vacate the seat.
14.
The writ petitions are, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be on order as to costs.
This order has been dictated in the presence of the counsel for the respondents.
He would convey it to the authorities concerned for compliance.