GS Singhvi, J - Resolution (Annexure P12) dated 2621993 passed by the Syndicate of the Punjabi University stopping the payment of special allowance of Rs. 80/- per month to the Senior Desk Assistants on the basis of the Punjab Government Letter No. 8/32/92/-S-1/4248, dated 3181992, has been assailed in this writ petition filed by the 66 employees of the University who are holding the posts of Senior Desk Assistants.
2.
Punjabi University is a creature of the Punjabi University Act, 1961.
It is a statutory autonomous body and falls within the definition of 'State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The University came into existence in the year 1962.
Pay-scale of the Assistants/Stenographers was Rs. 250-425 at that time.
Pay-scale of the Assistants working in the Secretariat was revised to Rs. 225-500 in the year 1970 and the Senate of the University adopted a resolution granting that pay-scale to the Assistants working in the University.
There was resentment among the employees due to reduction in the pay and ultimately the University decided to protect the emoluments payable to the employees.
Subsequent benefits of the revision of pay-scale given to the employees of the Punjab Civil Secretariat was also accorded to the employees of the University on the basis of Resolution independently passed by the Syndicate of the University.
On the recommendations of the Pay Commisison, the pay-scale of Assistants was revised to Rs. 1800-3200 and the University also adopted this revised pay-scale.
On 2541991, the Government of Punjab decided to redesignate the Assistants/Senior Assistants as Senior Desk Assistants and also decided to give special allowance to its employees @ Rs. 80/- per month.
This benefit was as subsequently extended to the Senior Assistants working in the Administrative Departments, Punjab Vidhan Sabha, Secretariat, Punjab Raj Bhawan and Punjab Public Service Commission w.e.f.
131992, but at the same time the Government directed that the benefit of special allowance shall not be given to the employees of the University.
Notwithstanding the Government directive, the Syndicate of the University decided to give the benefit of special allowance of Rs. 80/- per month to its employees.
This decision of the University was not looked upon favourably by the Government and it exerted pressure on the University to rescind the resolution granting the benefit of special allowance of Rs. 80/- per month to its Senior Desk Assistants.
To this effect letter (Annexure P-II) dated 3181992 was addressed by the Joint Secretary, Education_II, to the Registrar, Punjabi University, Patiala, Registrar, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The Syndicate of the University followed suit by passing Resolution (Annexure P-12) and stopped the special allowance which was being paid to the Senior Desk Assistants of the University.
The petitioners have assailed this decision of the Syndicate of the University on the ground of abdication of power and discrimination.
The respondent-University has defended its action by making reference to Section 21 of the Panjabi University Act, 1961.
According to the respondent, the Government has a right to audit the account of the University and the Audit Cell constituted by the Government in the University not only controls the pre-audit of the accounts but also objects to any unauthorised payment made in derogation of the directions/instructions issued by the Government and the Syndicate as well as the Financial Department of the University approved the instructions issued by the Government to withdraw the special allowance of Rs. 80/- per month payable to the petitioners and in view of the Resolution (Annexure P-12) the petitioners have no right to get the allowance of Rs. 80/- per month on the ground of alleged parity in the pay scales of the employees of the University on the one hand and those employed in the Punjab Civil Secretariat, Punjab Vidhan Sabha, Punjab Public Service Commission, Punjab Raj Bhawan etc. on the other hand where the post of Senior Desk Assistant has been abolished and now the posts are known as Senior Assistants.
3.
It is not necessary for me to make a detailed examination of the issue raised in the writ petition because I find that the matter is squarely covered by a decision of the Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 16275 of 1994 (Sardari Lal and others v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 30111995.
In that case, the High Court has examined the powers of the State Government to restrain the University from releasing the accelerated increments granted by it to the employees.
The Division Bench considered the rival contentions in the light of the provisions contained in Sections 14(5), 19, 23 and 25 and Statute 41 framed by the University and held:-  On a perusal of the provisions of the Act and Statute 41, it is obvious that the Syndicate is the principal executive body of the University.
It exercises the power of administration and management of the revenue and property of the University.
It is responsible for the conduct of administrative affairs of the University.
The State Government is obliged to provide funds.
Once in a year, the University has to submit the accounts of incomes and expenditures to the State Government for examination and audit.
However, there is no provision which may authorise the State Government to interfere with the day-to-day administration or the grant of benefits to the employees.
It is further apparent that the conditions of service of the employees of the University in the teaching and non-teaching departments are governed by the Statutes contained in Chapter II.
Statute 41 specifically vests the power with regard to the grant of accelerated increments in the authorities of the University.
The State Government has not been given any power of control or supervision in this behalf.
It is true that the State Government bears the financial burden of the expenses incurred by the University to a considerable extent.
However, in the absence of a provision specifically authorising the Government to interfere with the orders of the competent authority, it cannot be said that it had the power to stop the grant of accelerated increments to the employees.
Nor is there any provision which may oblige the University to follow the policy of the State Government or "the general principles of administration applicable to the employees of the State Government".
If the Syndicate or the Vice-Chancellor or the Registrar of the University considers it appropriate to reward the deserving employees as falling within their respective jurisdiction by the grant of accelerated increments for the good work done by them, as at present, the State Government has no jurisdiction to interfere with their orders.
The provision contained in Statute 41 has a salutary purpose to serve.
It authorises the competent authority to encourage a deserving employee.
In normal course, every employee earns the increment at the end of the year.
Under the present system, every official gets promotion virtually in his turn.
There is hardly any chance for a meritorious candidate to steal a march over his seniors.
In practice, the archaic rule of seniority is scrupulously followed with the result that there is no incentive for a person to work hard and excel.
The provision in Statute 41 provides a method by which the competent authority can encourage a deserving person.
It provides an incentive for the employees to put in their best so that they may have the satisfaction of earning a little more than others.
It contemplates the recognition of merit.
It may be that the Government has taken a policy decision to give cash rewards to its employees.
Such a decision however is in no way binding on the University."
4.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 4990 of 1985 (Dr. Rai Jasbir Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others,) 1996(1) SCT 571(P&H) decided on 6.11.1995, I had an occasion to consider a similar question involving claim of the petitioners to be paid benefit of arrears of revised pay-scale w.e.f.
111973.
The petitioners who were working as research Assistants were given the benefit of revised grade of Rs. 700-1600 with effect from 111973 but on the basis of the letter written by the Government to the University, arrears were denied to the petitioners for the period between 111973 and 8.1.1978.
One of the pleas raised by the University was that in the light of the direction given by the Government it could not accept the claim of the petitioners to be given arrears w.e.f.
111973.
After making reference to the provisions of the Guru Nanak Dev University Act, 1969 and the Statutes framed by the University, it has been held:-  "From the provisions of the Act and the Statutes it is clear that it is the Syndicate of the University which is empowered to prescribe the pay- scales and allowances etc. payable to the employees who are connected with teaching and research work.
This being the position, it was not at all justified for the University to have sought sanction from the Government for giving benefit of revised pay-scale to the petitioners with effect from 111973, particularly when the Syndicate and the Senate of the University had unequivocally resolved to give the benefit of the pay-scale of Rs. 700- 1600 with effect from 111973."
5.
In the light of the two decisions, referred to hereinabove, it is held that the Syndicate of the University has acted illegally in rescinding its earlier decision to give special allowance of Rs. 80/- per month to the petitioners.
The Resolution (Annexure P-12) passed by the Syndicate amounts to abdication of its authority to the Government and the same is legally unsustainable.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P-12 is quashed.
It is declared that the petitioners are entitled to be paid special allowance of Rs. 80/- per month on premise that Resolution (Annexure P-12) was never passed.
The respondent-University is directed to pay the consequential monetary benefits to the petitioners within a period of three months of the submission of the certified copy of this order before the Registrar.
7.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.