Sat Pal, J - The petitioner, in this case, joined the service of the Punjab Education Department as a Trained Graduate Teacher in the year 1977.
On 26th July, 1988, he joined the service of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (hereinafter referred to as the NVS) as Trained Graduate Teacher on deputation in the pay scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200.
He was absorbed in the NVS with effect from 1st May, 1991.
After his absorption in the NVS, he was given the benefit of regular service for fixation of his seniority from the date of his permanent absorption i.e. 1st May, 1991.
The petitioner submitted the representation dated 18th October, 1994 (Annexure P-3) wherein he stated that he was holding a post in the equal grade on regular basis (Rs. 1,800-3,200) in his parent Department and as such, in terms of Rule 5 of the Permanent Absorption Rules of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), he was entitled to the benefit of regular service from the date he came on deputation i.e. 26th July, 1988.
This representation was, however, rejected by the respondents vide order dated 8th December, 1994 (Annexure P- 4).
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.
2.
Mr. Kang, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submitted that the petitioner had joined the service of NVS as Trained Graduate Teacher in the pay scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 and vide notification, dated 9th September, 1988 the pay scale of Trained Graduate Teachers in his parent Department was also revised as Rs. 1,800-3,200.
He, therefore, contended that in terms of rule 5 of the rules, the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of regular service in the said grade for fixation of the seniority from the date of notification (9th September, 1988) by which the pay scale of Trained Graduate Teacher became equivalent in his parent Department to that of the pay scale in the NVS.
3.
Mr. Joshi learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, submitted that though the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of regular service for fixation of seniority with effect from 991988 under rule 5 of the Rules but the said rules were not found workable in the NVS and these rules were superseded by circular No. 2-32/94, NVS (Estt) dated 15th July, 1994 (copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-1).
The learned counsel further submitted that in any case, the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of regular service for fixation of his seniority with effect from the date he was absorbed permanently in the NVS.
In support of this submission, he placed reliance on a judgment of Calcutta High Court in the Director of Administrative Training Institute and others v. Sri Subhash Chandra Misra and another, 1995(5) S.L.R.
426.
He also submitted that NVS was an autonomous body and the rules framed by the Samiti were not statutory rules.
4.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
It is an admitted fact that vide orders dated 4th July, 1989, NVS had framed and circulated the rules which were applicable to those deputationists only who were already on deputation to the NVS.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was already on deputation to NVS on the date when these rules were framed; as such, the absorption of the petitioner in the NVS is governed by these rules.
The fixation of seniority of the deputationists who were absorbed under theses rules is governed by rule 5 of the rules which reads as under :-  "5.
FIXATION OF SENIORITY : The seniority of the person absorbed permanently in the NVS in the grade in which he is absorbed, shall be counted with effect from the date of this absorption in the Samiti.
In case, however, such a person was already holding a post in the same or equivalent grade on regular basis in his parent department, he will be entitled to the benefit of such regular service in the grade for fixation of his seniority.
In the later case the officer will be given seniority from the date from which he has been holding the post on deputation, or the date from which he has been appointed on regular basis to the same or equivalent grade in his parent department, whichever is later.
The seniority fixed in the above manner will not, however, affect the regular promotions.
The seniority fixed in the Samiti will, therefore, be operative only in filling up of vacancies in the higher grade occurring after the date of absorption."
From the above rule, it is clear that where a person has subsequent to his coming on deputation to the Samiti, got regular promotion in the same or equivalent post in his parent Department, his seniority in the post will be taken from the date of his such regular promotion to the post in his parent department or the date of his deputation, whichever is later.
As stated in the earlier part of the judgment, the petitioner got the pay scale of Rs. 1,800-3,200 in his parent Department in the post of trained Graduate Teacher vide notification dated 9th September, 1988 and the said post and the pay scale is equivalent to the pay scale and the post which he joined the NVS on deputation on 2671988 and was permanently absorbed with effect from 151991.
Since the date of getting the equivalent pay scale in his parent Department (9/9/1988) is later than the date of deputation (26/7/1988), the petitioner will be entitled to the benefit of regular service in the said grade for fixation of the seniority with effect from 9th September, 1988.
5.
We do not find any merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel of the respondents that since the rules were not workable, the petitioner will be governed by circular dated 15th July, 1994.
As stated earlier, the rules came into force with effect from 4th July, 1989, and on the date of permanent absorption, i.e. 151991, these rules were still in force and as such the case of the petitioner will be governed by the rules.
The circular dated 15th July, 1994 was not in existence on 151991 when the petitioner was permanently absorbed.
The judgment in the case of Subhash Chandra Misra (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents is also not applicable to the facts of the present case as in that case, there were no rules in the department and in the absence of the rules, it was held that the seniority of the deputationists will be determined from the date of his absorption.
For the reasons recorded hereinabove we allow the writ petition and hold that the petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of regular service for fixation of seniority in the post of Trained Graduate Teacher with effect from 9th September, 1988.
We further direct that the petitioner shall be entitled to the consequential benefits arising out of this judgment.
Petition allowed.