Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioners who are working as teachers in the Education Department pray for the issue of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the department to treat them ``at part with Sanskrit teachers...'' A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners belong the cadre of classical and vernacular teachers which is a part of the Punjab Educational Service Class III, School Cadre.
They had joined service on different dates during the period from December 8, 1952 to January 1, 1980.
The petitioners claim that all teachers belonging to the classical and vernacular cadre are entitled to parity in the matter of pay scales.
However, the State Government vide letter dated May 4, 1968 decided to treat persons teaching Sanskrit as a distinct class and awarded them a higher scale of pay.
Resultantly, all persons teaching Sanskrit who possessed the qualification of Shastri with one year's OT diploma were placed in the scale of Rs. 220-400 with a selection grade of Rs. 400-500 for 15% of the posts.
As against this, the other members of the classical and vernacular cadre remained in the scale of Rs. 125-250.
The petitioners allege that this action of the department is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Still further, the petitioners state that five of them viz. petitioner Nos. 1, 4, 9, 12 and 14 possess the qualifications of BA and OT As such, they have a right to be treated at par with the Sanskrit teachers who possess the qualification of Shastri with one year's OT diplome.
On the basis of these facts, the petitioners pray that the department should be directed to treat them at par with the Sanskrit teachers.
3.
The respondents contest the claim made by the petitioners.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the claim made by the petitioners is highly belated.
In any case, the respondents point out the matter is concluded by the decision of the Division Bench in LPA No. 1 of 1982 decided on July 28, 1982.
This decision is reported as 1982(3) SLR 58 (State of Haryana v. Jagdish Singh).
4.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners has very fairly conceded that the decision in Jagdish Singh's case (supra) is against the claim made by the petitioners.
He has only pressed his prayer in respect of the five petitioners mentioned above who are graduates with OT diploma.
Learned counsel submits that since they are graduates, the respondents should be directed to grant them the higher scale of pay.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that in view of the decision in CWP No. 493 of 1982 (Om Parkash Singhal etc. v. The State and others, decided on October 3, 1983) the claim made by even the five petitioners cannot be sustained.
5.
On January 23, 1964, the Government of India had issued instructions to the various State Governments for taking measures regarding the development of Sanskrit.
It was recommended that ``all the universities be advised that they should employ at least one traditional Sanskrit scholar... (who) should enjoy the same status and pay scales as his counterparts trained on modern lines with equivalent degrees.''
Similar recommendation even with regard to the employment of Sanskrit Pandit in High /Higher Secondary Schools was made.
It was in pursuance of these instructions that the State of Haryana had issued instructions vide letter dated May 4, 1968 by which Sanskrit teachers possessing the qualifications of Shastri with one year's OT diploma were placed in a higher scale of pay.
Resultantly, out of the cadre of classical and vernacular teachers, those Sanskrit teachers who possessed the prescribed qualifications were placed in a higher scale.
It was in background of this factual position that the other members of the classical and vernacular cadre had approached this court with the grievance that they were entitled to parity of treatment in the matter of pay scales.
The matter was considered by a Division Bench.
It was firmly ruled that the Government was competent to sanction different scales of pay on the basis of academic qualifications.
Since the qualification of Shastri with OT was treated at par with the trained graduates, the action of the respondents in granting a higher scale of pay to the Sanskrit teachers possessing the said qualification was legal and valid.
However, this did not amount to saying that every teacher who was a graduate with OT was entitled to be treated as a trained graduate and thus entitled to the higher scale of pay.
The obvious rationale for this differential treatment was that a person who possessed the qualifications of Shastri was considered as more proficient in teaching the subject.
The qualification of Shastri had a direct relationship with the proficiency of teaching.
However, merely because a teacher becomes a graduate does not mean that he becomes entitled to a higher scale of pay.
A Punjabi teacher passing BA with the subjects of English, Mathematics and Physics etc. may gain no proficiency insofar as the particular subject assigned to him is concerned.
Grant of a higher scale of pay is basically a question of policy.
If the Government in order to encourage the teaching of Sanskrit and to ensure employment of proficient teachers had decided to grant them a higher scale of pay it could not mean that all teachers who were graduates had automatically become entitled to the grant of a higher scale of pay.
In fact, no rule or instructions have been pointed out to show that merely by becoming a graduate, a teacher becomes entitled to be placed in the same scale of pay as was granted to the Sanskrit teachers.
Such a claim has in fact been rejected in Om Parkash Singhal's case (supra).
GC Mittal, J (as his Lordship then was was pleaded to observe that BA with OT is not BAB.Ed.
That is the actual position even in this case.
No other point has been urged.
6.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.