Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of an appropriate writ directing the respondents to consider his claim for admission against one of the seats reserved for 'Punjabis settled in other States'.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed his 10+2 Examination from the Govt. Model High School, Section 20, Chandigarh in the year 1995.
He applied for admission to the common entrance test conducted by the Punjabi University for admission to the 10 Engineering Colleges/Institutions in the State of Punjab.
He was admitted.
He appeard in the test held on May 28, 1995.
The result was declared on June 22, 1995.
The petitioner was placed at serial No. 1432 in the merit list.
According to the petitioner, the interviews for admission commenced on July 14, 1995.
He was actually interviewd on July 1, 1995.
The petitioner avers that he was placed in the joint waiting list for general category candidates.
3.
The petitioner states that out of the total seats available, 6 seats had been reserved for the category of Punjabis who have settled in other States.
In spite of being eligible, the petitioner alleges that his claim was not considered.
Accordingly, he has approached this Court with the present writ petition with a prayer that the respondents be directed to consider his claim against the aforementioned 6 seats.
In support of his claim, the petitioner has pointed out that his father is serving in the Directorate of Industrial Training, Punjab.
In the prescribed proforma provided by the respondent- University, the petitioner had clearly indicated that he belongs to the category - "General (Punjabi origin settled in Chandigarh (UT) as per proof attached."
The proof furnished by the petitioner consisted of a certificate issued by the Executive Magistrate, Chandigarh.
A copy of this certificate has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
It has been certified that the petitioner is "of Punjabi origin permanently settled in State namely Chandigarh UT" Still further, a copy of the judgment/decree dated May 24, 1980 delivered by the Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Phul in Civil Suit No. 85 of 25.4.1980 has been produced to indicate that the petitioner's father owns land in Punjab.
On the basis of this evidence, the petitioner alleges that he fulfilled the conditions of eligibility prescribed in the Information Brochure-cum-Application Form issued by the University, and had a right to be considered against the 6 seats reserved for the catergory of Punjabis who had settled in other States.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 viz. the Punjabi University, Patiala.
It has been averred that the petitioner had claimed admission "in the General Category for which the code is 01 and in the application form too he filled in column No. 6 - State of Domicile as 01 i.e. Punjab and has now claimed admission against the seats reserved for Punjabi settled in other States."
According to the respondent, the petitioner having not claimed his admission against the seats reserved for Punjabis settled in other States, he cannot be considered for admission against the reserved category.
5.
A short written statement has also been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
It is, however, not relevant for the controversy that arises in the present case.
6.
The petitioner has filed a replication controverting the pleas raised on behalf of the respondent-University.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
A copy of the Information Brochure-cum-Application Form issued by the respondent-University has been produced.
In para 1.3.1 it has been specifically provided that every candidate must indicate the category for which he is submitting the application.
The Codes for the catogories have been enumerated at page 39 of the Brochure.
These read as under :-  CATEGORY CODES  Category Code Category Code General (01) Cards of Defence personnel/Para-military personnel (08) Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes (02) Terrorist/Riot Victims (09) Backward Class (03) Freedom fighters Sportsmen/Women (04) their children/grand children (11) Backward Area (05) Physically Handicapped (12) Border Area (06) Rural Area Political sufferers their children/grand children (07) The provision regarding reservation at the institution where the petitioner is seeking admission is contained in para 9.2 where the number of seats reserved for different categories has been indicated.
A perusal thereof shows that 2 seats each have been reserved in the specialities of Computer, Electrotnics and Mechanical Engineering.
3 of these are for the 'free seats' and the other 3 for the 'payment seats'.
It is also the admitted position that similar reservation has not been made at the Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana.
The petitioner is a candidate for admission to one of the seats in the aforesaid two Institutions.
The short question that arises in this case is - Had the petitioner applied for admission against one of the seats reserved for the category of "Punjabis settled in other States" ?
While the petitioner contends that he had, it is pleaded on behalf of the University, that he had not.
8.
A perusal of the extract from the Brochure as quoted above shows that a Code had been allotted to each category for which the seats have been reserved.
To illustrate, a person applying against the seats reserved for Scheduled Caste or Tribes has to indicate Code 02 in the relevant column.
Similarly, a person who is physically handicapped or belongs to rural area, has to indicate Code 11 or 12.
From perusal of this categorisation, it is obvious that any seat which does not fall in category 02 to category 12 shall be deemed to fall in the general category for which the Code 01 has been prescribed.
So far as the category of 'Punjabis settled in other States' is concerned, no separate Code has been prescribed.
Consequently, it has to be deemed to fall in the general category - 01.
A candidate who has applied for seat in the general category will, thus, have a right to be considered against the seats reserved for the Punjabis settled in other States provided he satisfies the conditions.
9.
In case a separate Code had been allotted for the seats reserved for the Punjabis who have settled in other States, and the petitioner had not indicated that Code in his application form, it may have been possible for the University to contend that the petitioner was not entitled to be considered against one of the reserved seats.
However, it being the admitted position that no separate Code had been allotted for this category, it cannot be said that the petitioner was not entitled to be considered for these seats.
The contention raised on behalf of the University in this behalf cannot be sustained.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
In the year 1994, the entrance test had been conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University.
A copy of the Information Brochure-cum-Application Form issued by the University has been produced by Mr. Puneet Jindal, learned counsel for the petitioner.
A perusal thereof shows that for the category of persons of 'Punjabi origin settled in other States" Code 13 had been allotted.
This year for the reasons best known to the University, this Code was omitted.
The mere omission of the Code cannot render an eligible person as ineligible for being considered.
On the contrary, every person who does not fall in any other catagories specified from 02 to 12, shall have a right to be considered subject to his eligibility for the seats reserved for the category of Punjabis who have settled in other States.
11.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner's father owns land in the State of Punjab.
It is also admitted that he is serving in the Directorate of Industrial Training, Punjab and is posted at Chandigarh.
Mr. Jindal states that the petitioner's father has been working at Chandigarh since the year 1961.
He further submits that the petitioner was born at Chandigarh and has studied at Chandigarh.
These facts have not been disputed.
It is also the admitted position that the Executive Magistrate, Chandigarh has issued a certificate indicating that the petitioner's father is a permanent resident of this place.
In this situation, petitioner's eligibility to be considered against the seats reserved for Punjabis who have settled in other States cannot be disputed.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
According to the instructions issued by the State of Punjab the children of the employees of the State Govt. posted outside the State are considered as domiciles of Punjab.
That being so, the petitioner is also considered as a domicile of Punjab.
However, he has been excluded from consideration against the seats reserved for the domiciles of Punjab on the ground that he has passed the examination from a school in Chandigarh.
The result is that the petitioner though a Punjabi residing in Chandigarh is rendered ineligible to be considered against the seats reserved for the domiciles of Punjab on the ground that he has passed the 10+2 Examination from Chandigarh.
He is also excluded from consideration against the seats reserved for Punjabis settled outside on the ground that the Code indicated in the application form relates to the general category.
This is highly unfair.
Candidates for admission to educational institutions cannot be excluded from consideration on such grounds.
13.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for admission to the Engineering Course(s) at the institutions for which he has submitted his application against the seats reserved for Punjabis who have settled in other States.
Mr. MS Khaira, learned counsel for respondent No. 3 has stated that the seats at the Institute have not yet been filled up.
The petitioner's claim shall be considered against one of these seats.
14.
The writ petition is, according, allowed in the above terms.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
A copy of this order be given Dasti to the counsel for the parties on payment of requisite charges.
Petition allowed.