Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners are aggrieved by the orders dated February 18, 1995 by which their admission to the Diploma in Education Course has been cancelled on the ground that they were not admitted on the basis of merit.
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
The petitioners were admitted to the Diploma in Education Course in the year 1992.
They appeared in the Part I examination held in the year 1993.
Therafter they took Part II examination held in the year 1994.
The petitioners' result of Part II was declared.
They were given provisional certificates.
After the petitioners had appeared in the Part II Examination in July 1994, they were given show cause notices dated November 22, 1994 calling upon them to explain as to why their admission be not cancelled.
The only ground indicated in the show cause notices was that on enquiry it has been reported that they were not entitled to admission on their merit.
The petitioners submitted their respective replies.
Thereafter by two separate orders dated February 18, 1995 it has been held that the petitioners were not entitled to admission on the basis of their merit.
Their replies, which had been submitted in response to the show cause notices, have been rejected.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
They challenged the orders on different grounds which shall be presently discussed.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim.
They have filed a written statement.
It has been averred that the petitioners were admitted in the year 1992.
However, some irregularities were committed by the Selection Committee and the Head of the Institution.
A complaint to this effect was received in the office of the Director, Secondary Education Haryana, Chandigarh i.e. respondent No. 2 and the enquiry was conducted by the Additional Director.
As a result of this enquiry the persons at fault were suspended.
Departmental action against them is being taken.
It has been further averred that the petitioners got only 5755%and 6320% marks whereas the last candidate who had been admitted on the basis of merit had secured 6620% marks.
The petitioners were wrongly admitted and as such their admission has been cancelled after giving them reasonable opportunity to show cause.
The respondents further allege that the petitioners got admission "by adopting deceitful means by connivance with the then Headmistress."
On these grounds, the respondents pray that the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
The petitioners have filed replication.
It has been, inter alia, pointed out that a similar show cause notice dated November 22, 1994 had been issued to one Rajesh Kumar son of Shri Sita Ram.
He had also been admitted alongwith the petitioners.
In his case no action has been taken.
On the contrary, he has been declared to have passed the examination vide letter dated March 15, 1995 issued by respondent No. 2.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P9 with the replication.
Thereafter he was also allowed to appear in the interview for the posts of JBT Teachers.
The petitioners also aver that they had passed Part I examination securing high marks and that they deserved to be admitted.
It has also been stated that even though initially a number of employees had been suspended yet the Department had reinstated all the suspended employees except two of them.
The other averments made in the written statement have also controverted.
It has been alleged that the petitioners had not adopted any deceitful means.
They had disclosed correct facts.
5.
We have heard Mr. Laler, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Arun Nehra, for the respondents.
6.
On behalf of the petitioners, it has been submitted that the action of the respondents is wholly arbitrary and illegal.
The only ground mentioned in the show cause notices was that the petitioners had been admitted "without merit".
It was never suggested that the petitioners had got admission "by adopting deceitful means" or by conniving with the then Headmistress.
Since the petitioners had disclosed correct facts in their applications and produced the necessary documents, they cannot be held to have been wrongly admitted or made to suffer for some supposed default on the part of the Head of the Institution or the Selection Committee.
On behalf of the respondents, Mr. Arun Nehra has contended that the petitioners having secured lesser marks than the last candidate who was admitted on the basis of merit, it must be presumed that they had acted in collusion with the Head of the Institution and obtained their admission by fraud.
Mr. Nehra has placed strong reliance on the decision of Civil Writ Petition No. 4043 of 1995 vide order dated August 8, 1995.
7.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :  (i) Did the petitioners obtain admission by adopting deceitful means or fraud ?
(ii) Were the respondents entitled to cancel the admission after the petitioners had studied for two years and even taken the final examination ?
Regarding No. 1.
-  8.
The show cause notices issued to the petitioners by the District Education Officer have been produced on the record as Annexures P5 and P6.
The only reason mentioned in the notices is that the admission was illegal as it was "without merit".
There is not even a suggestion that the petitioners had disclosed wrong facts or played fraud.
No facts have been mentioned which may even remotely suggest that the petitioners had adopted deceitful means.
This plea has been raised for the first time in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
9.
It is true that in the final orders passed by the District Education Officer, it has been observed that petitioner No. 1 had secured 5775% marks while the last candidate admitted to the course had achieved 6620%.
This, however, is not sufficient to hold that the petitioners had played fraud or adopted deceitful means.
Even no such suggestion was made in the show cause notices issued to the petitioners.
10.
It is true that fraud affects every action.
One who plays fraud must suffer.
However, mere suspicion is not sufficient to hold that a person had committed fraud.
There must be clear evidence to support such an allegation.
In the present case, on being asked, Mr. Nehra could not refer to any evidence from which an inference of fraud or deceitful means could be even remotely drawn.
His only submission was that mere fact that persons higher in order of merit were not admitted should lead to assumption of fraud.
11.
We are unable to accept this submission.
It may be that persons who were higher in order of merit had got admission elsewhere or were no longer interested in joining the course.
In the present case, inference of fraud is impermissible.
The petitioners having disclosed full facts, it cannot be said that they were guilty of committing fraud or adopting deceitful means.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
If the respondents were convinced that the petitioners had committed fraud, they should have so alleged in the show cause notices.
The petitioners would have been in a position to answer the charge.
The respondents would have then considered their explanation and recorded a finding.
However, without giving any opportunity to the petitioners, the respondents were not entitled to even allege that the petitioners had secured admission by deceitful means.
13.
Accordingly, we answer the first question in the negative and hold that the petitioners had not committed any fraud or adopted any deceitful means by securing admission to the Diploma in Education Course at the respondents' Institute.
Regarding No. 2.
-  14.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners had joined the course in the year 1992.
In the impugned order, it has been observed that during personal hearing the petitioners had given in writing that they were admitted on October 14, 1992.
According to the Attendance Register of the School, they were present with effect from December 1, 1992.
It may be so.
Yet the petitioners had attended the requisite percentage of Lectures.
They did appear in the Part I examination held in the year 1993.
They had done reasonably well in the examination.
They have stated in their replication that petitioner No. 1 had stood third in the Institution while petitioner No. 2 was amongst the first six students in the merit list.
Thereafter they had attended classes in Part II.
They did appear in the examination held in July 1994.
The show cause notices were issued to the petitioners on November 22, 1994.
As already noticed, there is not even a suggestion that the petitioners had, at any stage, given any inaccurate information to the Institution at the time of their admission or thereafter.
The petitioners have, thus, spent two years of their career at the Institution.
They have spent money and energy.
In fact petitioner No. 1 was a student for the award of degree of MA in Ancient History at the Kurukshetra University and had passed two semesters.
He had left the course in between for joining the Diploma in Education Course.
If the respondents had questioned the petitioners' admission soon after their joining the course, it may have been possible for them to join some other course and save two years of their academic career.
After such a long delay, in our view, the respondents cannot be permitted to question the admission of the petitioners.
15.
We are not unmindful of the fact that certain candidates with higher marks were not admitted.
This was a fact which was clear from the record.
On this basis, the respondents may have been entitled to cancel the admission granted to the petitioners.
Action had to be taken promptly.
They were not entitled to wait for the petitioners to complete the course.
In the circumstances of the present case, we think that the respondents were estopped by their own conduct from questioning the legality of the admission granted to the petitioners.
16.
Accordingly, we answer the second question in the negative and hold that the respondents were not entitled to cancel the petitioners' admission after they had completed the course of study.
17.
Mr. Nehra has placed strong reliance on the decision of Civil Writ Petition No. 4043 of 1995 Jagdish Chand v. State of Haryana etc. We have perused the file of this case.
It deserves notice at the outset that petitioner Jagdish Chand had not controverted the averments in the written statement by filing any replication.
Secondly the fact that respondents had upheld the admission of Rajesh Kumar and declared his result vide letter dated March 15, 1995 was brought to the notice of the Bench.
These facts are vital to the decision of the case.
If respondent No. 2 has accepted the claim of Rajesh Kumar in spite of the fact that he was admitted alongwith the petitioners, there is no reason for treating the petitioners differently.
Plea in the case of Rajesh Kumar was similar to that of the petitioners.
Still further, the petitioners have also filed Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 10981 of 1995.
With this application, they have produced the show cause notices dated November 22, 1994 which had been issued to Mr. Rajesh Kumar.
Similar notices were served on the petitioners.
If in the case of Rajesh Kumar, the respondents have held the admission to be valid and declared his result, it is not understood why different yardstick has been adopted in the case of the petitioners.
Furthermore, another Division Bench while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 11546 of 1995 has taken the view that action in cancelling admission when a candidate is not found to have either suppressed any fact or misled the authorities in securing his appearance in the entrance test and admission on that basis cannot be sustained.
A copy of this order of the Division Bench has also been produced alongwith the Civil Miscellaneous Application, referred to above.
After consideration of the matter, we are inclined to follow the view taken by the Division Bench which decided Civil Writ Petition No11546 of 1995 in preference to the view taken by the Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 4043 of 1995.
In view of the above, we find that the action of the respondents in cancelling the admission of the petitioners after they had completed the course of study and taken the examination was unjust and unfair.
We accordingly quash it and direct the respondents to declare the result of the petitioners and in case they have passed, to give them the prescribed Diploma.
In the circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.