SS Sodhi & VK Bali, JJ - Once a charge-sheet for the imposition of a major punishment, as envisaged by Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules') has been served, does it thereby preclude the Punishing Authority from inflicting a minor punishment except upon completion of enquiry under the said rule 8 ?
In other words, before the completion of such an enquiry, is the Punishing Authority empowered to inflict a minor penalty just upon consideration of the reply/defence of the government employee concerned?
Herein lies the point in issue.
2.
The challenge here is to the imposition of the minor punishment of stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect imposed upon the petitioner Puran Chand Sharma, Headmaster Government High School, Bhareri Kalan, in District Ambala, on the ground that a charge-sheet having been served upon the petitioner in terms of rule 8 of the Rules, the imposition of a minor punishment merely upon consideration of the reply to the charge-sheet without completing the enquiry was not competent.
3.
The legal proposition canvassed does indeed find support from judicial precedents.
In State of Punjab and another v. Ch.
M Singh, 1986(1) S.L.J 49, a charge-sheet relating to a major penalty was served upon the plaintiff.
On considering his reply, however, the minor punishment of stoppage of two increments was imposed upon him.
In the suit to challenge this order, JV Gupta, J observed "It may be that in order to inflict minor punishment no enquiry as such may be conducted or is necessary but once, after issuing the chargesheet under rule 8, the enquiry is held (then minor punishment may be imposed as contemplated in clause (3) of rule 9 if the punishing authority so chooses at the time of awarding the punishment instead of the major punishment.
But at the same time once the proceeding has been initiated under rule 8, then for inflicting a minor punishment, the procedure as required under rule 8 has to be followed for awarding a minor punishment under rule 9(3)."
This was later approved and followed by VK Jhanji, J in Ram Kumar Goel v. The State of Haryana and another, 1992(1) SCT 67 (P&H) : 1991(2) P.L.R.
352 We, however, cannot, with respect, subscribe to this view.
4.
As is well known, the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, categorise penalties that may be imposed upon a government employee as minor or major.
The procedure for the imposition of major penalties is set out in rule 8 thereof, while, for the imposition of a minor penalty, the procedure laid down in rule 10 has to be complied with.
5.
A reading of rules 8 and 10 would show that at the initial stage, there is an obvious over-lapping with regard to the essential requirement, under both these rules, concerning the government employee, being informed, in writing, of the proposal to take action against him and of the imputation of misconduct and misbehaviour, on which it is proposed to be taken and further the opportunity to be afforded to him to represent against the proposed action and state his defence thereto.
It is from the stage subsequent to this that procedural differences emerge in the matter of the imposition of major and minor penalties.
6.
In so far as minor penalties are concerned, the procedural requirements for the imposition thereof are as set forth in rule 10 of the Rules.
A reading of this rule would show that all that is required is that the government employee concerned be informed in writing of the proposal to take action against him and the imputations of misconduct or misbehavour on which it is proposed to be taken, be conveyed to him and the Punishing Authority is thereafter empowered to impose minor penalties upon such government employee, after taking into consideration the representation, if any, that may be submitted by him.
These requirements, it will be seen, would stand satisfied even as per the procedure pertaining to the imposition of a major penalty under rule 8, by the service of the charge-sheet upon the government employee and consideration of his defence thereto.
This being so, we see no reason in law or in principle, to hold that merely because the charge-sheet has been served in terms of rule 8 of the Rules, even though the requirements of rule 10 stand complied with, the Punishing Authority must withhold consideration of the imposition of a minor punishment until after the entire enquiry in terms of rule 8 of the Rules has been completed.
Seen in this light, we are constrained to hold that the two judgments of this Court in Ch.
M Singh and Raj Kumar Goel's case (supra) do not lay down correct law and have consequently to be overruled.
7.
We must, however, hasten to clarify here that under rule 10 of the Rules, there is also an enabling provision for directing that an enquiry in respect of a minor punishment too be held in the same manner as laid down in sub-rules (3) to (23) of rule 8 of the Rules.
It goes without saying, that if an enquiry is directed to be held in this manner, it must, indeed, be so held and therefore the entire record of such an enquiry would have to be taken into account while considering the imposition of even a minor penalty.
8.
Such thus being the clear position in law, no exception can be taken to the minor penalty imposed upon the petitioner-Puran Chand Sharma merely on the ground that such penalty had been imposed after the service of a charge-sheet under rule 8 of the Rules without the completion of the enquiry thereunder.
No occasion thus arises for a review of our order dismissing the writ petition filed by the petitioners.
Petition dismissed.