Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Head Master with Respondent No. 3 viz. SS Arya High School, Raman, District Bathinda on February 19, 1990.
On December 26, 1990, the President of the School informed the petitioner that his work and conduct during probationary period had remained unsatisfactory.
The managing committee had, thus, decided to relieve him "with immediate effect".
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner approached the Tribunal constituted under the provisions of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979.
The Tribunal found that an appeal lies "only regarding dismissal, removal reduction in the rank and not regarding termination of services and thus the termination of the appellant does not fall in any one of the provisions."
Accordingly, it dismissed the appeal.
Aggrieved by the order of termination and that passed by the Tribunal, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He alleges that the order of termination is in fact punitive in character.
It casts a stigma.
It has not been passed in conformity with the terms of appointment.
It is violative of the principles of natural justice and cannot, thus, be sustained.
2.
The Respondent-Management contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that "The President of the School - Shri Ajit Kumar, visited the School on 20.12.1990 and found that some of the teaching staff members were absent and he requested the petitioner to show Attendance Register.
To his great surprise, the petitioner flatly refused to show him the attendance register."
It has been further stated that "the work and conduct of the appellant/petitioner during the first year of his probation period was not satisfactory and the management vide its duly convened meeting passed resolution No. 7 on 24121990 and decided to dispense with the services of the petitioner......" On these premises, it is urged that the action is legal and valid.
3.
Mr. Mukand Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the order dated December 26, 1990 is patently stigmatic and amounted to removal from service.
Consequently, the Tribunal has erred in holding that the appeal was not competent.
He has further submitted that the order was violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as no opportunity was ever afforded to the petitioner to explain his position, with regard to the allegation that he had refused to show the register to the President.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. RL Gupta, learned counsel for the Respondent-Management.
4.
The order of appointment given to the petitioner has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
In para 9 of this order, it has been provided as under :-  "As per the rules, the employee shall be on one year probation and in case he fails to successfully complete this period, his services can be dispensed with by the appointing authority after giving him notice."
Admittedly, this period of probation had not expired when his services were dispensed with by the impugned order on the ground that the petitioner's "work and conduct during probationary period" had remained unsatisfactory.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Was the order of termination a simple innocuous order passed in conformity with the terms of appointment or was and a camouflage for removal from service ?
6.
The Legislature of Punjab enacted the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 with the object of providing for "security of service to employees of privately managed recognised schools in the State of Punjab and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto".
Section 4 of the Act categorically provides that "no employee shall be dismissed, removed or reduced either in rank or within a time scale nor shall his services be otherwise terminated except with the prior approval of the Director".
Clause (2) gives the aggrieved employee the right to file an appeal before the School Tribunal within three months from the date of the communication of the order of dismissal, removal or reduction.
Under Section 15 of the Act, the State Government has been empowered to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
The rules were actually notified in the year 1981.
Rule 16 enumerates the penalties.
Clause (2) inter alia provides that the termination of services "of an employee appointed on probation, during or at the end of the period of his probation, in accordance with the terms of his appointment or the rules and orders governing such probation" shall not amount to a penalty within the meaning of Rule 16.
7.
In accordance with these provisions, it was incumbent on the Tribunal to determine as to whether or not the termination of the petitioner's services was "with the prior approval of the Director" and "in accordance with the terms of his appointment".
The Tribunal has not addressed itself to this aspect at all.
It has not considered whether the management had actually obtained the prior approval of the Director as required under Section 4.
It has also not examined as to whether or not the termination was in conformity to the terms of appointment.
8.
Mr. Mukand Gupta, counsel for the petitioner submits that according to the terms of appointment, the services of the petitioner could be dispensed with "after giving him notice".
No notice having been given, the termination was not in conformity with the terms of appointment and was, thus, penal in character.
He further points out that according to the terms of appointment, a month's notice or advance salary in lieu thereof had to be paid to the petitioner.
9.
Mr. RL Gupta, learned counsel for the respondent-management points out that such a plea has not been specifically raised before the Tribunal.
Even if it is assumed that the plea has not been specifically raised, the question clearly arises in the case.
The Tribunal had to hold that the order was not penal in character and was in conformity with the terms of appointment before it could dismiss the appeal on the ground that it was not maintainable.
The mere fact that the petitioner was on probation was not enough to arrive at the conclusion that the termination was not penal and that the appeal was not competent.
I, however, do not wish to express any final opinion in the matter lest it should prejudice the case of either party.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the order passed by the Tribunal cannot be sustained.
It is, accordingly, set aside.
The matter is remitted to the Tribunal for a fresh decision in accordance with law.
It would be appreciated if the Tribunal decides the matter expeditiously and in any case within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.