GS Singhvi, J - Appeal filed by the respondent Ramesh Kumar against the order dated 7.10.1988 passed by the Managing Director, Haryana State Federation of Consumers' Cooperative Wholesale Stores Ltd, dismissing him from service was allowed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh vide order dated 1781989 (Annexure P-5) on two grounds namely that the authority which issued the order of punishment was not competent to do so and that the inquiry report on the basis of which order of punishment was passed did not inspire confidence.
2.
The petitioner has questioned the order of Registrar on the ground that the Registrar has failed to take into consideration provisions contained in rule 9 of the Staff Service Rules of the Haryana State Federation of Consumers Cooperative Wholesale Stores Limited, 1975 and the Registrar has not given any reason for holding that the enquiry report which was made basis for punishing respondent No. 2 did not inspire confidence.
3.
In support of the writ petition, Mr. Hemant Kumar argued that the Registrar who had decided the appeal filed by the respondent has committed a serious error in holding that the order of punishment was without jurisdiction.
He argued that under Rule 9 of Rules, 1975, order of punishment of dismissal can be passed by the appointing authority and for an employee who was drawing a basic pay of Rs. 160/-, the Managing Director was the appointing authority and this aspect of the case has altogether been overlooked by the Registrar.
Shri Hemant Kumar then argued that the order passed by the Registrar castigating the inquiry report as bad is cryptic and arbitrary.
Shri Sandhu learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has argued that respondent No. 2 was appointed by the Board of Directors of Ambala Central Co-operative Consumer Store and, therefore, order of dismissal could not have been passed by an authority other than the Board of Directors of the Petitioner-Federation.
4.
It is not a matter of dispute between the parties that initially respondent No. 2 was appointed by the Ambala Cooperative Consumer Store and that appointment was given to him by the Board of Directors.
Subsequently, he was absorbed in the service of petitioner-Federation and was promoted as Store Keeper in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400 with effect from 2021980.
It is this post which he was holding on the date of passing of the order of punishment.
Rule 9 of Rules 1975 which is relevant for the purpose of deciding the question of competence of the Managing Director reads thus :  "Rule 9 - Appointment of employees, general conditions of their service and training of staff.
9(a) The Appointing Authority :  The appointment of the staff of all categories of staff shall be made by the Board of Directors/Staff Committee except for the staff carrying initial basic pay upto to Rs. 250/- for which Managing Director shall be the appointing authority;  (b) The appointing authority may delegate all or some of its powers to any other Officer Staff Committee or any other sub-Committee of its Board of Directors."
5.
A look at the above quoted rule shows that for the staff carrying initial basic pay upto Rs. 250/-, the appointing authority was the Managing Director.
It is thus clear that for a person appointed with a basic pay upto Rs. 250/-, the Managing Director was the appointing authority and so was the case of respondent No. 2.
Argument of Shri Sandhu that only Board of Directors should have removed respondent No. 2 from service cannot be accepted for the simple reason that the expression used in the Rules, 1975 is "appointing authority" and not "the authority which appointed".
Article 311 of the Constitution of India contemplates that no civil servant can be removed from the service except by an authority which appointed him.
In a number of cases the Apex Court and the various High Courts have taken a view that order of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank etc. cannot be passed by an authority other than the one which had appointed the employee.
Of course, in some cases a view has been taken that a co-ordinate authority can pass such an order.
Those decisions cannot be applied to a case where power to pass an order of punishment vests in the appointing authority.
Therefore, in the case of the petitioner the Managing Director, who has been defined as appointing authority for employees like the petitioner, was competent to make the order of punishment.
It must, therefore, be held that the Registrar has committed patent illegality in taking the view that the order of punishment passed against respondent No. 2 is illegal because the Board of Directors of the petitioner has not passed that order.
6.
Second argument of Shri Hemant Kumar namely that the order of Registrar is non-speaking order also merits acceptance.
The only conclusion which has been recorded by the Registrar in regard to the inquiry report is in the following words :  "Furthermore, the perusal of the inquiry report also does not inspire confidence as to how the appellant was held liable for shortage of the stock which were never entrusted to him."
This conclusion of the Registrar is not supported by any reason whatsoever.
In my opinion, the order passed by the Registrar can appropriately be described as a dumb order.
The Registrar who was acting as a quasi-judicial authority was duty bound to record sufficient reasons for setting aside order of punishment passed by the employer.
A look at the order of punishment shows that after a detailed inquiry, the competent authority had issued a show cause notice to respondent No. 2 and then passed a reasoned order.
It was legally not permissible for the Registrar to upset that order by a bald and cryptic order like Annexure P5.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 1781989 passed by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies is declared illegal and is quashed.
The Registrar shall reconsider the appeal filed by respondent No. 2 on merit and decide it afresh after giving notice to both the parties.
The Registrar should decide the appeal of respondent No. 2 as early as possible but in any case within a period of four months after service of notice on both the parties.
No costs.