GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves a challenge to the order of transfer (Annexure P-2) dated 1821993 by which the petitioner has been posted at Government Middle School, Rangilpur, district Ropar.
2.
As per petitioner's own showing, he was posted as Science Teacher at Government High School, Mohali, district Ropar, vide order (Annexure P-1) dated 4.12.1990 and since then he continued to work at Government Senior Secondary School, Mohali (Ropar) till the issue of order (Annexure P-2).
3.
Petitioner's case is that during the visit of Education Minister, Punjab, to Senior Secondary School, Mohali, on 27.7.1992, four teachers, namely, Amarjit Kaur, Chander Kanta, Smt. Brij Mohini and Smt. Pritam Gupta, were found to be not performing their duties properly.
The Education Minister ordered their transfer.
However, after some months, all the four teachers were re-adjusted in the Government Senior Secondary School, Mohali.
At the same time, respondent No. 6 has been posted at the said school resulting in displacement of the petitioner.
4.
The petitioner has pleaded that the impugned order has been passed in the colourable exercise of power by the respondents and he has been arbitrarily picked up for transfer from the school at Mohali.
5.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 have opposed the writ petition by pleading that the impugned transfer has been necessitated on administrative ground.
They have further pleaded that four teachers were adjusted looking at their family conditions and the petitioners who has already stayed at the Government Senior Secondary School, Mohali, for about 8 years, has no right to continue in the same school.
6.
Respondent No. 6 has pleaded that she has been adjusted because her husband is also working at a nearby place, namely, Chandigarh.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the respondents and in my opinion there is no merit in the writ petition.
Although it is true that four teachers, who were transferred on the ground of non-performance of their duties strictly in accordance with the required norms have been re-adjusted but mere factum of their re-adjustment cannot be a ground for presuming that the Government has arbitrarily exercised its power of transfer.
The very fact that the four lady-teachers have been re-adjusted shows the compassionate approach of the Government in the matter of transfer.
The petitioner, who has already worked in one school for 8 years, can hardly complain of his displacement.
Similarly, adjustment of respondent No. 6 at Government Senior Secondary School, Mohali, cannot be termed as arbitrary because it is an accepted policy of the Government that husband and wife should be posted at the same place or nearby places as far as possible.
8.
The petition is held to be without merit and is, therefore, dismissed.
However, taking into consideration the fact that the petitioner had been continuing in Government Secondary School, Mohali, under an interim order passed by this Court and if he is relieved at this stage, study of the students would suffer.
I direct that notwithstanding the dismissal of this writ petition, the petitioner should be relieved from the present place of posting only at the end of the current academic session.
Petition dismissed.