Jawahar Lal Gupta, J(Oral) - The petitioners who are working as Sub-Station Attendants at Guru Nanak Dev Thermal Plant, Bhatinda, pray for the issue of a direction to the respondents to appoint them as Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The respondents contest their claim.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On July 29, 1992, the Punjab State Electricity Board issued an advertisement inviting applications for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The following qualifications and experience were prescribed :  "Recognised Diploma in Mechanical and or Electrical Engg.
having at least 3 years' experience as Plant Attendant on Condensor Boiler Feed Pump and other Auxiliaries of Thermal Plant of minimum 15 MW capacity or above.
Qualification of diploma can be relaxed in respect of persons having first class Boiler Competency Certificate and long experience on Boiler.
OR Matric and ITI in Elect/Mech.
Traders with 8 years experience as Plant Attendant on Condensor and other Auxiliaries of Thermal Plant of minimum 15 MW capacity or above."
(emphasise supplied) The petitioners applied for these posts.
They claim that they were eligible and had been duly selected.
The grievance sought to be made out is that in spite of having been selected, they have not been appointed to the posts in question.
They consequently pray that a direction for issue of appointment letters be given to the respondents.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioners possess the academic qualifications required for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
However, they have not got the requisite experience.
It has been further averred that the Sub-Station Attendants are concerned with the distribution of electricity and they are entitled to be promoted to the post of Sub-Station Operators but they are not qualified to be appointed as Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The respondents point out that in view of the fact that the Sub-Station Attendants have been agitating for being considered for appointment as Auxiliary Plant Attendants, the Board had appointed a Committee to go into the matter.
This Committee submitted its report on September 24, 1992.
Since the seniority of Sub-Station Attendants was being maintained at the Board level for their promotion to the posts of Sub-Station Operators and their basic duties on the plants were to operate the switchgears which were similar to the duties performed by them, they were engaged in the distribution of power and were not entitled to be considered for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants for which only those experienced in 'generation of power' were suitable.
In view of this report, the petitioners were not considered as eligible for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
It has been also pointed out that the applications of the petitioners were considered but after the receipt of the recommendations of the Committee, a copy of which has been produced as annexure R-1 with the written statement, applications were rejected.
They were interviewed in accordance with the directions given by this High Court but were not selected as they were not "in possession of requisite experience....."  4.
The petitioners have filed an additional affidavit reiterating their claim.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. H S Bhakshi, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that there is no post of Plant Attendant in the Board.
Consequently, the counsel urges that the stipulation in the advertisement cannot be read to mean that only those persons who are designated as Plant Attendants are entitled to be considered.
He further submits that a number of persons who were actually not performing the duties of Plant Attendants had in fact been considered and selected.
In this situation, learned counsel submits that the action of the respondents in not appointing the petitioners is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
This claim of the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
The two questions that arise are (i) Are the petitioners eligible to be considered ?
and (ii) Have they been actually selected so as to entitle them to claim the issue of a direction to the respondents to appoint them ?
7.
A perusal of the advertisement shows that only such persons as have the experience of working as Plant Attendants are eligible to be considered for appointment.
The petitioners are admittedly holding the posts of Sub-Station Attendants.
There is nothing on record to show they are performing the duties of Plant Attendants.
In fact it appears that the Board has two categories of employees viz. (i) those who are associated with the production of electricity and (ii) those who are charged with the responsibilities of distribution of power.
The petitioners who are operating switchgears are concerned with the distribution of power and not with the production of electricity.
In any case, the petitioners are not Plant Attendants and consequently they are not eligible to be considered.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the expression 'Plant Attendant' has been used loosely.
He submits that there is no cadre of Plant Attendants.
It may or may not be so.
There is no averment in the writ petition in this behalf.
Consequently, this contention cannot be entertained.
9.
Learned counsel has further contended that others who were similarly situated have actually been appointed.
This contention also cannot be entertained.
Firstly the selected persons have not been impleaded as parties.
Secondly even if it is assumed that the Board has appointed certain persons who were not working as Plant Attendants, the action of the Board may be questionable.
However, a writ of mandamus cannot be issued directing the respondents to consider the petitioner who in my view are not eligible to be appointed.
10.
The submission in the writ petition that the petitioners have actually been selected and thus have a right to be selected is totally belied by the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been categorically averred that the petitioners were not eligible and consequently their applications were rejected.
In such a situation the question of their having been selected does not arise.
Even otherwise, the only document on the basis of which this contention has been raised is the list at Annexure P-7.
This list is of "general category candidates" for the post of "Auxiliary Plant Attendants at the Thermal Plants".
The list of candidates cannot be called a list of selected candidates.
11.
Accordingly there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.