VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner passed Higher Secondary Examination from Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi in the year 1977.
Thereafter, she passed JBT (Home Craft) 2 years' course from the Department of Industrial Training, Haryana, in the year 1979.
She also passed Diploma in Education (6 months' condensed course) in August, 1987.
This certificate is equivalent to JBT Part-II/Diploma in Education Part-II Certificate issued by the Education Department, Haryana.
2.
Vide advertisement dated 2971991, respondents invited applications for the post of JBT teachers.
The qualification prescribed under the advertisement was Matric (full subjects) from Haryana State Education Board, Bhiwani; (ii) passing 2 years of JBT from Haryana Education Department.
In response to the advertisement, petitioner having passed Higher Secondary Examination with Hindi, Civics, Economics, Domestic Science and Sanskrit subjects, applied for the post of JBT teacher and she was selected and placed at Sr. No.131 of the merit fist.
Candidates who were lower in merit i.e. at Serial Nos. 132 to 135 were appointed but appointment was not given to the petitioner.
Petitioner, has come to this court through the present writ petition seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner from the date persons lower in merit were appointed.
3.
In reply, the respondents have stated that the name of the petitioner was not recommended as JBT teacher as she did not fulfil the conditions as mentioned in the advertisement.
According to the respondents Government had taken decision on October 20, 1986 that Matric and Higher Secondary were to be taken equivalent provided the candidates had passed with Hindi and Mathematics with 33 per cent marks.
In the case of the petitioner, though she had the subject of Hindi but there was no subject of Mathematics and thus certificate of Higher Secondary Examination cannot be taken to be equivalent.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the stand of the respondents cannot be sustained.
Petitioner has given certain instances where persons had not passed Matric/Higher Secondary Examination with Mathematics, from Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi, but since they had passed the said examinations before the 1986, their services were regularised.
Some such instances are as under :  (i) One Bimla Devi was appointed by the District Education Officer, Rohtak, vide letter No. E3-84/7259-7855 dated 28111984.
(ii) Similarly, one Krishna Devi w/o Shant Ram VPO Jasrana (Sonepat) was appointed in Govt. High School, Dhakla vide order No.E-3-87/1111-1450 dated 1941987.
5.
One Santosh Kumari who had passed Higher Secondary Examination from Central Board of Secondary Education in the year 1972 without Mathematics, was selected in the same batch in which the petitioner was selected and she was issued appointment letter by the District Education Officer, Rewari.
Respondents in their written statement, have admitted these instances, but have stated that the case of the petitioner is totally different to the cases mentioned in the writ petition.
I fail to understand as to how the case of the petitioner is different to the one mentioned in the writ petition.
Respondents have not pointed out any difference in the case of the petitioner and others so mentioned in the writ petition.
Instructions dated 20.10.1986 cannot be applied qua the candidates who had passed their Higher Secondary Examination from the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi, without Hindi and Mathematics, prior to the issuance of the said instructions.
As a matter of fact, respondents had been accepting Matriculation/Higher Secondary Examination of Central Board of School/Secondary Education, New Delhi, without Hindi and Mathematics, equivalent to the one held by the Haryana School Education Board.
Such certificates were taken to be equivalent and those who possessed such certificates were taken in service and those, who were on ad hoc service, their services were regularised.
6.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as a JBT teacher from the date candidates at Serial Nos. 132 to 135 in order of merit were appointed as such, of course, the petitioner shall be entitled to the salary from the date she is appointed.
Case of the petitioner shall be considered within a period of one month from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.