V K Bali, J(Oral) - Sri Niwas Sharma through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent No. 1 to appoint him against the vacant post of Principal (H.E.S.-II) meant for direct recruitment quota in view of the Government Policy dated May 26, 1972 (Annexure P-4).
The relief asked for in the writ terms from the facts which need to be noticed, although briefly.
2.
Petitioner is serving as Headmaster in Government High School of District Rohtak.
It is stated that he possesses requisite qualifications and experience for appointment to the post of Principal in Government Senior Secondary School of Haryana.
Being, thus, eligible, he qualified the test for the said post but was not considered for regular appointment.
On the requisition made by the Government, the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) vide advertisement dated February 3, 1986 advertised 17 posts of Principals, vide separate requisition dated September 22, 1986, demand of five additional vacancies of Principals was made.
Out of total 22 vacancies that thus became available.
14 seats were reserved for general category, 4 for scheduled castes category, 3 for backward class category and 1 for ex-serviceman category.
Petitioner applied and was interviewed by the Commission and his name was recommended for regular appointment to the post of Principal, HES Class-II (Men Branch).
Order of selection has been placed on records as Annexure P-1.
The Commission recommended 26 candidates for appointment to the posts of Principal in view of vacancies in existence in the year 1987.
Out of 26 recommendees, 25 candidates were appointed and it is only the petitioner who was left out.
It is pleaded that Government had sent requisition of eight posts reserved for Scheduled Caste, Backward Classes and ex-servicemen categories whereas respondents appointed one more candidate of Backward Class category in excess of the quota of total 26 recommendees.
Aggrieved, petitioner submitted representation to the departmental authorities and to various other authorities but when his representation brought to tangible result, he came to this Court asking for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
3.
With a view to advance the case of petitioner, it has been further pleaded that six or seven vacancies belonging to direct quota of general category are still lying vacant and instead of appointing the petitioner against the available vacancies meant for direct recruitment, respondent-State in an illegal and arbitrary manner, promoted eight male and five female Headmasters/Headmistresses to HES-II vide order dated October 27, 1987.
It has been mentioned in the order of their promotion that the persons at serial Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 12 and 13 were being promoted against the posts of direct recruitment quota and would be reverted as soon as the recommendees from the Commission were available.
It is further pleaded that six posts, against which ad hoc promotions were made on October 27, 1987, were actually lying vacant before the said date.
The right full claim of petitioner was ignored and just a day before the expiry of six months, for which period any vacancies that were to fall vacant, were to be filled in out of the recommendees as per Government instructions Annexure P-4, six persons were promoted.
In the manner aforesaid, right of petitioner was defeated.
The Government instructions dated May 26, 1972, inter alia, require that at the time of making recommendations to the concerned department, the Commission would recommend five names in addition to the number of vacancies intimated by the department and if additional vacancies occurred in that department during a period of six months of the receipt of recommendations, such vacancies would be filled in from amongst the said five additional candidates recommended by the Commission.
In the present case the Commission had recommended three additional candidates from general category i.e. instead of 14, 17 candidates were recommended.
Two candidates from the waiting list have already been appointed and one additional candidate recommended by the Commission even from the reserved category, has also been appointed.
It is only the petitioner, who, too, is in the waiting list of general category, has been ignored.
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and the defence projected in the written statement filed by respondent No. 1 is only that the State had sent two requisitions to Haryana Public Service Commission for recommending the candidates against 22 posts of Principal for Government Senior Secondary Schools.
The Commission, however, recommended 26 candidates on April 28, 1987 belonging to different categories.
Categorywise break-up of the candidates requisitioned and those recommended by the Commission is as follows :-  Total G.C.
+ S.C. B.C ESM Requisition Sent 22 14 4 3 1 Recommendation received from HPSC 
26 
17 
4 
4 1 Against the demand of 14 candidates in the general category.
Commission recommended 17 candidates.
Name of petitioner figured at Sr. No. 17 in the general category.
Other nine candidates out of 26, belonged to reserved categories of SC, BC and ESM.
Appointment letters of sixteen candidates belonging to general category and nine candidates belonging to reserved category were issued on July 13, 1987.
Petitioner could not be appointed as no post of Principal became available within a period of six months from the date of recommendations by the Commission i.e. upto October 27, 1987.
According to Government instructions dated May 26, 1972 the vacancies that arise within a period of six months from the date of recommendations received from the Commission could be filled from the waiting list of selected candidates sent by the Commission.
Out of the vacancies which had arisen from March 5, 1987 to October 27, 1987, five fell in the quota of direct recruitment with the following break-up categoriwise according to prescribed roster :-  "Roster Category Name of the candidate in the waiting list who was appointed.
32 SC Chand Singh Verma.
33 GS Sher Singh.
34 SC -.
35 GC Prem Parkash Garg.
36 ESM -.
However, ad hoc promotions have been made against the said posts till the candidates belonging to those categories are made available by the Commission.
Since there was no post available in the general category, petitioner could not be appointed although his name had been recommended.
5.
On the facts aforesaid, it is pleaded and so argued by learned Counsel appearing for the State that selection of a candidate does not confer any title upon him to get appointment.
Insofar as promotions made on October 27, 1987, vide Annexure P-3, are concerned, it is pleaded that the Government had promoted eight male and five female Headmasters/Headmistresses to the posts of Principal vide order dated October 27, 1987.
In the said promotion order it was clear that the persons at Sr. No. 5, 6, 7 and 8 were promoted in Men Cadre and persons at Sr. Nos. 12 and 13 were promoted in Women Cadre against the quota of direct recruitment.
Out of the said four posts of direct quota in Men Cadre, one was meant for SC category and one for ex-serviceman category and two posts were for Ex-cadre.
(Emphasis supplied).
The qualifications for Ex-cadre posts for direct quota were different from regular quota in regard to experience of Adult and Social Education.
There was, thus, no post available for general category in the direct quota in regular cadre.
6.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner, vehemently contends that petitioner was entitled to appointment as additional posts had fallen vacant within a period of six months from the date the Commission made recommendations.
There was no justification for the respondents so not to exhaust the entire list of the persons, who were recommended in the waiting list and not to appoint the petitioner when, admittedly, 13 persons were promoted in October 27, 1987, that is the last date when six months' period was to expire.
He further contends that in any case the persons mentioned at serial Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 12 and 13 who were promoted against the posts meant for direct recruits, could not be given precedence over the petitioner particularly when it was mentioned in their promotion order that they would be reverted as soon as recommendees of the Haryana Public Service Commission were to become available.
7.
Learned State Counsel, however, contends that no one even after the selection can ask for appointment as a matter of right and it is the choice of the Government to appoint a person or not depending upon various reasons that may be available with the Government.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the cause of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
9.
According to the instructions issued by Government, dated 26.5.1972 at the time of making recommendations to the concerned department, the Commission could recommend five names in addition to the number of vacancies intimated by the department and if the additional vacancies occurred in that department during a period of six months of the receipt of recommendations, such vacancies were to be filled from amongst the said five additional candidates recommended by the Commission.
Five vacancies, it is admitted, fell vacant from 531987 to 27101987.
Two of these vacancies were meant to be filled by Scheduled Caste candidates, two vacancies were to be filled by general category candidates and one was to be filled from the quota of ESM.
The break-up category-wise has been given in the written statement and has been reproduced above.
Thus, it is admitted that the instructions dated 26.5.1972 have been acted upon.
In the manner aforesaid, two persons of general category who were in the waiting list have since been appointed and it is only the petitioner who was at serial No. 17 in the merit of general category candidates who has been ignored.
The positive case of the petitioner is that within the period of six months 13 more posts had fallen vacant but instead of accommodating the petitioner, in view of the instructions, others in the waiting list were appointed.
Ad hoc appointments were made and that, too, by specifically mentioning in the promotion/appointment letter that they will hold the posts only upto the time when regular recommendees of the Commission were to join.
The orders promoting 13 persons were passed on 27101987 i.e. within six months although on the last date of expiry of six months.
The only explanation that has been given is that persons mentioned at serial Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8 were promoted in the men cadre whereas persons mentioned at serial Nos. 12 and 13 were promoted in the women cadre against the quota of direct recruits.
Out of said four posts of direct quota in Men Cadre, one was meant nor scheduled caste category, one for ex-servicemen category and two posts were for ex-cadre.
Order Annexure P-3 vide which ad hoc promotions were given would rather reveal that the promotions of persons mentioned at serial Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 12 and 13 were being made against the posts of direct recruits quota and the said persons could be reverted as soon as the recommendees of the Haryana Public Service Commission became available.
Neki Ram mentioned at serial No. 1 was promoted against the ex- cadre post whereas all others were promoted to the posts of Principals within the cadre.
All the persons mentioned in Annexure P-3 were appointed against vacant posts.
The averment in the written statement that out of four posts of direct quota in Men cadre, two posts were for ex-cadre is not made out from the reading of promotion order Annexure P-3.
As mentioned above, it is only Neki Ram mentioned at serial No. 1 who was promoted against ex-cadre post whereas all others were promoted on the posts of Principals within cadre.
It is, thus, clear that instead of promoting the petitioner who was duly selected through the Commission ad hoc promotion was made in the quota of direct recruits even though the petitioner was available for his promotion in accordance with the instructions dated 26.5.1972.
The decision of the respondent-authorities to give ad hoc promotion by incorporating in the promotion order that the promotions were in the quota of direct recruits and the persons concerned could be reverted as soon as the recommendees from the Commission were available at a time when the petitioner was available for his appointment to the post of Principal is wholly arbitrary and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The instructions dated 26.5.1972 aforesaid were relied upon to give necessary relief in "Rohtas Singh Kharub v. State of Haryana", 1989(6) S.L.R.
45 and Umed Singh Malik v. State of Haryana and another, 1990(3) S.L.R.
96.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 1,000/- and a direction is issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioner on the post of Principal (H.E.S.-II) within a period of one month from today.
The petitioner in the wake of his appointment on the posts of Principal from a date when order Annexure P-3 was passed promoting others against the quota of direct recruits shall also be entitled to the consequential relief/reliefs as also arrears of pay from the date aforesaid.
Petition allowed.