Motilal B Naik, J - Petitioner was enrolled in the Central Reserve Police Force (for short 'CRPF) on 1841988 as a Constable.
On successful completion of nine months' training, he was appointed in 90 Battalion CRPF, Hyderabad.
It is the case of the petitioner that at the time of enrollment in the CRPF, he submitted all the relevant certificates including the domicile certificate.
It is only after verifying the certificates, he was given regular appointment in 90 Battalion CRPF.
2.
While so, by order No. DV1/89-90-EC-1, dated 1251989, petitioner's services were terminated.
The said order was signed by some officer 'for Commandant, 90 Battalion, CRPF, Hyderabad' without any authority and, therefore, the petitioner questioned the order of termination before the 1st respondent.
The 1st respondent reopened the case under Rule 5(2)(a) of the CCS (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 and after satisfying himself on verification of records directed reinstatement of the petitioner into service, by order dated 251189.
While setting aside the order of termination and directing reinstatement, the Ist respondent directed the interregnum period i.e. from the date of termination of service till the date of joining duty, to be treated as 'on duty' for all purposes.
Pursuant to the order dated 25.11.1989 of the 1st respondent, the petitioner joined duty on 13121989.
3.
It was to his surprise, the petitioner received once again a fresh order of termination No. DV1/89-90-EC-1 dated 23121989 from the 2nd respondent on 311990 terminating his services under sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 of the CCS (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 read with Rule 16(1) of the CRPF Rules, 1955 with effect from 23121989.
Through the said order, the petitioner was informed that he was entitled to claim one month's salary in lieu of one month's notice.
It is this order dated 23121989 of the 2nd respondent which is impugned in this writ petition.
4.
Petitioner assails the legality of the said order on the ground of violative of principles of natural justice offending Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Respondents justified the order of termination on the ground that on verification it was found that the petitioner was enrolled against the quota meant for Gujarat State basing on the false domicile certificate produced by him to the effect the further that he belongs to Gujarat State.
It is further stated that the Deputy Commissioner of Police (Special Branch), Ahmedabad intimated through his letter No. FB.
Domicile/8/89 dated 92198 that the domicile certificate produced by the petitioner was fake and was not issued by the Gujarat State Government authority; that in view of the said report, the respondents terminate the services of the petitioner and that, therefore, there is no illegality inasmuch as there is no violation of principles of natural justice.
6.
It is no doubt true that the petitioner claimed domicile to Gujarat State.
In terms of the report of the Deputy Commissioner of Police (Special Branch), Ahmedabad, it is evident that the petitioner produced a false domicile certificate as if he belongs to Gujarat State.
This probably seems to have prompted the respondents to terminate the services of the petitioner.
The concern of the petitioner is that the respondents have not given him an opportunity to explain his case therefore, principles of natural justice are violate offending Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
No doubt, the respondents are competent to terminate the services of the petitioner in terms of powers vested in them under sub-rule (1) Rule 5 of the CCS (Temporary Services) Rule 1965 read with Rule 16(1) of the CRPF Rules 1955.
There cannot be any doubt that a person on whom a penalty of termination of services or a minor penalty is sought to be imposed, has necessarily to be given an opportunity to putforth his case.
On the basis of the claim of the petitioner that he is a domicile of Gujarat State, according to the respondents, he was allotted to the quota meant for Gujarat State.
On departmental verification, it is stated to have been found that the domicile certificate produced by the petitioner is false.
If the respondents had reason to believe that the certificate produced by the petitioner is false, they could have sought an explanation from the petitioner as to the genuineness of the certificate.
In the absence of an opportunity being given to the petitioner, I am of the view, this is a clear case of violation of principles of natural justice offending Article 14 of the Constitution  7.
It is well settled that principles of natural justice are integral part of Article 14 of the Constitution No decision prejudicial to the affected party should be taken without affording an opportunity to it.
Failure to issue a notice to the petitioner before terminating his services on the ground that he produced a fictitious domicile certificate, would amount to unfair procedure offending not only Article 14 of the Constitution but also principles of natural justice.
Time and again, various High Courts including the apex court of this country in several decisions in no mean terms held that denying an opportunity to the affected party to explain his case would amount to violation of principles of natural justice and would offend Article 14 of the Constitution  8.
There are no parameters to judge the violation of principles of natural justice.
The requirement of natural justice must depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
All actions against a party which involve penal or adverse consequences must be in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Whether any particular principle of natural justice would be applicable to a particular situation or the question whether there has been any infraction of the application of that principle has to be judged in the light of facts and circumstances of each particular case.
As I have said, there are no parameters to fix the boundaries of principles of natural justice it is only in the facts and circumstances of each and every case, it has to be seen what is the extent of loss or damage that would be caused to the party by denial of sufficient opportunity.
9.
In the instant case, the petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the CRPF basing on his claim that he is a domicile of Gujarat State.
Enquiries have been held behind the back of the petitioner as to the claim of domicile of the petitioner and in the enquiry it seems to have been found that the petitioner produced domicile certificate as if he is a domicile of Gujarat State.
Basing on the enquiry report, the petitioner's services were terminated.
It is indeed this is the particular situation where the petitioner's right to survival is taken away by an action of the respondents without ascertaining the facts from the petitioner.
The course that is normally available to the respondents is to call upon the petitioner by necessary notice and seek his explanation on this aspect and after obtaining explanation, it could have been open to the respondents to take appropriate action in terms of rules and regulations if they were not satisfied with the explanation submitted by the petitioner.
Without affording such opportunity, terminating the services of the petitioner would not only amount to violation of principles of natural justice but also would amount to offending Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
10.
Since I have held that the petitioner was not given an opportunity to explain his case, the impugned order deserves to be set aside on this short ground.
Accordingly, the impugned order dated 23121989 of the 2nd respondent is set aside.
Consequently, the respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner into service forthwith.
Since the respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner into service on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
I am of the view, the petitioner is entitled to back-wages also.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to pay back-wages to the petitioner within three months from the date of reinstatement.
The interregnum period i.e. from the date of termination till the date of joining duty, shall be treated as 'on duty' for all purposes.
11.
It is, however, made clear that it is open to the respondents, if they are so advised, to give opportunity to the petitioner and seek his explanation on the finding of the Deputy Commissioner of Police (Special Branch), Ahmedabad.
On such explanation, the respondents should proceed to pass appropriate orders according to rules.
12.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.