Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Senior Accounts Officer in the Haryana State Electricity Board challenges the order dated June 15, 1992 by which respondent No. 2 was promoted as Financial Advisor & Chief Accounts Officer.
The petitioner has raised two grounds.
Firstly, it is urged that the petitioner's claim has not been considered in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated May 9, 1985 which had been adopted by the Board in the meeting held on November 20, 1985.
Secondly, it has been urged that 'average reports' having not been communicated to petitioner could not have been taken into consideration by the respondents.
2.
The Writ Petition has been contested by respondent No. 1 only.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Board it has been inter alia averred that the record of the two officers was considered.
It was found that in case of the petitioner, eight reports have been recorded from the year 1981-82 to the year 1990-91.
Out of these, in 5-1/2 reports the petitioner had been assessed as good/very good.
The remaining reports were 'Average'.
As such, the percentage of good reports was 6875%.
Similarly the record of respondent No. 2 was considered for a period of ten years from the year 1981-82.
In this case, a total of 7-1/2 reports had been recorded during this period.
Out of these, there were 6-1/2 reports in which he had been assessed as good/very good.
In the remaining reports he was assessed as 'Average'.
As such, his percentage of good reports was 866%.
On these premises, the respondent-Board maintains that its action in selecting and appointing respondent No. 2 is valid.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the post had to be filled on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
In accordance with the instructions issued by the Government which had been adopted by the Board, a person who has earned 70% good reports during the last ten years, is entitled to be promoted.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the missing reports had to be treated as good.
On this basis, the counsel submits that the petitioner had earned more than 70% good reports.
He further submits that the three average reports borne on the petitioner's record having not been conveyed to him had also to be treated as good.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. OP Sharma, appearing for respondent No. 1 has produced before me a copy of the notification dated May 25, 1990 by which the promotion policy issued vide notification dated March 9, 1990, in respect of Audit and Accounts Wing Staff had been modified.
It had been provided that the post of Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer shall be "filled up by selection from amongst the Senior Accounts Officers provided they have......  (a) passed the SAS Accountants Exam.
prescribed.... or  (b) passed the Departmental Examination and have an experience of five years on regular basis.
A copy of this notification as produced by the counsel alongwith the letter dated May 25, 1990 by which it was circulated is placed on record as marked 'A'.
He has also produced a copy of the memorandum which was circulated by the Secretary of the respondent-Board to the members.
This memorandum is taken on record as mark 'B'.
Relying on these documents, the learned counsel submits that the petitioner's claim had been duly considered.
However, respondent No. 2 was found to be better and consequently he was selected.
5.
A perusal of the copy of memorandum produced by the learned counsel shows that the office of the Board had prepared a detailed note for circulation to the members.
It was pointed out that the post of Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer was lying vacant due to the retirement of Shri P.C.
Mehra.
Accordingly, the names of three senior-most Accounts Officers were mentioned in the order of their seniority.
First of all the service particulars of the petitioner alongwith summary of his record was given.
Similarly, particulars with regard to respondent No. 2 and one Shri PD Jain were given.
It was also pointed out that in accordance with the decision of the Board the post had to be filled up by 'selection'.
Lastly it was pointed out that the Annual Confidential Reports of the Officers will be made available at the time of meeting.
A perusal of this memorandum clearly establishes that petitioner's case was placed before the Board for consideration and, thereafter, Respondent No. 2 was selected.
6.
Was this consideration in accordance with Law ?
According to the decision of the Board, the post in question had to be filled up by selection.
The Board was competent to consider the competing claims of all the three Officers and select the best.
Even if the Board had not considered the percentage of good reports earned by an Officer strictly in accordance with the instructions dated May 9, 1985, its action could not be said to the ultra vires or violative of the rules.
However, a perusal of the memorandum clearly shows that full details regarding the confidential reports were duly given and the percentage of good reports was worked out in respect of all the three officers whose claims were being considered.
It was found that respondent No. 2 had earned 866% good reports while Mr. PD Jain had earned 823% good reports.
As against this, the petitioner had earned only 6875% good reports.
Consequently, in the process of selection the person who had earned highest percentage of good reports was found to be the most suitable by the competent authority.
7.
Mr. SS Dahiya, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that respondent No. 2 had been awarded punishment of stoppage of one annual increment with cumulative effect vide order dated December 2, 1987.
He further submits that the petitioner had been awarded two advance increments vide order dated April 4, 1979.
On this premises, the learned counsel contends that the respondent could not be preferred to the petitioner.
8.
The argument is lacking in merit.
Firstly, it has been categorically pointed out in the memorandum that the order of punishment passed by the Board against respondent No. 2 had been challenged by him in Civil Writ Petition No. 1427 of 1990 before the High Court which had been allowed on September 13, 1991.
The order of punishment had been quashed.
That having happened, the order of punishment was non-existent on the date of consideration of the respective claims of the candidates.
It could not have, thus, been taken into consideration.
So far as the order of granting advance increments to the petitioner is concerned, it deserves notice that these increments had been granted when he was working as Accounts Officer.
Thereafter, he had been promoted to the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
However, for the post of Chief Accounts Officers the Board had considered the respective claims on uniform basis.
Record of Service for the preceding ten years as also the facts regarding disciplinary proceedings etc. were taken into consideration.
This was in strict conformity with the instructions.
It is, thus, apparent that the petitioner's claim was duly considered in accordance with law.
9.
Regarding the second contention raised by the learned counsel, it may be mentioned that an 'average' report is not adverse report.
It is consequently not required to be communicated.
If the argument of the learned counsel is accepted, It may follow that even a good/very good report shall have to be conveyed, for it would be open to a person to contend that if he had known that he had been assessed as only 'Good' or 'Very Good' he could have strived to improve his performance and earned a 'very good' or 'outstanding' report.
In the administrative instructions, it has been advisedly prescribed that only an adverse report has to be conveyed.
As average report is not adverse report.
However, it is certainly below or inferior to a good report.
The mere fact that it is not conveyed does not mean that it is to be treated as Good or that the selection of respondent No. 2 is vitiated.
It may also be noticed that according to the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1, respondent No. 2 has already retired from service on April 30, 1994.
No other point was urged.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition which is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.