Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - (Oral) - The petitioner, a disabled Army Officer, is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in denying him the disability pension.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner, who was a Junior Commissioned Officer, was granted a regular commission as an office on June 15, 1969.
He was posted at a high altitude.
He developed Pulmonary Tuberculosis.
He was admitted to the Military Hospital, Bareilly.
He remained there as an indoor patient from August 12, 1970 to January 24, 1972.
During the course of his treatment the left upper lobe was excised.
On July 27, 1972, he was discharged from the Army and granted a disability pension @ Rs. 190 per month.
His case was reviewed periodically.
The disability, which was initially assessed at 100% ultimately came down to 30% in the year 1979.
As a result, there was reduction even in the amount of disability pension.
He continued to draw pension at the lower rate till July 27, 1989 when he was informed that this disability had been assessed at less than 20%.
As a result, the payment of disability pension was stopped.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Central Government.
Vide order dated January 31, 1992, his appeal was dismissed.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in refusing to pay disability pension, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
There is no dispute regarding the factual position, as noticed above.
However, from the original record, which has been produced by Mr. Vinay Mittal, learned counsel for the respondents, it has been pointed out that the petitioner was medically examined by a Board at the Military Hospital, Ambala Cantt.
on April 27, 1989.
The Board had found the extent of disability upto 20%.
This recommendation of the Board was forwarded to the Controller Defence Accounts (Pensions) at Allahabad.
The Medical Adviser in the office of the Controller Defence Accounts opined that the extent of disability was 15 to 19 per cent and as a result the disability pension was no longer admissible to the petitioner.
On these premises, Mr. Vinay Mittal, learned counsel for the respondents contends that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of disability pension.
4.
The records produced by Mr. Mittal have been perused.
These records show that the petitioner was examined by the Medical Board at Ambala Cantt.
On April 27, 1989, the Board had assessed the petitioner's disability at 20%.
This report appears to have been signed by Lt. Col. PR Sen, Maj. (Mrs.) KG Sandhu and Major Tapas Roy.
Thereafter, it has been approved by the 'approving authority' Col. KG Subbarao, Senior adviser on May 18, 1989.
Nothing has been produced from the records to show that the petitioner's disability was assessed at less than 20% by any authority in the year 1989 and yet the Controller Defence Accounts (Pensions) informed the petitioner vide letter dated July 27, 1989, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition, that he was not entitled to the grant of disability pension.
It is no doubt correct that according to this letter the case had been examined "by the MA (P) attached to this office and degree of disability assessed at less than 20% for life."
However, nothing has been produced from the record to show that any authority had made such an assessment.
On the contrary, the file produced by the learned counsel shows that it was only on November 12, 1991, that Brig.
SR Bhattacharya, D.D.G.
(Pensions) had recorded the following note :  (1) Reference preceding note.
(2) Ex SS-22146 Lt. Joginder Singh was commissioned on 15.6.1969 and was invalidated out of service on 2071972 on account of' ID Pulmonary tuberculosis.
The ID was accepted on the basis of attributability.
(3) Perusal of the Medical documents available in the file shows that part of the left upper lobe (Apico-posterior Segment) was excised in 1972.
Last review in June 1979 assessed the percentage of disablement at 30 per cent for 10 years.
The clinical profile noted in the proceedings of the RSMB dated 2741989 shows that the individual is symptomatic, weight 72 kg.
ESR-10 mm fall 1st hour, Hb-13 gm% and the X-ray chest shows only residual Bibrosis in both upper zones.
In view of this the ID is considered to have improved and the percentage of disablement is assessed at less than 20 per cent (15-19%) for 5 years."
This report cannot be made the basis of a finding that the petitioner's disability in the year 1989 was below 20%.
Accordingly, it cannot be made the basis for supporting the order passed on July 27, 1989 (Annexure P.3).
Besides this document, learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to point out any other evidence on the file which may show that the extent of disableness had been assessed at less than 20%.
In this petition, the order dated July 27, 1989 impugned the petitioner cannot be sustained.
5.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner had appealed against this order.
His appeal is rejected by the Central Government vide letter dated January 31, 1992.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.8 with the writ petition.
In this order, it has been mentioned that "on examination of the records relating to your service/medical examination, the Appellate Medical Authority has found that your disability has improved.
He has assessed your disability less than 20% i.e. (15-19%) for a period of five years.
Since your disability is less than the prescribed degree of disability to the tune of 30% for getting pension, therefore, you are not entitled to get disability pension with effect from 2661989 as per the rules."
Apparently, the order dated July 27, 1989 has been justified on the basis of an opinion rendered by the Appellate Medical Authority after the decision.
It is the admitted position that the said authority had never examined the petitioner.
It had not itself assessed the extent of the petitioner's disability.
It had not even called upon the petitioner to appear before it for medical examination.
In any event, since the initial order passed by the Authority on July 27, 1989 is not supported by any evidence, the order passed by the Appellate Authority cannot be sustained.
6.
Even.
otherwise, as has been pointed out by Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner, he was getting a paltry sum of Rs. 90/- per month as disability pension.
Even according to the findings of the appellate Authority, the case had to be reviewed after five years.
The petitioner's case is due for review.
The respondents will proceed to carry out the necessary review.
For the intervening period, they are liable to pay the disability pension, which was being drawn by the petitioner, till June, 1989.
7.
In view of the above conclusions, it is not necessary to examine the other contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner in his petition.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders dated July 27, 1989 (Annexure P.3) and January 31, 1992 (Annexure P.8) are set aside.
The respondents are directed to pay the petitioner all arrears of disability pension within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
However, it is clarified that, in case, the payment is not made within three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of arrears of pension alongwith interest @ 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner will also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.