Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The three petitioners herein were selected and appointed as Readers in the Department of Chemistry at The Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, on June 29, 1985.
Their primary grievance is that persons who were actually ineligible in June, 1985 and were in fact selected and appointed long after them have been arbitrarily promoted vide order dated 8.4.1992 with effect from dates prior to June, 1985.
As a result, the petitioners claim that their seniority as also chances of further advancement have been adversely affected.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The University Grants Commission realising the need for providing "reasonable opportunities for career advancement and recognition of merit" to the University teachers evolved a scheme which has been described as the Merit Promotion Scheme.
The basic objectives of the Scheme as given in the guidelines issued by the Commission were (1) to recognise outstanding work done by the University teachers in the areas of teaching and research, (2) subject such work to objective evaluation by experts in the areas concerned; and (3) to provide for reasonable opportunities for professional advancement to such teachers, who merit academic recognition on a competitive basis.
The existing incumbents of posts were required to be promoted "on the basis of critical assessment" to the next higher level.
The method of implementation of the Scheme was also laid down.
The teachers desirous of being considered for the grant of promotion were required to "present their work to the University through their department".
The final selection of persons to be promoted was to be made "by the University in accordance with its normal procedure".
It was further provided that "it would be necessary to refer the work (to include research, publications, books reviews, curriculum development, teaching aids, innovation in teaching methods, equipment developed etc.) presented by the individual teachers to at least two referees in the subject/discipline concerned.
The referees are to be selected by the Vice-Chancellor out of a panel of names set up according to the procedure prescribed by the University for Selection Committee.
The evaluation reports by these referees should be kept confidential and should be made available to the Selection Committee.
Merit promotion be given by the appointing authority to a teacher only on recommendation of the Selection Committee duly constituted after it has given due consideration to the opinion of the referees.
There should be at least two outside experts on the Selection Committee in the case of promotion to readers and three outside experts for promotion to professors in these cases."
It is also stipulated that "the main criteria for promotion under the Scheme would be the merit of the work as defined above and not the seniority of the teachers."
A copy of the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission which has been produced by the learned counsel for the petitioners and accepted as correct by the learned counsel for the respondents has been taken on record as 'Mark A'.
3.
The petitioners aver that the Scheme proposed by the University Grant Commission was accepted by the respondent-University.
On May 14, 1984, the Executive Council of the University approved the recommendations of a Committee constituted by the Vice-Chancellor to prepare the modality and to suggest the procedure which was to be followed for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.
Thereafter, on February 7, 1985, the Executive Council of the University considered a letter dated October, 1984 received from the University Grants Commission concerning "requirement of Ph.
D Degree for promotion to the post of Readers under the Merit Promotion Scheme" and resolve that "for promotion under Merit Promotion Scheme from Lecturer to Reader and Reader to Professor PhD should be essential qualification."
It is the case of the petitioners that in fact PhD was an essential qualification for recruitment to the post of Lecturers ever since the year 1973 and exception was made only in rare cases.
Since the petitioners were fully eligible to be considered for promotion, they submitted their applications and were duly selected by the Selection Committee in June, 1985.
They were appointed with effect from June 29, 1985.
It was further averred that in the years 1984 and 1985 respondent Nos. 3 to 8 had not ever applied for promotion primarily because they did not possess the Degree of PhD It has been further stated that on account of the failure of the respondents to secure the Degree of PhD, their annual increments on the post of Lecturers had been stopped.
4.
On July 26, 1986, the Executive Council of the University considered the request of "the President, MD University Teachers Association as contained in (Annexure XXXVIII Page 80-81) already circulated) that the 'Equivalent Published Research Work, may be treated at par with PhD for promotion, under the Merit Promotion Scheme, from Lecturer to Reader and from Reader to Professor."
It was resolved that "the UGC guidelines regarding procedure and criteria for Merit Promotion as contained in the Secretary, UGC's DO letter No. F-1-87/78(C) Part-I dated 23rd November, 1982 amended till date be adopted by the MD University.
Further resolved that the teachers who become eligible in the light of this decision may also apply and submit their reports and their cases be also considered as per UGC guidelines."
A copy of this resolution has been produced on the record with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 as Annexure R. 3/2.
Thereafter, respondent Nos. 3 to 8 applied for promotion under the Scheme and were selected.
It has been mentioned that while selecting respondent No. 6, the Selection Committee had specifically observed that "he should submit his PhD thesis within two years failing which his future increments will be stopped."
The respondents No. 3 to 8 were actually appointed during the years 1986 and 1987.
5.
On July 22, 1987, the Executive Council of the University considered a proposal that "irrespective of the dates on which interviews are held or appointment letters are issued, the teachers who were eligible under the Merit Promotion Scheme as per UGC guidelines, their promotions may be made effective from the date they become eligible, if considered fit and selected or from the cut-off dates prescribed by the Executive Council i.e. 3131986 and 3091986, respectively."
On consideration of this proposal, the following resolution was passed :-  "Resolved that the proposal be approved that irrespective of the dates on which the interviews were held or appointment letters were issued, the promotion of the teachers under the Merit Promotion Scheme, as per UGC guidelines, may be made effective from the dates on which they became eligible and were found fit and were selected provided that (a) if the teacher was earlier rejected at the time of open selection to the higher post, then the promotion be considered effective from the date on which the interview for the Merit Promotion Scheme was held and he was selected (b) if the teacher was not found fit for promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme earlier than the promotion be considered as effective from the date on which he became eligible when he was subsequently found fit for promotion under the Scheme.
Further resolved that the promotion from the date of eligibility shall be only for the purpose of determining the seniority and pay fixation and that no arrears shall be paid."
6.
It appears that some of the candidates were still aggrieved.
The University constituted a Committee consisting of 5 members.
This Committee met on different dates in October, 1991 and finally made the following recommendation on November 12, 1991 :-  "That irrespective of the dates on which the interviews were held or appointment letters were issued, the promotion of teachers under the Merit Promotion Scheme as per UGC guidelines, may be made effective from the cut-off dates on which they became eligible to make application for promotion i.e. 31st March and 30th September every year (the first such cut-off date being 31st March, 1986) and were found fit and selected, provided that (a) if a teacher was earlier rejected at the time of open selection to the higher post, his promotion be considered effective from the date immediately after the date of joining of the appointed in the open selection or from the cut-off date under the Merit Promotion Scheme, whichever is later; and (b) if a teacher was not found fit for promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme earlier, his promotion be considered effective from the date on which he completed one full year from the date of the meeting of the Selection Committee in which he was rejected on 31386, whichever is later, provided he is subsequently found fit for promotion under the Scheme."
The Committee further recommends that:  i) This shall in no way affect the inter se seniority within the Department and inter-Department seniority in the University;  ii) This shall be only for the limited purpose of pay fixation and no arrears shall be paid.
However, for future promotions under the Scheme, the period shall be counted from the cut-off date of the eligibility year.
Sd/- Pardaman Singh Sd/- MG Gandhi Sd/- R.D Dikshit  Sd/- Gajraj Singh Sd/- Babu Ram Sd/- L.N.
Dahiya Sd/- R.K. Raizda Sd/- KS Sharma 7.
The above recommendation of the Committee was approved by the Executive Council of the University on November 27, 1991.
Thereafter, 19 teachers submitted their representations complaining of hardship caused to them.
The Committee constituted by the Vice-Chancellor met on March 20, 1992 and March 25, 1992.
It made certain recommendations, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P. 1 with the writ petition.
In pursuance to this recommendation, the Vice-Chancellor passed an order on April 8, 1992 (Annexure P. 2 with the writ petition) by which 18 Lecturers including respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were promoted to the post of Readers with effect from the different dates.
Respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5 were promoted with effect from September 30, 1984 and respondent Nos. 6, 7 and 8 were promoted with effect from March 31, 1985.
The result was that even though respondent Nos. 3 to 8 have become eligible in pursuance to the resolution of the Executive Council on July 26, 1986, and had been actually promoted thereafter, their promotions were made retrospectively effective from September 30, 1984 and March 31, 1985.
This decision of the Vice-Chancellor was approved by the Executive Council on April 30, 1992 vide its resolution, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P. 3 with the writ petition.
The petitioners represented to the Vice-Chancellor as also to the Chancellor.
Copies of these representations have been produced as Annexures P.4 & P.5 with the writ petition.
Having failed to get any decision, they have approached this Court through the present petition.
The orders dated April 8, 1992 and April 30, 1992 have been challenged on different grounds which shall be presently noticed.
8.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the University and the private-respondents.
The factual position as averred by the petitioners has not been controverted.
It has, however, been mentioned that PhD is an essential qualification for direct recruitment to the post of Lecturers as well as Readers.
But it is not an essential qualification for promotion from Lecturer to Reader.
It has been further mentioned that the petitioners were duly considered for promotion in the year 1984 but were rejected by the Selection Committee.
The University states that "the possession of PhD Degree for promotion of teacher under Merit Promotion Scheme was not an essential qualification.
Somehow, it had been made an essential qualification by the Executive Council of the respondent-University as per decision taken vide Resolution No. 54 of its meeting held on 7285.
By virtue of this condition, some teachers who were otherwise eligible could not apply for the same.
However this condition was withdrawn vide Resolution No. 65 of the meeting of the Executive Council held on 26786."
It has been further pointed out that "on persistent demands from the Teachers' Association, a Committee, in the overall interest of the teaching community had been constituted to go into the whole gamut of the matter in those cases where the promotion could not be made in time by the administration and in some cases the teachers could not apply due to imposing the condition of PhD as an essential qualification."
Various grounds of challenge raised by the petitioners have been controverted and it has been prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed.
9.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 to 8, certain preliminary objections have been raised.
It has been averred that by the impugned order, 18 persons have been promoted to the next higher post.
All of them are necessary parties.
The writ petition cannot be decided in their absence.
It has been further averred that the petitioners and respondent Nos. 3 to 5, 7 and 8 are working in the other departments.
They have been unnecessarily dragged into unwanted litigation.
On merits, it has been averred that the University had not imposed any requirement of PhD as an essential qualification at the time of the adoption of the Scheme.
As such, the respondents were eligible to be considered for promotion from February, 1984 to February 7, 1985.
It has been further averred that the petitioners having been rejected in the year 1984 could not have been considered before the expiry of two years.
But the condition was relaxed and they were considered and promoted on June 29, 1985.
It has also been pointed out that in response to a circular issued by the University on May 23, 1984, "most of the answering respondents had applied" for the grant of promotion under the Scheme.
According to the respondents, the qualification of Ph.
D was illegally prescribed and on receipt of a representation, the Executive Council had rightly resolved to waive this qualification off on July 26, 1986.
After this resolution "the answering respondents were promoted only with immediate effect and not from the date of their eligibility under the Merit Promotion Scheme circulated by the UGC" Consequently, they represented.
Their claim was again considered and was finally accepted in the year 1992.
It was accordingly decided by the University to change the cut-off date from March 31, 1986 to June 15, 1984 "when the Merit Promotion Scheme was formally implemented."
On these premises, the claim of the petitioner has been controverted.
The petitioners have filed a replication.
10.
I have heard Mr. Ajay Tewari, learned counsel for the petitioners.
Mr. RK Malik made the submissions on behalf of the respondent-University while Mr. Surya Kant has argued the case on behalf of respondents No. 3 to 8.
11.
It is the admitted position that recruitment to the post of Lecturers, Readers and Professors in various Universities, including the Maharishi Dayanand University, is made by direct recruitment only.
Eligible candidates from all over the country have a right to compete and the best from amongst them are selected.
The Scheme prepared by the University Grant Commission was a departure from the normal rule.
It was made with the basic objective of recognising outstanding work done by the University teachers in the areas of teaching and research.
Under the guidelines issued by the University, the promotion had to be granted to teachers, who merited "academic recognition, on a competitive basis" after "a critical assessment."
The research work etc. presented by the individual teacher had to be assessed by at least two referees.
Thereafter, the claims had to be considered by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
It was also incumbent for the University to associate two outside experts with the Selection Committee and to put up the evaluation reports submitted by the referees before it.
The main criteria for promotion was "the merit of the work" and not the seniority of the teachers.
In this background, the first question that has to be considered is as to whether or not the University could have prescribed the qualification of Ph.
D as a basic condition of eligibility ?
The guidelines provided by the University Grants Commission were primarily in the form of a recommendation.
The University was not bound to accept them in toto.
In my view, it was open to the University to lay down a minimum condition of eligibility.
After all, the Degree of, Ph.
D is basically an evidence of the assessment and evaluation of research work done by any individual.
When the research work is found to be of a reasonably good standard the degree of PhD is awarded.
If the University instead of adopting the vague criteria of research work of high standard had decided to lay down a uniform criteria of a PhD Degree, it did not in my view, violate any provision of the Act or any other law governing it.
Learned counsel for the respondents have not been able to point out any provision in the Act, Statutes and Ordinances which may have even remotely debarred the University from laying down such a qualification.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the University had validly prescribed the qualification of PhD  12.
Mr. Surya Kant, however, submits that this qualification had not been prescribed at the time of the adoption of the Scheme on February 19, 1984, but was prescribed later, on June 29, 1985.
It may be that the University had initially adopted the Scheme as was forwarded to it by the Commission and had even implemented it.
If on the basis of the experience, the University felt that it was necessary to prescribe a uniform criteria or to lay down a minimum condition of eligibility for promotion under this scheme, neither the adoption of the Merit Promotion Scheme nor its formal implementation precluded the University from doing so.
In fact the prescription of a uniform qualification is the best method to exclude discretion and to avoid arbitrariness.
This is precisely what the University appears to have done.
Any and every candidate is entitled to claim that he has done outstanding research work.
A person, who had written or published only one paper, could have claimed that it constituted outstanding work.
In order to eliminate all discretion and to lay down a uniform criteria, the University could have adopted its own procedure, provided the guidelines or prescribed a minimum qualification.
In this background, it appears that the resolution dated February 7, 1985, passed by the University laying down PhD as an essential qualification was just, fair and legal.
After all, if such a Degree can be prescribed as an essential qualification for direct recruitment, there is nothing illegal if it is prescribed as an essential qualification even for the purposes of promotion.
13.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners possessed the qualification of PhD They applied for consideration for promotion in the year 1985.
The were duly interviewed by the Selection Committee and were selected.
Accordingly, they were appointed on June 29, 1985.
Further, it is also the admitted position that the respondent Nos. 3 to 8 did not have the qualification of PhD at that time.
They were thus not even eligible to apply for being considered.
In fact, it was only on July 26, 1986, when the University considered the representation of the President of the Teachers' Association that persons who had published research work which may be equivalent to the Degree of PhD may be considered under the Merit Promotion Scheme from Lecturer to Reader and from Reader to Professor Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the private respondents states that according to resolution of July 26, 1986 and in view of the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission till that date, it was essential for every candidate to either possess the Degree of PhD or to produce evidence of equivalent published research work.
Accordingly, it is apparent that on July 26, 1986, persons who did not possess the Degree of PhD, but had published research work of an equivalent standard became eligible to be considered for promotion from the post of Lecturer to that of Reader.
Accordingly, it appears that the claims of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were considered in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the University Grants Commission and they were actually promoted.
It is the admitted position that some of them were promoted in the year 1986 while others were promoted in the year 1987.
14.
From the above sequence of events, it is clear that while the petitioners had been promoted to the post of Reader, on June 29, 1985, respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were promoted long thereafter in the years 1986 and 1987.
As a result, the petitioners had become senior to the respondents in the inter-departmental seniority of Readers.
It is thereafter, that persons like respondent Nos. 3 to 8 started representing.
Presumably, in pursuance to those representations, the Executive Council considered the matter on July 22, 1987 when it was decided that the promotions of teachers be made effective "from the dates on which they became eligible and were found fit and were selected."
This promotion was to be taken into account only for the purpose of determining the seniority and pay fixation.
No arrears were to accrue.
15.
On a perusal of the resolution dated July 22, 1987 as reproduced earlier, it is clear that the promotion was not to be effective from the date of eligibility.
It was necessary that the person concerned should have been found fit and even selected.
In my view the Executive Council merely wanted to ensure that the rights of a person should not be adversely affected merely because there was delay in the issue of the letter of appointment or his actually joining the post.
It merely decided that a person who had become eligible, was considered and selected earlier should not become junior to a person who became eligible and was selected later but was somehow appointed and actually joined the post before the person who had been selected prior to him.
In any case the resolution did not provide for an automatic promotion w.e.f.
the date of eligibility.
Such an interpretation would militate against the fundamental principles of 'recognition of outstanding merit' on "competitive basis" after an "objective evaluation" as laid down in the Scheme.
16.
Even by virtue of this resolution, the inter se position of the petitioners and the respondents was not affected.
The petitioners were selected and appointed on June 29, 1985, while the respondents were selected and appointed in the years 1986 and 1987.
Even under the resolution of July 22, 1987, the petitioners, in my view, were to remain senior to Respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
17.
Mr. Surya Kant, however, contends that the promotion was to be effective from the date of eligibility and the seniority had to be determined on that basis.
According to the learned counsel, the date of selection was wholly irrelevant.
I am unable to accept the contention of the learned counsel.
Admittedly, eligibility had to be determined on the basis of two factors, viz. completion of 8 years of service and the award of the degree of Ph.D or "equivalent published research work."
Till it was found as a fact that a person had either secured the Degree of PhD or had produced evidence of published research work equivalent to the Degree of PhD, he could not have been considered as eligible even to be considered.
Under the guidelines issued by the Commission, assessment of the work had to be done by the two referees and the Selection Committee.
Till the selection committee had actually considered the relevant evidence and found the research work to be equivalent to PhD, it could not be said that the person was eligible.
Thereafter, his claim had to be considered on competitive basis.
Accordingly, the date of the meeting of the Selection Committee and the selection of the candidates were basic factors which would have determined their seniority, vis-a-vis various other selected candidates.
Mr. Surya Kant, however, contends that the respondents had become eligible in the month of September, 1984 and on March 31, 1985, and, therefore, according to the resolution dated July 22, 1987, they are deemed to have been promoted on the said date.
This contention is wholly lacking in merit.
According to the guidelines laid down by the University, the research work of a candidate had to be evaluated by the two referees.
The evaluation report had to be put up to the duly constituted Selection Committee, which had to consider the suitability of the candidate for the grant of promotion.
The respondents have not produced anything to suggest that on September 30, 1984 or in March, 1985, they had done research work which was equivalent to the Degree of PhD Further more, it is not even suggested that at the time of their interview in the years 1986 and 1987 only the work done by them upto September 30, 1984 or March 31, 1985 was taken into consideration.
In this situation, it is reasonable to assume that the Selection Committee at the time of its meeting in the year 1986 or 1987, had taken into consideration the work done by the respondents upto that date.
It is on the basis of the evaluation of that work that they had become eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Reader.
Accordingly, the submission made by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
18.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Let us assume everything in favour of the respondents.
It is established on the record that a person can be promoted to the post of Reader only after the prescribed procedure had been followed.
This procedure was followed in the case of the respondents in the years 1986 and 1987.
Accordingly, they were promoted w.e.f.
different dates.
By the impugned order, their promotions have been made effective from September 30, 1984 and March 31, 1985.
On that date, none of the respondents had submitted any evidence of research work to the University nor had it been evaluated by any referees.
No Selection Committee had even constituted to consider their claims.
Consequently, their suitability on September 30, 1984 and March 31, 1985 has not been determined by the University in accordance with the procedure as laid down in the guidelines given by the Commission and duly adopted by the University.
This being the position, the action of the respondents in promoting the respondents retrospectively from the years 1984 and 1985 is in complete violation of the guidelines issued by the Commission and adopted by the University.
Even otherwise, it appears to be totally unjust that persons who were made eligible only by virtue of the resolution passed by the Executive Council on July 26, 1986 (Annexure R. 3/2) and were considered and promoted thereafter should be deemed to have been promoted with effect from a date on which their suitability was not even judged by the competent selection committee in accordance with the prescribed procedure.
By this process, respondent Nos. 3 to 8 have been made senior to persons who possessed the qualification of PhD and were duly selected and appointed on June 29, 1985.
It may have been open to the University to relax the rigour of the resolution passed on February 7, 1985 by which the qualification of Ph.
D was prescribed as a condition of eligibility.
Having done so, it could have proceeded to consider the claims of eligible persons and selected the best from amongst them for promotion to the posts of Readers.
This is what was precisely done.
However, it appears that under the pressure of the candidates who were not selected earlier, the University bent too low and declared them to have been promoted w.e.f.
September 30, 1984 and March 31, 1985 in utter violation of the norms duly laid down by it.
The action was most inequitable and unfair.
19 Even otherwise, the action is patently arbitrary.
Persons who were selected have retained their date of appointment.
Those who were ineligible have been promoted retrospectively.
Claims of the petitioners were not considered for retrospective promotion.
This was violative of Articles 14 and 16.
20.
Lastly, Mr. Surya Kant has contended that respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were eligible even in the year 1984 and as such, the University has committed no wrong in granting them retrospective promotion w.e.f.
September 30, 1984 or March 31, 1985,  21.
I am unable to accept this contention.
The promotion under the Merit Promotion Scheme is not automatic or mechanical.
It has to be ordered only after the prescribed procedure has been duly followed.
This procedure was never gone through prior to the year 1986 and 1987.
This September 30, 1984, there is no proceeding of any selection committee indicating that any one of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 was found to be suitable for appointment to the post of Reader.
Similar is the position with regard to the promotion of respondents who have been promoted with effect from March 31, 1985.
This being the situation, the contention raised by the learned counsel that orders of retrospective promotions in respect of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 are valid, can not be sustained.
22.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, I am unable to uphold the action of the University in promoting respondent Nos. 3 to 8 with effect from September 30, 1984 or March 31, 1985.
Accordingly, the order dated April 8, 1992 (Annexure P2) is quashed in so far as it relates to respondents Nos. 3 to 8.
Its approval by the Executive Council is also set aside.
Universities have an important role to play in the present set up.
If the academic bodies start bending under the pressure of teachers as these appear to have done in the present case, it does not augur well for the Society.
Academic standards have to be raised.
Merit must be rewarded.
The University has failed to do so in this case.
23.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.