Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a constable in the Punjab Armed Police prays for the issue of it writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated February 14, 1989 by which his two years' approved service was forfeited on temporary basis and for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to declare the result of the lower school course attended by him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a clerk on August 4, 1981 On January 19, 1984, he was discharged from service.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, P.A.P.
Jalandhar Cantonment.
Vide order dated May 28, 1985, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition, his appeal was accepted.
On may 20, 1987, the petitioner was charge-sheeted.
It was alleged that he alongwith certain other persons was deputed for duty in District Jalandhar in connection with Dussehra festival and was put on guard duty.
Under the effect of liquor, the petitioner started creating rowdyism and threatened the public with the weapon which had been officially provided to him.
An enquiry was held.
It was held that the charge of rowdyism or threat to public with the weapon was not proved.
However, it was established that he had taken liquor while on duty.
A show cause notice was given to the petitioner and ultimately vide order dated February 14, 1989, the competent authority ordered the forfeiture of his two years' approved service on temporary basis.
As a result of this order, the increments which were due to the petitioner on August 1, 1989 and August 1, 1990 were not released.
Ultimately, the increments were released with effect from August 1, 1991 vide order it copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
3.
On February 28, 1992 a test as contemplated under Rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules, was held to select constables for being brought on List B and for being deputed for the lower school course.
The petitioner avers that he qualified the written test.
He appeared for the parade test on March 5, 1992.
At that time, he was not permitted to take the test as it is pointed out that he was not eligible on account of the fact that a major punishment had been awarded to him within it period of three years preceding the first day of January 1992.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
4.
The action of the respondents in imposing the punishment vide order dated February 14, 1989 and not selecting the petitioner for the lower school course has been challenged on various grounds in this petition.
5.
The motion Bench admitted the writ petition vide its order dated 16.7.1992 and directed the respondents to depute the petitioner to attend the next course.
6.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by Deputy Inspector General of Police, P.A.P.
Jalandhar Contonment.
It has been inter alia stated that the petitioner "was not eligible to appear in B-I test according to Standing Order for B-I framed under Rule 1320 of the Punjab Police Rules because a major punishment has been awarded to the petitioner within a period of three years preceding the first day of January 1992."
It has been further averred that forfeiture of approved service or withholding of increments amount to a major punishment in view of the provisions of Rule 16.1-A(3) of the Punjab Police Rules.
It has been further stated that in view of the Lok Sabha/Vidhan Sabha elections held in January 1992, the test which had to be originally held in the month of January, was postponed and actually conducted in the month of February 1992 under the orders of the Director General of Police, Punjab.
On these premises the petitioner's claim has been contested.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the order dated February 14, 1989 was wholly illegal as it suffered from the vice of double jeopardy.
He further submits that even if the petitioner's challenge to this order is rejected, he was still eligible to appear in the test and to be considered for being deputed for the lower school course.
8.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the respondents.
9.
It is the admitted position that the order of punishment was passed on February 14, 1989.
The writ petition was filed by the petitioner on March 17, 1992.
A period of more than three years had elapsed by then.
Even if the petitioner had filed a civil suit challenging the order dated February 14, 1989, a triable issue of limitation could have been raised.
In any case, there in no explanation for the inordinately long delay of three years in challenging this order.
On this short ground alone, the petitioner's challenge to the order dated February 14, 1989 deserves to be rejected.
10.
Even otherwise, on merits, there appears to be no ground to sustain the challenge to the order.
It is no doubt correct that initially an order had been passed on January 19, 1984 by which the petitioner was discharged from service under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Even though, under the rules, no appeal lies against such an order, the petitioner's plea was accepted and he was reinstated into service.
However, this was followed by a regular departmental enquiry which culminated in the passing of the impugned order.
No punishment had been imposed on the petitioner on account of the misconduct of being under the influence of liquor while on duty prior to the passing of the order dated February 14, 1989.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner is being punished twice for the same misconduct.
Consequently, there appears to be no ground to sustain the challenge to the order dated February 14, 1989.
11.
Mr. TP Singh then contends that in any event, the petitioner was eligible to appear in the test and to be considered for being deputed for the lower school course.
Even his claim is not tenable.
The Proviso to Rule 137(2) specifically provides that "no constable who has been awarded a major punishment within a period of three years preceding the first day of January of the year in which the selection is made will be eligible for admission to this list..." Further, Rule 16.1-A(3) provides that "the term 'major punishment' shall be held to mean any authorised punishment of reduction, withholding of increments, forfeiture of approved service, dismissal and every judicial conviction on a criminal charge."
12 It is the admitted position that vide order dated February 14, 1989, the petitioner's two years approved service was forfeited on temporary basis.
As a result, his two increments were stopped.
He had thus been awarded a major punishment within the meaning of Rule 161A(3).
Further, this punishment had been awarded within the period of three years preceding the first day of January 1992.
Consequently, in view of the proviso to Rule 137(2), the petitioner was not eligible to appear in the test held on February 28, 1992.
13.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that in accordance with the provisions of Rule 137 as also the Standing Order issued by the Inspector General of Police under Rule 1320, a copy of which has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition, it was incumbent on the respondents to hold the test in the month of January.
14.
It is no doubt correct that under Rule 137 as well as in the Standing Order, it has been inter alia provided that "selection will be made in the month of January each year."
This is the normal rule.
The authorities are expected to hold the test in the month of January.
However, if on account of certain reasons, the test is actually not held, it cannot be said that a constable who is otherwise ineligible, shall be deemed to have become eligible.
Further, the facts in the present case clearly show that the respondents could not hold the test in the month of January on account of the general elections to the Parliament and the State Legislative Assembly.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that since the test was held in the month of February by which time the period of three years had expired, the disability contemplated under the proviso to Rule 137(2) had ceased to exist.
In fact, on a consideration of the provision, it appears to be clear that the test can be held at any time in the month of January or thereabout but so far as the disability is concerned, the period or three years has to be calculated from the first day of January of the year in which the selection is being held.
The rule making authority has specified the date so as to rule out the possibility of any arbitrary action on the part of a subordinate authority.
15.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had been punished vide order dated February 14, 1989.
By 1st of January 1992, the period of three years had not elapsed.
Consequently, he was ineligible to appear in the test.
16.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner then contends that vide order dated August 1, 1991, the petitioner's increments had been restored and, therefore, the order of punishment should be deemed to have ceased to exist.
17.
It is true that by August 1, 1991, the period of punishment had expired and, therefore, the two increments which had been withheld were released.
However, it does not mean that the petitioner had not been awarded a punishment within the meaning of Rule 137(2).
The injury may have healed but the scar remained.
The period of punishment may have expired but the factum of punishment did not cease to exist.
The order of punishment had not been set aside by any authority.
18.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, further contends that in pursuance to the interim order passed by the Division Bench while admitting the writ petition, the petitioner has already attended the course and now a direction for the declaration of the result should be issued.
He refers to the provisions of Rule 13.8-A to contend that the Superintendent of Police should be directed to waive the disqualification.
19.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
Clause I of Rule 13.8-A provides as under :  "The infliction of any major punishment shall be a bar to admission to or retention in fists A, B and C, provided that (a) for special reasons to be recorded by the Superintendent in each case, and subject to confirmation by the Deputy Inspector General, this disqualification may be waived and (b) after six months' continuous good conduct in the case of censure of confinement to quarters or on expiry of the period of reduction in the case of reduction for a specified period, a constable may be re-admitted at the discretion of the Superintendent."
A perusal of the above provisions shows that the infliction of any major punishment is a bar to admission to or retention on List B However, for special reasons, which have to be recorded by the Superintendent of Police and subject to confirmation by Deputy Inspector General, the disqualification can be waived.
No special reasons appear to exist in the present case.
The petitioner was merely a candidate for the test.
He was ineligible to appear as he had been found guilty of being under the influence of liquor while on duty.
Without qualifying the test and attaining the requisite merit, he was not even eligible to be included in List B There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner's name could have included in List B or that he had attained sufficiently high merit, so as to be entitled to such a relief.
Still further, there are no special reasons which may justify the waiver of the disqualification.
Since the petitioner was never admitted to List B, the question of this being re-admitted under Clause (b) or Rule 138-A(l) does not arise.
20.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs  Appeal dismissed.