VK Bali, J - Harjap Singh and another through the present writ petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seek a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash Show Cause Notice, 'Annexure P5 as also order dated 511988, Annexure P7 vide which they were dismissed from service.
Both of them were teachers and in consequence of conviction recorded against them in a criminal case registered against them under Sections 306/201 of the Indian Penal Code, they were dismissed from service.
It is admitted position that in the appeal carried against the order of their conviction before the High Court, they were acquitted.
2.
The prayer in the petition is, thus, to restore their status of teachers as they have been acquitted of the charge which was the only basis of their dismissal from service.
The aforesaid prayer is also pressed for yet another reason that the co-accused who were tried alongwith the petitioners have since been reinstated in service and given all the benefits.
The co-accused of the petitioners who were convicted were Smt. Jaswant Kaur, Amarjit Kaur and one Joga Singh.
They were ordered to be reinstated vide order 811992.
Copies of the same have been placed on the records of the Civil Writ Petition.
3.
The averments of the petitioners in particular with regard to reinstatement of co-accused of the petitioner have not been denied.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the petitioners deserve the relief asked for by them.
Besides the fact that they have been acquitted of the charge which was the only basis for terminating their services, the co-accused of the petitioners who were tried alongwith them in the same very case have been reinstated and given all other benefits.
Non grant of relief to the petitioners would amount to discrimination.
For the reasons mentioned above, this writ petition is allowed.
Show Cause Notice dated 1191987, Annexure P5 as well as order dated 511988, Annexure P7, are quashed and the petitioners are ordered to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.