VK Bali, J - Aswinder Singh in the present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash but imposed by the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana, Chandigarh on the internal assessment in respect of theory papers of first year of Diploma Course in Pharmacy awarded by Maharishi Pharmacy College, Traori, District Karnal during the assessment year 1983-84 as also issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner for the year 1991 after restoting the cut imposed by the said respondent.
The facts of the cases be noticed first.
2.
Petitioner joined the Diploma in Pharmacy Course in Maharishi Pharmacy College, GT Road, Tarori District Karnal during the session 1983-84.
Under the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the State Board of Technical Education is the authority competent to hold the examinations and award Diploma in Pharmacy.
During the academic session i.e. 1983-84, which is stated to be first session of Maharishi Pharmacy College, (hereinafter to be referred as respondent No. 2), there arose some dispute between the management of respondent No. 2 and the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred as respondent No. 1).
It is pleaded that respondent No. 1 did not hold any examination of the students of respondent No. 2 and later on after the expiry of full one year when there was big hue and cry and strike by the students, respondent No. 1 decided to hold the examination and called for internal assessment from respondent No. 2 which was sent somewhere in the year 1985.
It is stated that respondent No. 1 could not reconcile its disputes with respondent No. 2 and for that precise reason, a malicious design of desisting the students from joining respondent No. 2 in future was endeavoured by imposing a cut of 50% on the marks of internal assessment awarded by respondent No. 2.
It is pleaded that the petitioner obtained 18 marks in the internal assessment but on account of the cut imposed, the same were reduced to nine.
It is this cut which is styled to be discriminatory without any guidelines provided in the Regulations and by adopting policy of pick and choose.
With a view to highlight discrimination, it is further pleaded that cut was not imposed on any Government institution throughout the State and further even privately managed institutions like Hindu College of Pharmacy Sonepat, Jat College of Pharmacy, Butana and many others were exempted from the cut being imposed in the internal assessment and it was only imposed on the Institutions, the management whereof had earned the wrath of respondent.
It is further averred that thereafter the petitioner appeared in the said examination but because of enmity and heart itching between the respondents, his fate remained the same.
The petitioner then approached respondent No. 1 for rechecking of his paper which according to the Regulations is to see that all the questions answered have been properly evaluated and the marks so awarded are properly counted.
This course was not followed in the case of petitioner.
The final result card for the year 1991 has been annexed with the petition as Annexure P-1.
In the result card, the petitioner is shown to have obtained 37 marks in the theory of General Chemistry and it is pleaded that if the cut imposed is restored then he would secure 46% marks against the pass percentage of 40.
3.
Mr. Gupta, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has raised four points for consideration by this Court.
(1) There being nothing in the Prospectus empowering Rationalisation Board to impose a cut on the marks given by the College towards internal assessment, the action resorted to by the respondents would be illegal.
(2) Internal assessment being exclusively between the Principal and the student concerned, the Rationalisation Board would not be competent to impose any cut.
(3) There were no guidelines as to what extent the Rationalisation Board would impose the cut.
(4) That the College where the petitioner was a student was victimised inasmuch as this cut was not imposed on the internal assessment of the students in Government and non-Government institutions.
4.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed by respondent No. 1, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objection that the petitioner has no cause of action to file the present petition as his right has not been infringed.
Before starting diploma course in Pharmacy, the Institution must be affiliated with some Examining Body.
When the Examining Body has affiliated the institution intending to run the diploma course in Pharmacy, the Pharmacy Council of India constituted under the Pharmacy Act 1948 and All India Council for Technical Education constituted under the AICTE Act 1987 gives its approval to the Institution for conducting the diploma course in Pharmacy.
Affiliation and recommendations of the Examining Body are essentials for obtaining approval of Pharmacy Council of India and The All India Council for.
Technical Education.
It is further pleaded that the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana is the Examining Body of the students of institutions running the diploma course in Pharmacy in the State of Haryana.
The State Board of technical Education Haryana has been constituted by the Governor of Haryana and the Rules of business of the State Board have been notified.
In this notification, the constitution of various Committees has been provided.
The State Board of Technical Education, Haryana has framed the Examination Rules.
It has been pleaded that Rule 25 specifically deals with the controversy in hand and the same reads thus :  "Rule 25  (a) "A Board of Rationalisation shall be constituted by the Examination Committee.
The Board of Rationalisation shall have at least 3 members (not below the rank of Principal) one of whom shall be designated as Chairman of the Rationalisation Board.
The members of Rationalisation Committees shall be decided by the Examination and Syllabus Committee.
Each Rationalisation Committee shall consist of two-three members, one of whom will act as convener and will be member of the Rationalisation Board.
The convener may co-opt one or two members as and when necessary.
(b) Purpose  The purpose, of the Rationalisation Committee shall be to visit various Institutions so as :  (i) to ensure that the teachers award fair marks in sessional work and do not have the tendency to boost marks or to be too strict in awarding marks;  (ii) to ensure that Institutions maintain proper, prescribed standard in regard to staff and equipment;  (iii) to ensure that no student is failing in sessional work due to victimisation;  (iv) to ensure that the staff members have been regular in their function as teachers.
For this, the members of Rationalisation Committee will examine the work of a cross-section of the Students (top, middle, bottom) in each class and also the work of all students detained on account of poor performance in sessional work.
Procedure  (i) The Board of Rationalisation shall meet before the commencement of the Rationalisation work of each examination and lay down guidelines for the Rationalisation Committees;  (ii) The Rationalisation Committee shall undertake rationalisation work normally three days before the start of preparatory holidays and the students should be required to be available to the Rationalisation Committee;  (iii) After the Rationalisation Committee have visited the institution the Board of Rationalisation shall meet again to discuss the notes/information/data prepared by the conveyors and decide the procedure for Rationalisation of marks.
The Rationalisation Committees shall modify the sessional marks in accordance with the decision and hand over the rationalised marks to the Chairman of the Board of rationalisation;  (iv) The rationalised marks duly authenticated will be forwarded to the Directorate by the Chairman of the Rationalisation Board in one lot 5 days before the commencement of the examination under all circumstances;  (v) In case the detention of a student becomes necessary as a result of rationalisation, the convene of Rationalisation Committee shall ensure that an intimation to this effect reaches the Principal concerned before the commencement of the examination so that the student is actually detained and not allowed to appear in the examination."
5.
It is pleaded that a perusal of Rule quoted above Would manifest that the purpose of the Board of Rationalisation is to ensure that the teachers/institutions award fair marks in sessional works of students and do not have the tendency to boost the sessional marks or to be too strict in awarding the same.
This procedure is uniform in its application and it applies to each and every institution affiliated with the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana, irrespective of the fact as to whether the Institution is Government Institution or aided/unaided privately managed Institution.
Some of the affiliated Institutions some time award quite high sessional marks to their students whereas some time some Institutions become too strict in this task.
By way of this rationalisation, the Board ensures that the students are neither favoured in an unbecoming manner nor are they victimised.
In case, the aforesaid principle of rationalisation is not adhered to then there are chances that the standards of training for diploma in Technical/Non-Technical/Parmacy courses will fall to very low levels.
By way of example, if a student is alotted 30 sessional marks out of 30 by the teacher then he is required to obtain only 10 marks out of remaining 70 marks for qualifying the particular theory paper, being of 100 marks.
Pharmacy is a very important and sensitive course.
It has got direct concern with the human life and it will not be in the public interest to lower down the standards of Pharmacy course.
It would be prejudicial to public health.
The Board of Rationalisation also ensures that curriculum is covered by the teacher and experiments are performed by each and every student.
As is evident from the perusal of Rule 25, it is not always necessary that cut is imposed on sessional marks.
In case some students appear to have been victimised then there are lot of instances where the Board of Rationalisation has increased the marks of such students.
It is further pleaded that each theory paper carries 100 marks and out of these, 30 are allocated for sessional work and 70 for annual examination.
In the case of petitioner, it is stated that he failed in two subjects i.e. Pharmaceutics and Pharmacogonosy.
The Institution awarded 28 out of 30 marks and 27 out of 30 sessional marks to the petitioner in the two subjects.
The Rationalisation Committee awarded 14 sessional marks out of 30 in each of two subjects.
The petitioner had secured 25 and 22 marks out of 100 in these two subjects respectively.
It, thus, means that out of 70 marks each in these two papers, he was awarded only 11 and 8 marks respectively.
It is for this reason, it is pleaded, that the Rationalisation Committee has awarded him such marks which were commensurate to his performance in the annual examination.
6.
In so far as the contention of counsel for the petitioner that this cut is imposed only on those Institutions which have earned the wrath of official respondents is concerned, it is specifically pleaded that this cut is uniformally imposed on all the Institutions irrespective of the fact whether they are Government Institutions or privately managed Institutions.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records, I do not find any substance in any of the points raised by Mr. Gupta and this petition, thus, deserves to be dismissed.
8.
It may be true that in the Prospectus, when the petitioner joined way back in the year 1983-84 there was nothing to the effect that the Rationalisation Committee can impose a cut after considering all the matters, narration of which has been given above.
The Prospectus may provide various items like eligibility of admission and allied matters but it cannot be said that the same is encyclopedia of all the matters that govern the career of a student.
That apart, it is not a case where the petitioner is able to show that in Prospectus the procedure for giving marks in internal assessment has been provided and that the respondents are following a different procedure or procedure contrary to that.
That being so, Rule 25 which came into being way back in the year 1974 cannot be said to be non-operative simply on the ground that procedure for giving marks in internal assessment as per Rule 25 has not been prescribed in the Prospectus.
It is true that the internal assessment is between the Principal and the students but it appears that the Board thought of intervening into this aspect by constituting a Board known as Board of Rationalisation.
The very constitution of the same and the purpose for which it has been constituted clearly manifests that it has been done with a view to ensure that the teachers award fair marks in sessional work and do not have the tendency to boost marks.
This Board has obviously been constituted with a view to curb the tendency of favouritism as also protecting the students who may otherwise be a victims of some hostility which tendency, in recent times, is on increase.
9.
The Board consists of at least three members not below the rank of Principal, one of whom has to be designated as Chairman of the Rationalisation Board and the members of the Rationalisation Committees have to be decided by the Examination and Syllabus Committee.
Each Rationalisation Committee shall consist of two-three members, one of whom will act convenor and will be member of the Rationalisation Board.
10.
Mr. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana informs me that the Committee visits the Institution concerned, examines the academic career of the student in the matter of checking of practical books and interviews them.
It is done by calling five students who are at the bottom, five who are at the top and five who have secured average marks.
The reports prepared by the Rationalisation Committee are sent to the Rationalisation Board and the matter is finally approved by the said Board.
A fool proof method has been chalked out with a view to achieve excellence in academic career of a student and to see to it that those who are favoured for one reason or the other by the Principal do not get undue gains.
For example, even if the case operation is seen, it would transpire that whereas he got exceptionally good marks in the internal assessment i.e. 28 and 27 out of 30, he had a very poor score in theory papers.
Not only that, he is a student of 1982-83 and it took him years to clear the examination.
Though such were the credentials of the petitioner, he secured unduly excessive marks in the internal assessment and for that reason it appears the Board rationalised hi- marks.
11.
In so far as providing of guidelines is concerned, suffice it to say that in the very nature of things, the same cannot be provided.
It will depend upon each individual student as to what extent in his case the cut should be.
imposed.
Providing of guidelines on the other hand, would militate against the very purpose for which Rule 25 has been made.
12.
In so far as victimisation is concerned, there is complete and categorical denial in the written statement.
13.
Finding no merit, I dismiss the writ petition.
Parties, are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.