RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner in response to an advertisement issued by the Haryana Public Service Commission (On short 'Commission') in the year 1988, for 24 posts in the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch), applied for one of the posts.
In the remarks column of the application submitted by the petitioner to the Commission, it was mentioned by him that he was the grandson of a freedom fighter, i.e. Shri Sohan Lal and also appended with the application a certificate issued by the Administrator General and official trustee that Shri Sohan Lal, grand father of the petitioner, was a freedom fighter.
2.
Out of the 24 posts, which were advertised, 10 posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes of Haryana, 2 for backward classes of Haryana and 3 posts for the Ex-servicemen of Haryana.
The State of Haryana had issued instructions on 26th July, 1984 (Copy Annexure P-2 with the writ petition) on the subject of reservation of the posts for the children of freedom fighters in the Haryana State.
The relevant extract of the said instructions is reproduced below :  "The State Government has further decided to reserve 2% posts in Class I, II, III and IV posts in direct recruitment for the children and grand-children of Freedom Fighters subject to the condition that these 2% posts will be available for Freedom Fighters and their children and grand-children, only if the quota reserved for ex-servicemen, remains unfilled due to non-availability of suitable ex-servicemen or their dependents.
This benefit will be available to all grand children i.e. sons and daughters of sons and daughters (paternal as well as maternal) of the freedom fighters."
It is clear from these instructions that the State Government had decided to reserve 2% posts in Class I, II, III and IV in direct recruitment for the children and grand-children of freedom fighters subject to the condition that these 2% posts will be available or freedom fighters and their children and grand-children, only if the quota reserved for ex-servicemen, remains unfilled due to non-availability of suitable ex-servicemen, or their dependents.
3.
The case put forth by the petitioner is that the quota for the ex- servicemen was not completely filled, as only two suitable candidates were available for appointment and one post from the ex-servicemen quota remained unfilled.
Accordingly, it is the case of the petitioner, that in accordance with the instructions of the State Government, dated 26th July, 1984, the petitioner who was the grandson of a freedom fighter should have been considered for appointment against that post.
However, he was not called for interview by the Commission.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
4.
The writ petition was initially dismissed after notice of motion had been issued to the respondents on 11th September, 1990 but on a review application having been filed by the petitioner, the said order of dismissal was recalled on 16th November, 1990 and fresh notice of motion was issued.
Again the writ petition was dismissed on 14th February, 1991 by the Motion Bench and another review application filed by the petitioner was also dismissed on 19th April, 1991.
The petitioner took the matter to Hon'ble Supreme Court by filing S.L.P.
Special Leave was granted and vide order dated 26th March, 1992 the impugned judgment dismissing the writ petition was set aside and the case was remitted back for fresh decision.
That is how I am seized of the matter.
5.
It is not disputed that the petitioner had obtained 509 marks in the written examination and according to Rule 7 of part C of the Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch), Rules (hereinafter called the Rules).
However, his position in the merit list of those candidates who had passed the examination was not so high to entitle him to have been called for the interview against the seats meant for the general category candidates.
What is claimed by the petitioner is that one seat of the ex-servicemen quota having remained unfilled as no suitable candidate was found for that seat, the petitioner was entitled to be called for interview and considered for appointment in view of the reservation for the children/grand children of the freedom fighters as contained in the instructions dated 26th July, 1984 (Annexure P-2)  6.
The case put forth by the respondents in the written statement, as well as by the learned counsel for the respondents before me, is that candidates thrice the number of the posts available in each category was called for interview and in case of Ex-servicemen category, 10 candidates were called for interview.
However, only two out of them were found eligible and suitable.
The other 8 candidates did not fulfil the condition of Rule 8 of Part C of the Rules, which requires that a candidate must obtain at least 55% marks in the aggregate of all papers, including viv-a-voce test.
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, on the basis of the written statement, is that it is not a case where suitable candidates from the Ex-servicemen category were not available and for that reason the posts remained unfilled.
In fact, according to the respondents, more than 10 candidates in the Ex-servicemen category were suitable, but they could not be appointed as they failed to get 55% marks in the aggregate of all papers, including the viv-a-voce test, as required by Rule 8 Part C of the Rules.
Further, according to the written statement, two persons belonging to the Ex-servicemen category who had more marks than the petitioner in the written examination though called for interview, were not appointed as they failed to fulfil the condition of Rule 8 Part C of the Rules.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition is liable to succeed.
The respondents have not correctly interpreted the instructions dated 26th July, 1984 of which the relevant portion has already been reproduced above.
The instructions clearly provide that if the quota reserved for Ex-servicemen remained unfilled due to non- availability of Ex-servicemen or their dependents, then upto 2% posts in Class I, II, III and IV posts would be available for freedom fighters or their children and grand-children.
Surely the suitability of a candidate is judged after he has appeared in the written test, if any, and the viv-a-voce.
Simply because a person has qualified in the written test, would not make him suitable for appointment.
It is only after he is judged in the interview that a person may become suitable or unsuitable.
Rule 8 Part C of the Rules itself provides that a candidate who does not obtain at least 55% marks in the aggregate of all papers, including viva-voce test, is not to be appointed as such, meaning thereby that a candidate getting less than the above percentage of marks as envisaged by the Rules, is suitable and unfit for appointment.
Out of the 10 candidates from the Ex-servicemen category, 8 could not be held fit and suitable for appointment as they could not fulfil the condition laid down in Rule 8 Part C of the Rules.
That is why they were not appointed to the Service.
The net result of this was that one post from the Ex-servicemen quota remained unfilled due to non-availability of a suitable candidate and a person of the category mentioned in instructions, Annexure P-2, i.e. freedom fighters, their children or grand children had to be considered for the same.
The learned counsel for the petitioner.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has produced before me the Haryana Government Gazette, dated 16th September, 1989 to stress that at least six candidates from the Ex-servicemen category, who had lesser marks in the written examination than the petitioner, were called for interview, but they could not make the grade for appointment.
I have perused the Gazette and find that, that is so and in fact one candidate, Chander Bhan, who was getting 504 marks in the written examination belonging to the Ex-servicemen category, has been selected for appointment in that category.
9.
From the above discussion, I conclude that the petitioner had a right to be considered for the post in the category of freedom fighters, their children and grand children against the post that remained unfilled from the Ex-servicemen category.
I may observe here that a certificate issued by the City Magistrate, Hissar, dated 13th August, 1992, (a photo copy of which has now been produced) shows that the petitioner was the grandson of freedom fighter Shri Sohan Lal.
10.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that in the written statement it has been admitted that one post out of the Ex-servicemen category, which were advertised in the year 1988, is lying vacant.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondent-Commission is directed to arrange for viva-voce test for the petitioner within six weeks from today for being considered for appointment to the H.C.S.
(Judicial Branch) after informing the petitioner of the date of the viva-voce test.
The requisite information may also be sent at the address of the petitioner's counsel, Shri SK Lamba, Advocate 995, Sector 7, Chandigarh by registered post which would be considered sufficient information to the petitioner.
If the petitioner makes the grade, Respondent No. 1 i.e. State Government would give appointment from the date when the last person in the impugned selection was appointed.
However, in that eventuality, the petitioner would not be entitled to any arrears of salary, but that date otherwise would be reckoned for all other purposes.
There will be no order as to costs.
A copy of this judgment, attested by my Reader, may be given to the counsel for the Commission for compliance.