DN Jagannadha Raju, J - Held that in the counter itself, it is specifically pleaded that the first respondent is an autonomous body answerable to the Ministry of Health of the Central Government and that the second respondent is an institution controlled and functioning under the guidance of RI It is clearly admitted that the institution has been adopting such rules as are warranted from the rules framed by the Central Government in respect of rules governing the relationship of employers and employees.
It is also admitted in paragraph 7 of the counter-affidavit that the ICMR as well as R2 receive Government grants and grants from other Government of India agencies and various international organizations.
These admissions clearly indicate that R2, though a registered society under the Societies Regulation Act and though it is an autonomous institution working under the guidance of R.1, ICMR, it is an authority which comes within the ambit of `State' as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution.
It is an authority under the control of Government of India.
The bye-laws governing conditions of services of R2 clearly indicate that the fundamental and supplementary rules framed by the Government of Indian and such other rules and orders framed by the Government of India from time to time shall apply to the employees of the respondents.
This also indicates that it is a governmental organization.
The bye-laws governing the conditions of service provide ample material to show that all the Government rules would apply to the employees of R2.
Judicial pronouncements have also held that the Indian Council of Medical Research (R.1) is an authority within the meaning of the expression "other authorities" in Article 12 of the Constitution and a writ against ICMR, is maintainable.
(Refer to AIR 1992 NOC 15 (Calcutta) in Director General, ICMR v. Dr. Anilkumar Ghosh).
During the course of arguments, it was frankly stated that Justice, SSM Quadri of this High Court held that the second respondent is amenable to writ jurisdiction in one of the judgments.
In view of the various admissions made in the counter and in view of the judicial pronouncements, it is quite clear that a writ is maintainable against R.1 and R2.
They are the authorities which satisfy the definition of `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution.
I hold this point in favour of the petitioners.)
Held that throughout the counter and in the course of the arguments, the stand taken is that from 1989 June onwards these petitioners are employees of the labour contractor.
Not a word is said as to what was their position prior to 161989.
There is abundant material on record to indicate that the petitioners have been employed from the years 1982 and 1983 onwards as casual labourers by R2.
After the Government issued Casual Labour Regulation-Government Policy in the memo dated 761988, it looks as if with a view to avoid implementation of this memorandum, an effort was made by R2 to introduce the system of labour-contractor.
Such a thing cannot be permitted for various reasons.
The material papers filed by the respondents show that on 1st June, 1989, an agreement is entered into between Sri SZ Khan and the Director of NIN To this agreement, the representatives of the casual labourers are not parties.
The casual labourers had no part to play in it.
In the meeting held on 7th April, 1989, between the NIN Employees Association and the Director, the specific question of payment of equal pay for equal work to contingent workers and implementation of the Central Government's memo dated 7th June, 1988, were brought in is specific items for discussion.
At that meeting, the Director took the attitude that the Employees Association is not concerned with this issue of payment of wages to casual labourers.
In the representation dated 831991 given by the Employees Association to the Director General of ICMR, it was specifically complained that more than 50 workers were employed on contingency basis for about ten years and they were being paid minimum wages till 1988 and when the Association sought for payment of minimum wages in accordance with Memo dated 761988, the Director, who loves contracts, converted them as contract workers and then threw a challenge stating "let me see which union can save you from becoming contract-workers."
It was specifically complained that instead of implementing the Government of India's order dated 761988, she adopted the device of introducing the contractor and hence the Director General, ICMR, should intervene and do justice to them.
In fact, the additional material papers filed by the petitioners show an office order passed by the Director on 31st May, 1989, which clearly indicates that it has been decided to hand over the maintenance of grounds, gardens, lawns and roads cleaning at NIN campus to a labour-contractor, Sri SZ Khan, with effect from 1st June, 1989.
The casual labourers employed for such works will be under the control of the contractor and all the casual labourers from this day will receive payment of dialy wages at Rs. 1870 per day with weekly off.
They are also entitled to contributory provident fund, ESI benefit and bonus.
The order also mentions that the seniority of the casual labourers as on today "31st May, 1989" will be maintained for considering them for regular posts as when vacancy arises at this institute.
This document clearly shows that it is a unilateral decision taken by the second-respondent to introduce the contractor and that the casual workers are originally casual labourers of R2.
Order accordingly.