RS Mongia, J - The grievance of the petitioner (now dead) was that he had been dismissed from service as a Lecturer by the respondents in violation of the provisions of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (hereinafter called the Act).
No doubt, Rashtriya Jubilee College at Rewari managed by Rashtriya Education Board, Rewari, is affiliated with Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, but it is not receiving any aid from the State Government.
This fact has been mentioned by the respondent in the written statement that the College is not receiving any aid from the State Government.
This was disputed by the petitioner and by way of replication he appended a letter dated 18th August, 1978 from the District Education Officer, Narnaul to Director of Public Instructions, Haryana (with a copy to the Principal of the College) wherein it is mentioned that some drafts of the grant which were pending in the office of District Education Officer in the year 1977-78 were being released to the officiating Principal of the College.
From this document, the petitioner wanted to submit that the college was an aided college.
2.
The Act came into force on 19th April, 1979.
Section 2(a) of the Act defines the affiliated College in the following terms :  "Section 2(a) - "affiliated college" means a college which is not run by the Central Government or the State Government or a local authority which is recognised by the Kurukshetra University under the Kurukshetra University Act, 1956, or is admitted to the privileges of the Maharishi Dayanand University Act, 1975, and is receiving or but for suspension would be receiving grant-in- aid from the Government, a local authority or a university."
3.
It is apparent from the above that it is only the aided college which is recognised by the Kurukshetra University or admitted to the privileges of the MD University, is treated as an affiliated college to which the provisions of the Act, apply.
The only document which has been brought on the record by the petitioner is Annexure P-6, dated 18th August, 1978, which shows that the college had been given grant-in-aid for the years 1976-77 and 1977- 78.
There is nothing on the record that after the enforcement of the Act, the college received any aid.
As observed above, the respondent-College has specifically averred in the written statement that the college is not aided by the State of Haryana and that it is not getting any aid from the State.
Since there is nothing on the record to suggest that the college had been getting aid from the Government after April, 1979, when the Act came into force, the provisions of the Act would not be applicable to the college and the petitioners.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that in fact the respondent-College had been receiving grant-in-aid from the State Government even after the enforcement of the Act, though at the moment he has no document to prove it.
If that be so, the petitioner would be at liberty to approach the Director High Education-cum-Director of Public Instructions, Haryana under the Act there has been violation of the Act and if the Director of Public Instructions comes to the conclusion that the provisions of the Act are applicable, he would decide the matter on merit without any plea being raised regarding limitation, inasmuch as the petitioner has been pushing his case in this Court.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, subject to the observations made above, this writ petition is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.