Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise his services with effect from the date of his initial appointment as Auction Recorder.
The facts are few and interesting.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
On January 5, 1987, the petitioner claims to have submitted an application to the Chairman, Punjab Marketing Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') seeking appointment as Auction Recorder.
On January 8, 1987, Mr. Tota Singh, Chairman of the Board, appears to have observed as under :-  "If there is any vacant post, then adjust him as per his qualification."
In pursuance to this direction, the Chairman, Market Committee, Batala ordered the appointment of the petitioner as Auction Recorded on ad hoc basis.
In this order, it was specifically mentioned that "you will be paid salary on the receipt of approval of the post of Auction Recorder from the Punjab Mandi Board, Chandigarh......." Vide letter dated March 28, 1987, a report was sent to the Chairman of the Board pointing out that there was no vacant post in the Market Committee, Batala.
It was specifically pointed out that the Committee had staff in excess of its requirement.
Accordingly, a request was made for the creation of posts to accommodate people who had been appointed in accordance with the orders of the Chairman.
Vide letter dated April 22, 1987, the Board conveyed its approval for the creation of two posts of Auction Recorders with a direction that Mr. Harnek Singh and Mr. Sukhbir Singh be adjusted against those posts.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a representation dated August 6, 1987.
The Chairman, Market Committee, Batala vide letter dated September 17, 1987 pointed out that approval in respect of the post meant for Inderjit Singh, the petitioner was sought.
On account of the non-receipt of the approval, the Committee was unable to pay him any salary.
It was further pointed out that this employee had better right than the two Auction Recorders.
Consequently, a request for approval was made.
On November 23, 1987 the Board sought the comments of the Committee on the representation of the petitioner.
These comments were sent vide letter dated December 3, 1987.
It appears that the petitioner submitted certain other representations also.
Finally, vide letter dated January 24, 1990 the Market Committee informed the petitioner that no approval has been received from the Board.
As a result no salary was ever paid to the petitioner.
Claiming that the petitioner has worked with the Committee for more than one year and that his work and conduct has been satisfactory, the petitioner has approached this Court that his services be regularised.
Consequential reliefs have also been prayed for.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been mentioned that there is no post of Auction Recorder which may be lying vacant in the Market Committee.
In fact, "there are already 8 to 9 posts of Auction Recorders in excess of the sanctioned strength of the posts at the Market Committee."
It has been further pointed out that as there was no vacant post, the petitioner could not be adjusted.
It is on account of this situation that the petitioner had been specifically informed vide a letter dated March 9, 1987 that he would be paid only if the approval of the Board is granted.
On this premises, the claim of the petitioner as made out in the petition has been contested.
4.
A written statement to a similar effect has been filed on behalf of the Market Committee also.
The petitioner has filed a replication, in which an effort has been made to show that certain favours have been shown to M/s. Harnek Singh and Sukhbir Singh etc.  5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. Gurnam Singh, appearing for the petitioner, has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, he submits that the petitioner's services cannot be terminated for lack of approval from the Board.
In any event, he submits that the action in terminating the services of the petitioner while others like M/s Harnek Singh and Sukhbir Singh etc. have been allowed to continue, is arbitrary and discriminatory.
This stand has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
Mr. Gurnam Singh learned counsel for the petitioner, has conceded before me that there was no vacancy in the cadre of Auction Recorders on the date of petitioner submitted his application or the Market Committee issued the order of appointment.
In this situation, it is apparent that the petitioner was given a letter of appointment only in anticipation of the approval of the Board.
The Board never permitted the creation of the post.
In fact, the Board had conveyed its decision vide letter dated October 15, 1987 and rejected the demand of the Market Committee.
A copy of this letter has been produced on record as Annexure R-1/1 with the written statement filed on behalf of the Board.
Once the Board had refused to sanction the post in there office of the Market Committee and there was no other vacancy against which the petitioner could have been appointed, the very initial appointment of the petitioner was null and void.
Existence of a post/vacancy is a condition precedent for an appointment.
Since there was no post, the question of making an appointment could not have arisen.
As a result, neither the question of termination of services nor of regularisation thereof can arise.
I am, therefore, of opinion that the prayer for regularisation of services has no merit and deserves to be rejected.
7.
Even otherwise, a perusal of Annexure P2 which is a copy of the application submitted by the petitioner to the Chairman of the Board shows that only a direction for his adjustment subject to the existence of a vacant post was given.
Since there was admittedly no post, the petitioner could have neither worked nor claimed the salary therefor.
Even otherwise, this method of directing the Market Committee to adjust actually smacks of nepotism and arbitrariness.
Posts under the State or other organisations have to be filled up by following some process of selection.
Eligible persons have a right to be given a chance to compete.
No authority, howsoever high , has the jurisdiction to order the appointment of a person without considering the claims of various eligible persons.
Nothing of the sort appears to have been done in the present case.
No applications were invited.
No interview was held.
The petitioner appears to have submitted an application across the table.
The order of his appointment appears to have been passed.
Such a course of action is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
8.
Mr. Gurnam Singh points out that M/s Harnek Singh and Sukhbir Singh have been appointed by a similar method.
The Board has granted approval in their cases, while the approval in the case of the petitioner has been arbitrarily declined.
This contention has been raised in paragraph 9 of the writ petition.
The reply thereto does not appear to be entirely satisfactory.
Even the appointment of these two gentlemen appears to suffer from the same vice as that of the petitioner.
Since M/s Harnek Singh and Sukhbir Singh are not parties to this case, it would not be appropriate to pass any order regarding the validity of the action of the Board in their absence.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he could have been appointed only if a vacancy existed.
There was none.
Consequently, there could have been no appointment.
9.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
However, as directed by the Motion Bench in its order dated December 20, 1990, the Board and the Market Committee may consider the petitioner's claim for appointment as Auction Recorder on preferential basis as and when a vacancy arises.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.