Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who is an Ex-serviceman, was appointed as a Physical Training Instructor on September 13, 1977.
This appointment was made on purely ad hoc basis.
However, the petitioner continued to work on ad hoc basis till the year 1985, when he filed the present writ petition.
The grievance as made out in the petition is that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana from time to time, he had a right to be considered for regularisation.
His claim having not been considered, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
Initially, when the matter came up for motion hearing, the Bench directed the issue of notice of motion.
In spite of a number of adjournments having been granted, no written statement had been filed.
Consequently, vide orders dated February 18, 1986, the writ petition was admitted and the termination of the services of the petitioner was stayed.
No written statement has been filed as yet.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
3.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel has produced a photostat copy of order dated April 15, 1991, by which the services of the petitioner had been regularised w.e.f.
December 31, 1990.
This photostat copy of the order is being placed on record as "Mark A".
4.
The services of the petitioner having been regularised, the sole question surviving for consideration is as to whether or not he was entitled to be considered under the instructions issued by the Government vide their letter dated August 22, 1984.
The petitioner has averred that he had completed two years of service upto September 15, 1982 and possessed the qualifications prescribed by the Government.
Learned counsel further submits that his case is squarely covered by the judgment in CWP No. 696 of 1985, decided on August 24, 1985.
In this case, MM Punchhi, J (as his Lordship then was) has observed as under :-  "The only hurdle in his way, was that he did not possess the prescribed qualifications under the 1955 Rules of the post at the time of his appointment on ad hoc basis.
But as stated in Kitab Singh's case (supra), the qualifications stood redundant right from the year 1958 onwards when the courses which were mentioned in the rules were not available anywhere.
So, the redundant qualifications are no qualifications at all as conceded to by the State in Kitab Singh's case (supra), and thus, the services of the petitioner had to be regularised without fulfilment of the condition of the said qualifications.
It is nobody's case that the petitioner's work and overall conduct was in anyway objectionable or that there was anything against him, to kick him out of the job.
Rather, his consent for re-employment, the last one being of 7th January, 1985 is indicative of the fact that the State required to keep him to render services.
He cannot, now, be allowed to be thrown over board, to fend himself elsewhere, for his bread and butter.
The petitioner, for obvious reasons, is entitled to the relief claimed for."
5.
The ratio in the above decision is fully applicable to the facts of the present case.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for regularisation from September 15, 1982.
Keeping in view of the fact that nobody has appeared on behalf of the respondents to contest the petition, I make no order as to costs.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
Petition allowed.