RS Mongia, J - Brief facts leading to this Letters Patent Appeal by the State of Punjab, against the judgment of the learned Single Judge are that respondents (writ-petitioners) were appointed as ad hoc Social Studies Mistresses in Government Girls High School, Chohla Sahib, District Amritsar.
Vide orders Annexures P-2 and P-3, dated 6th March, 1976, respondent No. 3 namely, Shri Balraj Singh Hundal, Principal, Government Higher Secondary School, Chohla Sahib, relieved the writ-petitioners.
It was these orders which were impugned in the writ petition in this Court.
2.
The case which was put forth by the writ-petitioners before the learned Single Judge, was that the Principal, Shri Balraj Singh Hundal, was not competent to remove them from their ad hoc appointments.
This argument of the writ-petitioners found favour with the learned Single Judge, who accepted the writ petition and quashed the orders Annexures P-2 and P-3.
Aggrieved by the said State of judgmeut, the State of Punjab has come up in appeal.
It may be stated that when the Letters Patent Appeal was admitted on 18th of July, 1983, the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge was stayed.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the petitioners were appointed purely on ad hoc and temporary basis against the leave vacancies or for fixed periods and on the expiry of the period of appointment or on the termination of the leave arrangement, the appointments of the writ-petitioners automatically stood, terminated and, in fact, there was no necessity to pass any order terminating their services.
Learned counsel drew our attention to paragraphs 2, 3 and 6 of the written statement which are in the following terms :-  "2.
Admitted to the extent that petitioner No. 1 was appointed purely on temporary basis against a leave vacancy w.e.f.
2.8.73 and continued to work against leave regular vacancies upto 6376 AN, on purely temporary basis.
She was relieved on the afternoon of 6376 according to the terms of her appointment."
"3.
Admitted to the extent that petitioner No. 2 was appointed as Mistress w.e.f.
10.1.75 on purely temporary basis with subsequent ajustment against leave vacancies.
She too was relieved on 6376 AN according to the terms of her appointment."
"6.
Admitted to the extent that Annexures P-2 and P-3 to the writ petition are the relieving chits meant for the renewal of their names with the Employment Exchange Office, after which they become eligible for the next term of appointment whereas the actual relieving order No. 2 dated 6376 (from the School Order Book) at Annexure R-2 a photo copy of the same order and its translation in English is attached.
The petitioners were relieved not only because of the expiry of the six months term but also on Administrative grounds."
4.
On the basis of the above averments, learned counsel argued that Annexure P-2 and P-3 were just relieving chits, as the appointments of the petitioners had automatically come to an end in terms of their letters of appointment, and are not orders of termination.
These relieving chits were given to enable the writ-petitioners to get them renewed with the Employment Exchange.
5.
We find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants that the ad hoc/temporary services of the writ-petitioners had come to an end when the period of their appointment was over or when the leave arrangement came to be terminated, on the incumbents, who had gone on leave rejoining the posts.
Annexures P-2 and P-3 are not termination orders but are merely relieving chits.
In view of this, it is not necessary to go into whether respondent No. 3 was really authorised as Principal to terminate the services of the writ-petitioners.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, Letters Patent Appeal succeeds and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Consequently, the writ petition would stand dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.