Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these three writ petitions viz. CWP Nos. 9856, 14156 and 14157 of 1991 have a common grievance.
They challenge the action of the respondents in changing the qualifications prescribed for the posts of language teachers in the statutory rules called the Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981 by an executive order issued by the State Govt on November 30, 1990.
On account of the commonality of questions of law and facts, these petition shall be disposed of by a common judgment.
For facility of reference, the facts stated as in CWP No. 14156 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Sanskrit teacher at Doaba Arya High School, Nurmahal, district Jalandhar on January 22, 1990.
It is averred that vide his letter dated May 10, 1990, the District Education Officer (S), Jalandhar conveyed the approval regarding petitioner's appointment to the Headmaster of the school.
While the petitioner was continuing to work as a Sanskrit teacher, the Circle Education Officer sent a letter dated May 21, 1991 informing the District Education Officer that the petitioner's appointment could not be approved.
The reason, according to the petitioner, was that vide letter dated November 30, 1990, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-10, the Govt had directed that for appointment to the post of language teachers, the person concerned must possess the qualification of "BA with concerned subject as compulsory and in B.Ed.
as a teaching subject."
Furthermore, the Govt had vide another letter dated November 30, 1990 decided that "the qualifications for appointment as language teacher in the Recognised Aided Schools will be the same as that for appointment of language teachers in the Government schools."
As a result, the petitioner's appointment has not been approved.
The department is not releasing the aid in respect of the post held by him.
His continuance on the post of teacher is threatened.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondent-State, the petitioner has approached this Court through this petition.
The action has been challenged on the ground that it is violative of the rules and that in any event, the amended qualifications cannot be retrospectively applied to teachers appointed prior to the issuance of the letter dated November 30, 1990.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the Punjab Govt vide letter dated November 30, 1990 "decided that educational/professional qualification for the appointment of Sanskrit Master/Mistress in aided schools would be those which are possessed by the employees of Govt School."
It has been further averred that the qualification for the post of Sanskrit master is BA with Sanskrit as elective subject and in B.Ed.
as teaching subject.
On this premises, it is averred that the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualification and is not eligible for appointment as Sanskrit Master in Govt School as well as privately managed aided school.
On this ground, the approval granted by the District Education Officer has been described as inadvertent and the stoppage of pay to the petitioner is sought to be justified.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
It is the admitted position that the conditions of service governing the employees in privately managed recognised schools are governed by the provisions of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as the Act).
Section 15 of the Act authorises the State Govt "to promulgate rules by notification and subject to the conditions of previous publication.
for carrying out the purposes of the Act."
In exercise of this power, the State Govt has framed the rules called the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
Rule 6 which is referable to the provisions of Sections 3 and 5 of the Act inter alia provides that "no person shall be appointed to an aided post unless he possesses the qualifications and experience as specified against that post in the appendix to these rules."
In the appendix, the qualifications for the post of Punjabi, Hindi and Sanskrit teachers have been prescribed as Matric/Giani (Hons.
in Punjabi) OT Matric, Parbhakar (Hons.
in Hindi) OT and Matric, Sanskrit with OT respectively.
5.
Mr. Randhir Singh concedes that these statutory provisions have not yet been amended by the issue of any notifications in accordance with the requirements of Section 15 of the Act.
In this situation, it is apparent that the statutory rules governing the appointment of teacher in a privately managed school only requires him to possess the qualifications of Metric Sanskrit with OT The rules do not require him to possess the qualifications prescribed or mentioned in the letter dated November 30, 1990 as issued by the State Govt It is also settled that statutory rules cannot be amended by an executive order.
The Govt have no jurisdiction to issue any executive order in violation of the statutory rules.
It is thus clear that the instructions contained in the letter of November 30, 1990 requiring that a person should possess the qualification of BA with Sanskrit as an elective subject and should have also passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a teaching subject, is contrary to the provisions of the rules.
It cannot be enforced till such time as the statutory rules are amended in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
6.
Furthermore, It is also apparent that the petitioner was fully qualified for appointment as a Sanskrit teacher on January 22, 1990 when he was actually selected by the Managing Committee.
Any subsequent alteration of qualification by an executive order cannot have any retrospective effect vis-a-vis the petitioner.
7.
Accordingly, I hold that the amended qualifications are not applicable to the petitioner.
The action of respondents in enforcing these qualifications against the petitioner and the consequential effect thereof in as much as payment of salary etc. has been stopped by the department is also untenable in law.
It is set aside.
The respondents are directed to treat the petitioners as qualified persons.
His case for the grant of approval shall be examined on that basis.
Still further the department is directed to release all arrears of salary etc. expeditiously and in any case within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case the parties are left to bear their own costs.