GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has moved this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India; `or a mandate' to the respondents to promote him as Sub Divisional Engineer with effect from the due dote.
2.
Facts first :  The petitioner obtained Bachelor of Engineering degree in the year 1972.
He was selected and appointed as a Sectional Officer on February 13, 1973.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 are Diploma Holders and they were appointed as Sectional Officer prior to the petitioner.
They passed the AMIE examination in 1978.
The Overseers/Sectional Officers are eligible for appointment to the Punjab State Service of Engineers Class II (for short, the Class II service).
The conditions of service etc. governing Class II service are laid down in the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II Public Works Department (Public Health) Rules, 1966 (for short, the Rules).
Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were promoted to Class II Service vide order dated March 26, 1980.
The precise grouse of the petitioner is that Rules 9(3) and 9(4) of the Rules provide that Committee shall meet at intervals ordinarily not exceeding one year and consider the cases of all eligible officials for promotion to the Service as on the Ist day of January of that year.
The Committee did not meet in the years 1976 and 1977 and postponed its meeting to the year 1978 to accommodate respondent Nos. 3 to 5 so that they may become eligible for promotion to Class II Service.
The meeting was held in the year 1979.
The petitioner was informed that his name was at serial No. 1 in the list of eligible persons.
However, he was not interviewed and respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were placed on the select list.
3.
The factual averments made by the petitioner have been controverted in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
Para 6 of the written statement reads thus :  "Rules 9(3) and 9(4) of P.S.E.
Class II Rules, 1967 provide that :  9(3).
The Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year, and consider the cases of all officials in service as on the Ist day of January of that year.
9(4).
The Committee shall prepare a list of officials suitable for promotion to the Service.
The selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority,"  Accordingly, the process of screening of eligible categories was started in 1976.
But due to certain administrative reasons such a completing of inquiries position in respect of about 150 officials and ACR's of the concerned officers, the Screening Committee could convene its meeting in February-March, 1979.
When the case of screening was initiated in 5/76 there was only one post failing to the share of AMIE quota, but in the list of eligible officials name of the petitioner, in order of seniority, figured at serial No. 7.
Obviously, he could not have been appointed to the P.S.E.
Class II Service on the basis of his seniority.
On the eligibility of 111979, petitioner's name figured at Serial No. 11 among A.M.I.E/B.Sc.
officers, and at that time their share of Class II vacancies was 10.
Respondents 3 to 5 were senior Sectional Officers Service members to the petitioner and as such became eligible for screening.
The Screening Committee meeting had to be postponed in 1978 due to administrative reasons.
The meeting of the Screening Committee was fixed for 2221979 but had to be canceled and refixed on 1.3.1979.
The allegation that the meeting was postponed intentionally to harm the interest of the petitioner is not correct.
There is no provision in the rules that the Screening Committee should interview the candidates.
The candidates are usually asked to appear in person before the Screening Committee.
In this case, however, the Committee did not consider it necessary to interview the petitioner.
Likewise, Respondents 3 to 5 were also not interviewed.
But all of them were brought on the Select List.
The contention of the petitioner that his name was not considered is incorrect.
It is admitted that in Annexure P-6 to the writ petition he has been shown as having AMIE qualification instead of Engineering Degree.
This is a mistake committed inadvertently.
Had he been considered as an AMIE candidate his name would have not appeared in the list of eligible candidates of 1976 because at that time he had an experience of less than 5 years as a Sectional Officer.
It is also submitted that the aforesaid issue came up for decision before the Hon'ble High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 37/1/1975 Shukal Kumar v. State of Punjab and the petition was dismissed on 621975 by Mr. Justice DS Tewatia and Mr. Justice KS Tiwana.
A perusal of Rules 9(3) and 9(4) of the Rules indicates that the committee shall meet once a year to consider the cases of eligible officials for promotion to Class II Service.
If the Committee does not meet in any particular year or years for some reason selection made by it in the subsequent meeting will not be invalidated.
The Rules cannot be so interpreted that if in any particular year the Committee has not held its deliberations, the selections made by it in the subsequent meeting will he invalidated.
The rule is an enabling provision and it is expected that the Committee should meet once, in a year, but if for some reason it could not meet for making the selection, the selection made thereafter will not be rendered invalid.
4.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is bereft of any merit and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.