Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - (Oral) - The petitioner, a Gardner, Arya Girls High School, Amritsar has impugned the order dated 1641991, a copy of which is Annexure P6 to the writ petition, vide which he was transferred from the present place of posting to D.A.V.
Sr.
Secondary School, Qadian, on the plea that the respondents had transferred him without obtaining prior approval of the Director of Public Instructions and as such this action is violative of the provisions of Rule 9 contained in Punjab-privately Managed Recognised School Employees (Security of Services) Rules, 1981, hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules'.
2.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the approval of the District Education Officer, Amritsar was obtained in the matter and as such, no approval from the Director, Public Instructions was required in the case of the petitioner.
Another plea raised by Mr. Girish Agnihotri, Advocate, for respondents No. 1 and 2, is that the behaviour of the petitioner towards his superiors and students was not good as he has been misbehaving with them.
As such, keeping in view the conduct of the petitioner, the impugned transfer order was passed.
3.
On a consideration of the matter, I am of the view that the services of the employees of the privately managed recognised schools are protected under the provisions of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised School Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 read with Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981.
Rule 9 of the said Rules requires consideration of this Court, which reads as under :-  "9.
(1) The Managing Committee, which is running two or more privately managed recognized schools, may transfer any employee from one school to another school under its control :  (a) with the prior approval of the Director; or (b) on the request of the employee; under intimation to the Director; Provided that no employee shall be transferred to a post lower in rank or carrying pay or pay scale which is less than, the basic pay or the pay scale he would have drawn but for his transfer."
A bare glance of the rule clearly envisages that the Managing Committee, which is running two or more privately managed recognised schools, can transfer an employee from one school to another only with the prior approval of the Director or on the request of the concerned employee.
As such, I am of the view that before transferring the petitioner from Amritsar to Qadian, prior approval of the Director was necessary, which admittedly, has not been obtained in the present case.
In view of the clear provisions of Rule 9 of the Rules, the impugned order of transfer, copy Annexure P6 cannot be sustained being illegal and the same is quashed.
No order as to costs.