AG Qureshi, J - The petitioner is a peon/record supplier on the establishment of District & Sessions Judge, Mandsaur and he is a permanent Government servant.
According to the petitioner, in the gradation list prepared by the office of the District and Sessions Judge, Mandsaur dated 1891980, the petitioner has been placed at serial No. 2.
He also has passed Higher Secondary Examination.
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are below the petitioner in the gradation list and, therefore, they are junior to the petitioner.
No adverse remark was communicated to the petitioner during his entire service period.
Earlier when occasion arose for promotion, the petitioner was superseded on 661984 and his name was not even considered for promotion.
Therefore, he made representation on 20.6.1984 to the Registrar, High Court of MP Jabalpur, but in vain.
2.
The petitioner is working as Record Supplier in the grade of Rs. 400-525 from 521982, whereas respondents Nos. 2 and 3 were working in the grade of Rs. 380-495.
As such, according to the pay scale also the petitioner is senior to respondents Nos. 2 and 3.
The District & Sessions Judge, Mandsaur, vide order No. 250 of 87 dated 19687 promoted respondents Nos. 2 and 3, superseding the petitioner, on the posts of lower Division Clerks.
The name of the petitioner was not even considered.
He made representation, but to no effect.
Therefore, has filed this petition.
The petitioner, therefore, prays that he be promoted on the post of L.D.C.
from 521982 with consequential reliefs quashing the order Annexure-C  3.
The petition has been resisted by respondent No. 1 mainly on the ground that after the promotion of the petitioner on the post of Record Supplier he became a patient of Tuberculosis and because of his ill-health he was not deemed fit for promotion to the post of Process Writer.
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were promoted in view of their merits and superiority and the petitioner being incapable of doing the job of Process Writer he was not promoted.
The petitioner also does not have any knowledge of typing.
The confidential reports show that the work of the petitioner was not satisfactory.
4.
After hearing the arguments and perusing the Annexures, we find, that in the order dated 18.5.1984 the petitioner was not considered for promotion on the ground that he is a patient of Tuberculosis and, therefore, people avoided coming into contact with him; therefore, it will not be proper to promote him.
In the confidential reports filed along with the returns we find that in the year 1976 he was found to be a worker with fair performance, in the confidential report for the year 1977 also he was found to be an average worker, in the confidential report for the year 1977 he was found to be a good worker and in the confidential report of the year 1981 his work we found to be satisfactory as Process Server.
The confidential reports of the later years have not been filed.
A copy of the medical report also has been filed, which if of 7121987.
It shows that although he is a patient of Tuberculosis, but he is not an infective case.
He is physically fit to continue his normal duty with taking anti TB treatment.
However, he was not promoted in the year '87' also on the same grounds on which he was superseded in the year '84'.
5.
From the above it is apparent that the only ground on which the petitioner has not been promoted is that he is a patient of TB Although about the adverse confidential reports, the record does not support that pleading.
On the contrary the reports of the petitioner are not adverse.
The medical report shows that he is in a fit condition to perform his duties.
It is common knowledge that the job of Record Supplier is more strenuous than the table work or Process Writer.
The promotion to the post of Process Writer, on the departmental promotion does not require the passing of typing examination.
It is not pleaded that the respondents Nos. 2 and 3 who have been promoted as Process/Writers also know typing.
Therefore, in our opinion the petitioner has wrongly been left out from promotion on the ground of his ill-health.
When the petitioner is found fit to work as a Process Server and Record Supplier he fail to understand how he cannot work as a Proces writer.
However, in view of the fact that the other Class IV employees who were found fit in preference to the petitioner have already been promoted and have been working on that post for a period of over two year, we do not propose a reversion of any of the promotees.
We, therefore, direct that the petitioner is entitled to get the promotion on the post of Process Writer and he should be promoted on the aforesaid post as soon as a next vacancy is available in the office.
When promoted the seniority of the petitioner shall be above respondents Nos. 2 and 3 as Process Writer.
However, he shall be entitled to get the pay and other benefits of the post of Process Writer from the date of his promotion.
The seniority of the petitioner after his promotion as Process Writer shall be only notional and would not entitle him to any monetary benefits because of the seniority, such as increments etc.
But if an occasion for his next promotion may arise, then his seniority shall taken into consideration vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
6.
The petition is allowed with no order as to costs.
The security deposit, if any, be returned to the petitioner after verification.
Petition allowed.