GD Sharma, J - The petitioners deal with the supply of books to the Education Department and claim that they are the members of the Federation of Publishers and Book Sellers Association in India and thereby also members of good offices Committee (Federation of Publishers and Book Sellers Association in India).
2.
It is pleaded that a member of the said association is bound to accept the terms and conditions laid down by the Good Offices Committee and the petitioners being the members thereof are under an obligation to accept the same.
The said Good Offices Committee has prescribed a uniform rate of discount at the rate of 10% at the published prices in respect of all books in English, Hindi and other languages.
The exceptional categories are also specified where discount to the extent of 30% can be given (Annexure A).
3.
The case of the petitioners is that respondent No. 2 (Director School Education, Jammu) in his capacity as "Convenor of the Divisional Purchase Committee, School Education Department, Jammu" issued (Tender notice) NIT No. 02-DSEJ of 1996 dated 2771996 whereby he invited duly sealed offers from the book sellers and publishers quoting discount over and above the discount recommended by the Good Offices Committee.
Respondent No. 2 has intentionally kept loop-holes in the said tender for the supply of even those books which have not been categorised as "standard books" at the national and state level.
4.
The petitioners have challenged the vires of the above said tender notice on the following grounds :-  i) No discount over and above the discount recommended by the "Good Offices Committee" can be asked for from the members of the Federation of Publishers and Book Sellers in India.
ii) Respondent No. 2 (Director School Education, Jammu) has no jurisdiction to issue the tender notice as well as to fix the amount of discount by styling himself to be the convenor of the Divisional Books Purchase Committee.
Petitioners have prayed that writ of Certiorari may be issued thereby (tender notice) NIT No. 02-DSEJ of 1996 dated 2771996 may be quashed.
Any other relief found fit in the circumstances is also prayed for.
5.
Respondents have filed the objections wherein it is pleaded that no fundamental or statutory right of the petitioners has been violated which could give rise to any cause of action and as such the petition is not maintainable.
Furthermore, It is pleaded that in supersession to all previous orders, the Government has now issued order No. 1173-Edu of 1996 dated 271996 whereby sanction was accorded to the constitution of "Divisional Level Selection Committee" for the selection of books which are to be purchased for all the Libraries of the School Education Department for the year 1996-97.
In pursuance of the said order, tender notice in question has been issued and it is valid in the eye of law.
6.
The arguments of the learned counsel appearing for the parties have been heard who have prayed for the disposal of the case on merits.
7.
Mr. Lehar at the outset has contended that respondent No. 2 was not legally competent to call tender (NIIT No. 02-DSEJ of 1996) for the purchase of books referred therein as such power had specifically been delegated to the Government functionaries specified at S.No.
7-B at page 175 of the Book of Financial Powers, (Second Edition of 1990).
Here the heads of Educational Institutions have been delegated with such powers to the extent of budgetary limits after fulfilling the conditions laid down therein.
At page 176 under head (ii) it is provided that "a Committee consisting of Secretary to Government, Higher School Education and heads of Department of Higher Education/School Education/Libraries" will at the beginning of each financial year ascertain from the Government of India/University Grants Commission and Federation of Indian Book Sellers and Publishers, the rate of discount and the conversion rate of foreign publisher applicable for that year and communicate the same to all purchasing officers.
A bare persual of the provision of law discloses that rates of discount are to be determined by a committee consisting of Secretary to Government, Higher School Education Department and heads of departments of Higher Education/School Education/Libraries.
Such a committee has to ascertain the rates of discount from the Government of India/University Grants Commission and Federation of Indian Book Sellers and Publishers.
8.
Mr Chauhan has countered the argument on the plea that subsequent Government order No. 1173-Edu of 1996 dated 271996 supersedes the financial powers delineated in the Book of Financial Powers (at page 176 of S.No.
7-B).
This argument, on first impression seems to be quite specious but subsequently pales into insignificance when the said Government order is read in between the lines.
The order encompasses the constitution of "Divisional Selection Committees" for the selection of Books for school libraries and nowhere it adumbrates the supply of books and fixing the rate of discount.
The controversy which has been generated herein is with regard to issuing of (tender notice) i.e. NIT No. 02-DSEJ of 1996 dated 2771996 which is an offer for entering into contract with the tenderers for the supply of books on the terms and conditions contained therein and to be accepted by the committee headed by respondent No. 2.
9.
The Government in her wisdon already has delegated the powers for fixing the rates of discount on a committee headed by Secretary to Government, Higher School Education Department and it is not known how respondent No. 2 (Director School Education, Jammu) is stepping into his shoes and started the process of fixing the discount.
In order to check any pilferage of the public money the high ranking committee was constituted on the basis of old maxim "Les nil facit frustra" (law does nothing in-vain) but the facts of the case disclose that this power has been abdicated and a person who has no locus-standi has been asserting his authority to over-reach the lawful authority of the concerned Secretary to Government.
The old adage, "salus populi est suprema lex" (which means that regard for public welfare is the highest law) has been found to be given a good by.
It is regret able that the holders of public office, both big and small, have forgotten that the offices entrusted to them are sacred trust.
Such offices are meant for use and not abuse.
The Officers of the Government who under law have been vested with the powers to discharge public functions shall realise their responsibility towards the society and without exhibiting ostrich syndrome obey the dictates of law within a span of two months.
10.
With these findings, writ petition is accepted and tender notice (NIT No. 02-DSEJ of 1996 dated 2771996) is hereby quashed.
In the circumstances the petitioners are not found eligible for the grant of any other relief.
Accordingly, the connected CMPs are also disposed of.