GS Singhvi, J - Whether the respondents who were engaged as Workshop Instructors/Laboratory Technicians in Government Polytechnic, Nilokheri and Government Polytechnic for Women, Ambala City in 1997 and thereafter on contract basis for a fixed period of 30 days on consolidated salary are entitled to fixation of their pay in the regular pay scale is the question which arises for determination in this appeal filed by the State of Haryana and others under Clause X of the Letters Patent against order dated 2892002 passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 16989 of 2000.
2.
The facts of the case lie in a narrow compass.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 and 10 were initially engaged as Workshop Instructors and respondent Nos. 6 to 9 and 11 were engaged as Laboratory Technicians in the Government Polytechnics on contract basis subject to the terms and conditions embodied in the memos of their appointment.
For the sake of convenient reference, the relevant extracts of memo dated 9.11.1997 issued by Principal, Haryana Polytechnic, Nilokheri for appointment of respondent No. 2 - Ram Karan, are reproduced below :-  "1.
You will be paid at the rate of Rs. 2,250/- (fixed) p.m. as consolidated salary without any further obligation on the part of this Institute in lieu of hiring your services.
2.
This engagement is purely on contractual basis and it is for a period of 30 days starting from the date of your joining.
3.
You will have no right or claim to any further extension.
4.
The contract can be terminated on 24 hours notice on either side or by payment thereof for the period falls short of notice.
5.
You will have to perform the duties assigned to you by the Principal, Head of Deptt./Officer incharge.
6.
You will have no claim of experience.
7.
In case of any dispute or controversy the decision of Principal, Haryana Polytechnic Nilokheri shall be final and will be binding on you."
3.
The respondents have been continuing in service with intermittent breaks as is evident from the following statement which we have extracted from paragraph 4 of the written statement filed on behalf of the appellants in Civil Writ Petition No. 16989 of 2000 :  Sr. No. Name & Designation Duty Period S/Shri/Smt.
1.
Priti Girdhar, Lab.
Technician.
18.11.98 to 17199  17.2.99 to 11299 31200 onward.
2.
Naveen Kumar, Lab.
Technician.
17.11.98 to 17199  17.2.99 to 11299 31200 onward.
3.
Ravinder Kumar, Lab.
Technician.
17.2.98 to 11299  31200 onward.
4.
Jaspinder Singh, Lab.
Technician.
5.11.98 to 14199  17.2.99 to 11299 31200 onward.
5.
Rupinder Singh, Work Instructur.
6399 to 11299  31200 onward.
6.
Ram Karan, Workshop Instructor.
20.11.97 to 28298  12.10.98 to 14199 18299 to 11299 31200 to 18.8.2000 7.9.2000 onward.
7.
Harjeet Chawla, Workshop Instructor.
13.11.98 to 14199  18299 to 11299 31200 onward.
8.
Satpal, Workshop Instructor.
17.11.98 to 14199 18299 to 11299 312000 onward.
9.
Vinod Kumar, Work Instructor 17.2.99 to 11299 312000 onward.
Respondent Nos. 10 and 11 were engaged on contract basis w.e.f.
13101998 and 4.12.1998 as Workshop Instructor and Laboratory Technician respectively and are continued in that capacity.
4.
In December, 2000, the respondents filed writ petition claiming parity with the regular employees in the matter of pay scale by asserting that their work, duties and responsibilities are similar.
They invoked the principle of `equal pay for equal work' and prayed that the appellants be directed to fix their pay in the scale of Rs. 5000-8000/-, as was done in Civil Writ Petition No. 13730 of 1999 - Dharam Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 472000.
They further prayed for issuance of a direction to the appellants to allow them to continue in service till the availability of the regularly selected candidates.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the appellants, it was averred that the respondents were engaged as technical supporting staff required to impart technical training on machines/equipments like welding machine etc. to the students in various workshops; that they were engaged by way of stop-gap arrangement without advertisement and without involving Employment Exchange and that they are not liable to be treated at par with regular employees in the matter of fixation of pay etc.  6.
The learned Single Judge relied on the judgment of this Court in Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(4) RSJ 708 and order dated 472000 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 13058 of 1999 - Seema and others v. State of Haryana and others, and directed the appellants to allow the respondents to continue in service and also fix their pay in the scale prescribed for regular employee.
7.
Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana assailed the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that the direction given by him for fixation of the pay of the respondents in the regular pay scale should be set aside in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh and others, 1997(2) SCT 151 (SC) : 1997(1) SLR 143.
He further argued that the judgment of Shamsher Singh's case (supra) and order passed in Seema and others v. State of Haryana and others (supra) do not have any bearing on the claim of the respondents and the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by directing fixation of their pay at par with regular employees.
Shri Dahiya pointed out that the respondents had been engaged on contract basis without following a procedure consistent with the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and without complying with the provisions contained in the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 (for short, `the 1959 Act') and as such, they are not entitled to fixation of their pay in the regular time scale.
He emphasized that the nature of duties performed by the respondents, who were engaged on contract basis by way of stop-gap arrangement are qualitatively different than those performed by the regular employees and argued that the principle of `equal pay for equal work' cannot be invoked for bringing about parity in the pay scale of the employees who are not similarly situated.
8.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondents supported the order under challenge and argued that the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by directing the appellants to fix the pay of his clients in the regular time scale because the duties performed by them are identical to those of the regular employees.
He referred to the averments contained in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the writ petition and the corresponding paragraphs of the written statement to show that the appellants had not controverted the assertion of the respondents on the issue of similarity in their duties vis-a-vis regular employees and argued that his clients have been rightly granted regular time scale in accordance with the principle of `equal pay for equal work'.
In the end, Shri Patwalia submitted that if the Division Bench does not feel inclined to approve the order of the learned Single Judge, then the appellants may be directed to consider the cases of the respondents for regularisation of their services in accordance with the policy contained in notification dated 1102003 issued by the Government of Haryana.
9.
In the context of the last submission made by Shri Patwalia, learned Assistant Advocate General, on instructions from the officer in-charge of the case who is present in the Court, made a statement that the posts of Laboratory Technicians have already been abolished and respondent Nos. 6 to 9 and 11 are being continued in the service only because of the directions given by this Court.
10.
We have given serious thought to the entire matter.
In our opinion, the learned Single Judge committed an error by applying the ratio of the judgment of Shamsher Singh's case (supra) and the order in Seema's case (supra) to the case of the respondents because the facts of those cases were entirely different.
In Shamsher Singh's case (supra) this Court considered the question whether the services of the petitioners, who were appointed as ad hoc Lecturers on the basis of recommendations made by the duly constituted Selection Committee, could be terminated and they could be re-employed on the same posts on contract basis on a consolidated salary and whether they were entitled to be continued in service against the posts which remained vacant after adjusting the candidates selected by Haryana Public Service Commission.
The facts of that case were that in response to the advertisement issued by the Technical Education Department, Haryana, the petitioners applied for recruitment as Lecturers on temporary basis.
The names of some of them were sponsored by the Employment Exchanges.
They were selected by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
They were appointed on ad hoc basis in the scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
They joined service between September, 1995 and January, 1996.
They were continued in service with intermittent breaks.
In 1997, they were offered contractual appointment on a consolidated salary of Rs. 5,500/- per month.
After considering the rival pleadings and making a reference to the order passed in Polu Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 18835 of 1997, decided on 1741998, the Court held that the action of the competent authority to terminate the ad hoc appointment of the petitioners and re-appointment them on contract basis was violative of Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
11.
In Seema and others v. State of Haryana and others (supra), the petitioners were appointed after regular selection, though on contract basis.
They filed writ petition claiming parity with the regular employees in the matter of pay scale.
By relying in the judgments of Polu Ram's case (supra) and Shamsher Singh's case (supra) and taking note of the fact that Special Leave Petition filed by the State of Haryana against the order passed in Shamsher Singh's case (supra) had been dismissed by the Supreme Court, the Division Bench allowed the writ petition and directed the respondents to allow the petitioners to continue in service till the joining of candidates selected by the Haryana Public Service Commission and they be paid salary in the regular time scale.
12.
The facts of the present case show that the petitioners were engaged on contract basis for a fixed period on consolidated salary without any advertisement, without sending any requisition to the Employment Exchange and without selection.
They appear to have been given back-door appointments by the concerned Principals without inviting applications from open market and without sending requisition to the Employment Exchange so as to enable other eligible candidates to compete for selection.
Therefore, their appointments will have to be treated as violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and a writ in the nature of mandamus cannot be issued for fixation of their pay in the regular time scale by invoking the principle of `equal pay for equal work' embodied in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
13.
In State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh and others (supra), the Supreme Court reversed the order of this Court vide which a direction was given for payment of regular pay scale to daily-wage employees and held as under :-  "10.
The respondents, therefore, in the present appeals who are employed on daily wages cannot be treated as on a part (par ?)
with persons in regular service of the State of Haryana holding similar posts.
Daily-rated workers are not required to possess the qualifications prescribed for regular workers, nor do they have to fulfil the requirement relating to age at the time of recruitment.
They are not selected in the manner in which regular employees are selected.
In other words, the requirements for selection are not as rigorous.
There are also other provisions relating to regular service such as the liability of a member of the service to be transferred, and his being subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the authorities as prescribed, which the daily-rated workmen are not subjected to.
They cannot, therefore, be equated with regular workmen for the purposes for their wages.
Nor can they claim the minimum of the regular pay scale of the regularly employed.
11.
The High Court was, therefore, not right in directing that the respondents should be paid the same salary and allowances as are being paid to regular employees holding similar posts with effect from the dates when the respondents were employed.
If a minimum wage is prescribed for such workers, the respondents would be entitled to it if it is more than what they are being paid."
14.
In State of Orissa and others v. Balram Sahu and others, 2002(6) SLR 542, the Supreme Court reiterated the law laid down in Jasmer Singh's case (supra) and observed :-  "On a careful consideration of the materials placed on record, we are of the view that the principles firmly laid down in the well considered decision of Jasmer Singh (supra) squarely applied in all the four cases on hand and the respondents-workers would be entitled to only, apart from the regularization ordered for which the appellants have had no serious objections, the payment of minimum wage prescribed for such workers if it is more than what they were being paid and that the High Court was in serious error in directing that the respondents should be paid the same salary and allowances as were being paid to the regular employees holding similar posts.
The respondent-workers cannot be held to hold any posts to claim even any comparison with the regular and permanent staff, for any or all purposes including a claim for equal pay and allowances.
The fact that no materials were placed before the High Court as to the nature of duties of either categories should have been viewed as a disentitling factor so far as the workers are concerned and dissuaded the High Court from embarking upon an inquiry in the abstract and with no factual basis and not to empower the court to assume and presume equality in the absence of proof to the contract or of any unequal nature of the work performed by them.
To claim a relief on the basis of equality, it is for the claimants to substantiate a clear-cut basis of equivalence and a resultant hostile discrimination before becoming eligible to claim rights on par with the other group vis-a-vis an alleged discrimination.
In the light of the decision directly on this issue rendered in Jasmer Singh (supra), we are unable to persuade ourselves to countenance the claim for minimum basic salary given in some unreported decisions brought to our notice which appear on the face of it to be certain directions given on the peculiar facts and circumstances of the same without an objective consideration of any principle of law.
An order made to merely dispose of the case before court by issuing certain directions on the facts and for the purposes of the said case, cannot have the value or effect of any binding precedent and particularly in the teeth of the decision in Jasmer Singh's case (supra)."
15.
In State of Haryana and another v. Tilak Raj and others, 2003(4) SCT 485 (SC) : 2003(6) SCC 123 the Supreme Court referred to some of the earlier judgments including State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh (supra) and State of Orissa v. Balram Sahu (supra) and set aside the order passed by this court granting parity in the matter of pay scales to daily wage employees.
The propositions laid down in that case read as under :-  "The principle of "equal pay for equal work" is not always easy to apply.
There are inherent difficulties in comparing and evaluating the work done by different persons in different organisations, or even in the same organisation.
It is a concept which requires for its applicability complete and wholesale identity between a group of employees claiming identical pay scales and the other group of employees who have already earned such pay scales.
The problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
A scale of pay is attached to a definite post and in case of a daily-wager, he holds no posts.
The respondent workers cannot be held to hold any posts to claim even any comparison with the regular and permanent staff for any or all purposes including a claim for equal pay and allowances.
To claim a relief on the basis of equality, it is for the claimants to substantiate a clear-cut basis of equivalence and a resultant hostile discrimination before becoming eligible to claim rights on a par with the other group vis-a-vis an alleged discrimination.
No material was placed before the High Court as to the nature of the duties of either categories and it is not possible to hold that the principle of `equal pay for equal work' is an abstract one.
Also, judged in the background of the various legal principles enunciated by the Supreme Court, the impugned judgment of the High Court is clearly indefensible and the same is set aside.
However, the appellant-State has to ensure that minimum wages are prescribed for such workers and the same is paid to them."
16.
In the State of Haryana and others v. Subhash, 2005(1) S.C.T.
297, LPA No. 385 of 1998, decided on 2192004, a Division Bench of this Court of which one of us (GS Singhvi, J) was a member, referred to the above-noted judgments of the Supreme Court and reversed the order of the learned Single Judge vide which the State Government was directed to give regular pay scale to daily wage employees.
Some of the observations made in that judgment are reproduced below :-  "Before parting with the case, we consider it our duty to observe that even if a daily wage employee is engaged against a vacant post, the principle of `equal pay for equal work' cannot be invoked for directing payment of regular pay scale to such employee ignoring the fact that such engagements are usually made in violation of the provisions of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 and the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as also the law laid down in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) S.C.T.
201 : 1992(4) SCC 118.
In this context, it is also important to bear in mind that the directions given by the Court for grant of regular pay scale to daily wage employees, who are engaged against vacant posts without complying with the mandate of law and the Constitution result in growth of illegal employment market which benefits unscrupulous public employers at the cost of thousands and thousands of young citizens of this country who are more qualified, more meritorious and more deserving and who get themselves registered with the employment exchanges and stay in the queue for years together with the fond hope that some day, their right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution will be recognised and respected and they will get an opportunity to compete for selection.
Another grave and adverse consequence of such direction is that the country as a whole has to suffer at the hands of less meritorious and at times, inefficient persons who get back-door entry in the public services by corrupt means or are beneficiaries of the prevailing spoil system."
(Emphasis supplied) By applying the principles laid down in the aforementioned decisions to the facts of this case, we hold that the respondents, who were engaged on contract basis without any selection and without considering the competing claim of other similarly situated persons, are not entitled to the benefit of the principle of `equal pay for equal work' and their pay cannot be fixed in the regular time scale.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition filed by the respondents is dismissed.
17.
However, it is made clear that if the respondents are entitled to be regularised in service in terms of the policy contained in notification dated 1102003 issued by the Government of Haryana, then this order shall not be construed as an obstacle in the consideration of their cases for regularisation of services and the competent authority shall pass appropriate order in that regard within a period of 3 months from the date of submission/receipt of copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.