Amar Dutt, J - The petitioner-Karam Singh joined the Army on 15121975 when he has medically and physically fit.
After the completion of his training at Punjab Regimental Centre, Ramgarh Cantt., he was posted to 13th Battalion of the Punjab Regiment at Dehra Dun in January 1977.
While serving at Sikkim in high altitude in uncongenial climate, he had attacks of Epilepsy Fits in October, 1980.
He was removed to Military Hospital, Bagdogra and thereafter to the Military Hospital, Ramgarh Cantt., where he was downgraded in medical category `CEE' temporary for six months and transferred to Military Hospital, Danapur as a Psychiatric patient for treatment, where his medical category CEE was extended for another six months.
Pursuant to the Medical Board held in December, 1982 in Military Hospital, Ramgarh, he ws awarded 40 per cent disability.
While on casual leave on 2061983, he suffered Epilepsy Fits and involved in an accident, wherein his right arm was badly mutilated.
He was rushed to th P.G.I.
Chandigarh, where his arm was amputated and subsequently he was transferred to the Military Hospital, Chandigarh and thereafter to Military Hospital, Pune.
After treatment, his disability was assessed as 85% and he was discharged.
The petitioner waited for a considerable time for disability pension being released to him and thereafter started correspondence with the Office-in-Charge Records, the Punjab Regiment Ramgarh.
He was informed that his pension claim was rejected.
The petitioner requested the Officer-in-charge Records to take up the matter with the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad.
His request for the grant of disability pension remained pending till 6.12.1988, when it was finally turned down by the Government of India.
The petitioner claims that although from the order of discharge it appears that the same had been passed in the exercise of Army Rule 13-A (III) (iii), yet it is evident that the petitioner has been boarded out on completion of his tenure of service and he had been categorised EEE on account of the disease suffered by him during the military service put in by him and thereafter had been invalided out of service because of amputation of arm on account of an accident met by him while on casual leave and, therefore, the impugned order rejecting his claim for disability pension has got to be set aside.
2.
In the reply filed by the respondents, it was submitted that 30% disability suffered by the petitioner on account of fits (NYD) since September.
1983 was not attributable to military service but aggravated due to stress and strain of service at Ramgarh Cantt.
It was also submitted that ultimately while on casual leave for 20 days at his own request, the petitioner had sustained injury on his right hand on 19.6.1983, which too cannot be attributed to military service and, therefore, as per the recommendations of the Military Hospital, Ramgarh Cantt., though the petitioner was invalided out of service, yet the disability pension claimed by him was denied as disability suffered by him was in no way co-related with the duties in the army.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, during the course of arguments, based his claim on judgment reported as Gurnam Singh v. Union of India, 1991(3) SCT 514, wherein after perusing the paras of Regulation 173 and Paragraph 7(b) of Appendix II, it was held as under :-  "A perusal of paragraph 7(b) as reproduced above would show that a disease which leads to an individual's discharge is deemed to have arisen in service if "no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service."
This is precisely, the position in the present case.
No note was made at the time of the petitioner's entry into service that he was suffering from any disease like epilepsy.
Furthermore, there is nothing before me to indicate that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service.
Inevitably, it must follow that the disability from which the petitioner is suffering and has led to his discharge is attributable to military service.
As a result the petitioner's claim for the grant of disability pension has to be sustained."
In view of this decision, as there is no evidence on the file to show that the petitioner, at the time when he joined the army service, was not suffering from the disease, which he was found to be suffering from in the year 1983, it can safely be inferred that the same was attributable to the tenure of service, which he had put in the Indian Army in the high altitude of Sikkim.
However, before the present petition can be allowed, the petitioner will have to cross another hurdle, which stands in the way of granting him the relief, which comes into existence on account of the fact that the aggravation of the disability found in his case in the year 1983 has led to his getting involved in an accident while operating a thresher on account of which he has lost his right arm.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents, has in view of the judgment reported in Gurnam Singh's case (supra), conceded that in view of the settled law that armed official while on casual leave is to be treated on duty, therefore, the injury, which the petitioner has suffered during the period he was availing casual leave too would have to be taken as occasion while he was on duty.
Looked at from any angle, the order of denial of disability pension to the petitioner on account of amputation of his right arm cannot be sustained.
Consequently, the petitioner would be entitled to receive the pension wrongly denied to him by the respondents on 6121986, which order was upheld by the Govt. of India.
I am, however, of the opinion that this relief would be available to him 38 months prior to the date of filing of this petition.
Ordered accordingly.
In the circumstances of the case, no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.