Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner questions the appointment of respondent No. 3 as Principal, University College of Education, Kurukshetra.
The challenge is made on the ground that the third respondent does not fulfil the qualifications for appointment to the post of Principal.
He prays that the appointment be quashed.
2.
The respondents in their separate written statements have claimed that the qualifications had been duly relaxed.
As a result, the 3rd respondent was eligible.
They maintain that he was already working as Lecturer in the College of Education.
Thus, he was eligible to be considered for appointment as Principal.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short question that arises for consideration is- Did the third respondent fulfil the qualifications for appointment to the post of Principal ?
4.
Admittedly, the University had advertised the post of Principal vide advertisement No. 10/95.
The following qualifications were laid down :-  QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE POST OF PRINCIPAL, UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF EDUCATION (DEPTT.
OF TEACHER EDUCATION), KURUKSHETRA.
(a) Doctor's degree.
(b) A consistently good academic record with high second class (55% marks of grade B in seven point scale) M A Education with B.Ed.
(Second Class with 50% marks in Theory and Practice separately) or Master's degree in any subject with M.Ed.
(55% marks in one Degree and 50% marks in the other) (c) Teaching experience of at least 8 years in a recognised College or University out of which teaching experience of at least five years should be in a recognised College of Education or the Department of Education of University.
Persons with some administrative experience in an educational institution will be preferred.
(d) Provided that the teaching experience in the case of lady Principals of Woman College of Education may be reduced up to five years by the Vice- Chancellor on the basis of merit taking into consideration the age, academic record and experience.
5.
For University appointed Lecturers or University approved Lecturers of University recognised colleges appointed before 2711976, the qualifications for the post of Principal, University College of Education will be as under :-  (a) A consistently good academic record with high second class (55% marks of grade B in seven point scale) MA Education with B.Ed.
(Second class with 50% marks in Theory and practice separately) or Master's Degree in any subject with M.Ed.
(55% marks in one degree and 50% marks in the other).
(The condition of 55% marks in MA Education or Master's Degree in any other subject is relaxable down to 50% marks in the case of a teacher appointed in a University Teaching Department or in a college recognised by the University prior to 2711976 provided that such appointment in a college recognised by the University has been approved by the University).
(b) An M Phil.
Degree or a recognised degree beyond the Master's level or published work indicating the capacity of a candidate for independent research work.
(c) Provided that if a candidate possessing the qualifications as at (b) is not available or not considered suitable, the University on the recommendation of the Selection Committee may appoint a person possessing the qualifications as at (a).
(d) Teaching experience of at least 10 years in a recognised College or University Teaching Department out of which teaching experience of at least 5 years should be in a recognised College of Education or the Department of Education of a University.
(e) Persons with some administrative experience including financial accounting in an educational institution will be preferred."
6.
It is not disputed that in the advertisement, there was no provision for relaxation of the academic qualifications.
Relexation was permissible in respect of "teaching experience" under clause (d) of the first part of the qualifications.
In case of "University appointed... approved lecturers ... appointed before 2711976, the qualification at (b) viz. the M Phil.
Degree could be waived".
No more.
7.
A perusal of the above would show that every candidate was required to possess the following qualifications :-  (i) M A Education with B.Ed.
or (ii) Master's Degree in any subject with M.Ed.
These qualifications were basic and necessary.
The third respondent's qualifications are :- (i) Five years' diploma course in Commercial Art. (ii) Three years' Madhyama Course in Kathak dance.
(iii) BA with Art and clay Modelling.
(iv) MA Drawing and Painting (v) PhD in Fine Art. 8.
A perusal of the above would show that the 3rd respondent did not have the prescribed qualifications.
In particular he did not have the qualification of M.Ed.
or even B.Ed.
This qualification was considered as essential by the University.
It had a nexus with the job requirements of the post of Principal in the College of Education.
The respondent did not have this essential degree.
Yet, for reasons which are not clear from the record, he was not only considered but even selected.
To us, it is apparent that the 3rd respondent did not have the essential qualifications.
He was not eligible.
He could not have been considered.
9.
Mr. Sibal, learned counsel for the respondent-University submits that the Executive Council had considered the matter regarding qualifications of the 3rd respondent on receipt of his representation in the meeting held on September 22, 1993.
It had found that he was eligible to appear before the Selection Committee.
10.
The petitioner has produced a copy of the minutes of the meeting held on September 22, 1993 along with the writ petition as part of Annexure P-11.
The proceedings read as under :-  MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL HELD ON 22.9.93 (ITEM NO. 28) 28.
Considered the representation dated 7/14191 of Shri S K Kushwaha, Lecturer in Arts & Craft, University College of Education (Annexure pages 28(1-5) regarding claim for the post of Principal, College of Education, in view of orders of the Hon'ble Chancellor conveyed vide letter No. HRB-UA- 15(2)(26)-90/3895 dated 1181993 by the Secretary to Governor, Haryana, Chandigarh (Annexure Pages 28(6-7).
THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL CONSIDERED THE REPRESENTATION OF SHRI S.K.
KUSHWAHA, LECTURER IN ARTS AND CRAFT, UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF EDUCATION, AND RESOLVED THAT HE IS ELIGIBLE TO APPEAR BEFORE THE SELECTION COMMITTEE IN TERMS OF THE ADVERTISEMENT AS PUBLISHED IN FEBRUARY, 1990.
HE IS AN APPROVED LECTURER OR THE RECOGNISED COLLEGE.
THE TERM "RELAXATION" AS USED IN THIS ADVERTISEMENT IS NOT RESTRICTED TO PERCENTAGE OF MARKS ONLY AS INTERPRETED BY THE THEN EXECUTIVE COUNCIL IN ITS RESOLUTION NO. 82 DATED 23.11.1990, BUT HAS AN EXTENDED MEANING COVERING THE ENTIRE ESSENTIAL QUALIFICATIONS AS LISTED IN CLAUSE (a) OF THIS ADVERTISEMENT".
11.
A perusal of the above proceedings shows that the Executive Council was considering the representation of January 1991, which had been submitted by the 3rd respondent.
It appears that respondent had made a claim for the post of Principal.
While considering this matter, the Council had resolved that "he is eligible to appear before the Selection Committee in terms of the advertisement as published in February, 1990".
What were the qualifications advertised by the University in the year ?
We are not aware.
However, if the qualifications were, as indicated in the document produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement (Advertisement No. 2/90), we have no doubt that the decision of the Executive Council was patently wrong and against the plain language of the advertisement by which the applications had been invited.
In any case, this decision could, at best, relate to the advertisement which had been issued in the year 1990.
It had no relevance whatsoever to the advertisement issued in the year 1995.
The University had laid down definite qualifications for the post of Principal.
No power to relax the essential qualifications was available.
Thus, no relaxation was permissible.
None could have been granted.
Yet, the respondent was selected and appointed.
We can only lament the total arbitrariness of the action of the respondent-University.
12.
It deserves notice that in the advertisement a limited power of relaxation has been reserved.
It was not at all indicated that persons possessing qualifications other than those mentioned in the advertisement, would also be eligible to be considered.
If such an indication had been given, it could have been possible for others like the 3rd respondent to offer their candidature.
It is not unlikely that there may be persons who possess qualifications much higher than those of respondent No. 3.
They may not have applied at all as there was no indication in the advertisement that the academic qualifications as mentioned therein were relaxable.
The action of the University in selecting a person who did not possess the basic qualification as mentioned in the advertisement was totally unfair and wholly illegal.
It cannot be sustained.
13.
In view of the above, the selection and appointment of respondent No. 3 as Principal, University College of Education, Kurukshetra, are set aside.
The post shall now be advertised afresh.
It shall be filled up in accordance with law.
However, respondent No. 3 shall vacate the post forthwith.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.