Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Has the authority acted arbitrarily in making selection of 12 posts of Patwaris from amongst the physically-challenged candidates ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these five petitions.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the factual position as appearing on the record of CWP No. 12015 of 2000.
The facts may be briefly noticed.
2.
The State Government invited applications for the posts of Patwaris from amongst the 'physically challenged' category of persons.
A total of 985 candidates submitted applications.
It was decided to hold a screening test.
This test was fixed for August 11, 2000.
A total of 965 candidates appeared.
It was an objective type test.
The result was prepared with the aid of the computer.
It was declared in the evening.
A merit list of first 36 candidates was displayed on the Notice Board.
The interview was commenced.
About 14 candidates had been interviewed.
It was late in the evening.
Thus, the members of the Committee decided that the interview shall be continueds next morning.
The petitioners allege that at this hour, there was interference by the politicians.
The Committee was pressurised to postpone the interview to August 18, 2000.
On the day, a new Committee was constituted.
285 candidates were interviewed.
Out of them, respondent Nos. 3 to 14 were selected.
The petitioners allege that the selection was arbitrary.
The action in calling 285 candidates for interview was unfair.
Thus, they pray that the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 3 to 14 be quashed.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by Mr. Anirudh Tewari, the then District Collector, Sangrur.
It is admitted that the test was held on August 11, 2000.
In the first instance, 36 candidates with the highest score "were short-listed".
However, as "the selection process was also going on in many other districts simultaneously on the same day, many candidates did not turn up for interview and only 810 candidates were present for interview on 1182000.
Therefore, it was decided to hold the interview on 1882000.
Since margin of marks obtained by 36 candidates was quite narrow, it was decided to call for interview all those candidates who had obtained minimum 60% marks in the screening test."
As aresult, 285 candidates who obtained minimum 60% marks in the screening test were called for interview.
It has been further averred that the interview was conducted "as per law and procedure.
The candidates were asked questions in order to judge their suitability and mental as well as physical alertness."
It is denied that "the whole interview was completed within two hours only.
The interview continued for the whole day and the candidates were called at different times mentioned in their call letters."
The allegation that there was interference by Mr. SS Dhindsa, the Union Minister and his son, has been controverted.
It may be mentioned that they were not being served, thus, counsel for the petitioners pray that their names may be deleted.
This prayer is allowed.
4.
The petitioners have filed a rejoinder reiterating their claim.
5.
A separate written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 3 to 14.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been contended that the selection was wholly arbitrary.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents,  7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Was the selection fair ?
8.
Admittedly, an objective-type test was held.
Thereafter, a list of 36 candidates which was three times the number of actual vacancies, was notified.
The interviews had commenced.
It is the case of the respondents that 8 to 10 candidates had been interviewed on the same day.
Thereafter, suddenly, a decision to call 285 candidates for interview was taken.
Why ?
There is no answer.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondents submit that since selections were being made in other districts, the candidates were not available for interview.
10.
No details regarding the districts in which selection was going on have been given.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the candidates had appeared in the written test conducted at Sangrur by the respondents on August 11, 2000.
Those who had appeared in the test could not have normally gone to another place on the same day.
The respondents have placed nothing on record which may even remotely suggest that there was any occasion for the candidates to have gone away.
It appears that only an excuse has been trotted out to justify their own action in discontinuing the interview on August 11, 2000.
11.
Admittedly, a written test was held.
The answer-sheets of the candidates were assessed with the help of computer.
The result was with the respondents.
However, while making the selection, no credit for the score in the written test was given.
The marks secured by a candidate were totally ignored.
A wholly new criterion is alleged to have been adopted.
Resultantly, those who had lower marks were brought at par with the candidates who had done very well.
The result was that out of the candidates who were at the top, only one person at Sr. No. 23 of the merit list, was selected.
The remaining candidates were far below.
If the initial decision to make selection out of the top 36 had been followed, all the successful candidates would have been out of them only.
12.
Mr. DV Sharma, learned counsel for the official respondents has stated that according to the criterion as shown for the impugned selection, five marks had to be awarded for the minimum qualification viz. Matric.
If a candidate had secured first or second division, he was to be given an additional mark.
Those who had qualified 10+2 in the first division were to be given seven marks.
For a degree of BA or MA an additional one mark had been fixed.
For distinction in sports or academics, an additional mark was allotted.
One mark was given for experience.
The personality test carried five marks.
13.
A perusal of the criterion as disclosed by the respondent-authorities shows that out of a total of 15 marks, 5 had been allotted for the interview.
In other words, 33% marks had to be awarded as a result of the interview.
14.
DV Sharma, Additional Advocate General, Punjab appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2, has placed before us the list of 285 candidates who had been called for interview.
The marks awarded to each one of the candidates who had appeared for interview have been indicated.
We have examined this list to test the veracity of the claim made by both sides.
It appears that at Sr. No. 9, is the name of Manohar Lal.
He is a petitioner before us in CWP No. 14933 of 2000.
He has the qualification of B.Sc.
Agriculture.
It is duly entered.
He has been awarded six marks for Matric first division.
He has been given no credit for graduation.
Why ?
There is no answer.
He was given two marks for interview.
Thus, he had a score of 8 out of 15.
As against this, at Sr. No. 23 is the name of Harbans Singh respondent No. 3.
His qualification is Matric.
He has been given six marks for that.
An additional mark has been given to him on account to sports etc.
He has been given five marks out of five for interview.
Thus, there is a total of 12 marks.
In fact, on further examination, it appears that the selected candidates have been propped up by awarding high marks in interview.
To illustrate the name of Param Singh s/o Shri Sukhdev Singh, respondent No. 4, appears at Sr. No. 61.
He has been awarded five marks for his Matriculation.
One mark has been given for +2 examination.
Five marks have been given in interview.
Thus, he has a total of 11.
Similarly, Rajesh Goel, respondent No. 5 has a qualification of 10+2.
He has been given six marks therefor and five marks in the interview, making a total of 11.
Gurdarshan Singh, respondent No. 6 has only five marks for his basic qualification of Matric.
He has been selected by giving him five marks in interview.
15.
These instances are illustrative of the fact that mere Matriculates had a cent per cent score in the interview while some of the graduates were awarded much lesser marks.
Still further, even Matriculates were also eliminated.
To illustrate, Beant Singh s/o Nazar Singh had a score of six for Matric.
One mark was allotted to him for distinction in sports etc.
He was rejected by being awarded only one mark in the interview.
16.
On a consideration of the matter, we are satisfied that largely, the marks awarded to the candidates under the personality test were in reverse proportion to their academic qualifications.
It appears too much to assume that the award of high marks to mere Matriculates and low marks to graduates was just a coincidence.
17.
It has been contended on behalf of the private respondents that the selection was fair.
The field of choice had been enlarged.
No prejudice was caused to the petitioners.
18.
We are unable to accept this contention.
Firstly, even if it is assumed that the authority wanted to enlarge the field of choice, it should have given a reasonable time to the candidates to appear.
A perusal of the record produced on behalf of the official respondents shows that more than 100 candidates were absent.
It further appears that the letters sent to some of the candidates had been received back undelivered.
Surely, if the authority wanted to conduct a fair and objective selection, the time-gap between the issue of letters for interview and the actual date of interview could have been longer.
This was not done.
Secondly, it is the admitted position that the interviews were held on one day.
285 candidates had been called for interview on August 18, 2000.
More than 180 candidates had actually appeared.
Even if each candidate was to be interviewed for five minutes, the committee would have needed 900 minutes or 15 hours to interview the candidates.
This would mean that even if the interviews had commenced at 10 in the morning, it would have continued till 1 am on the next day.
Clearly, it has not even been suggested that the interviews had lasted beyond the normal office hours.
19.
On a consideration of the matter, we are satisfied that the selection has not been fair.
Resultantly, it is quashed.
The competent authority shall now reconsider the matter.
It would take a view about the number of candidates to be called for interview.
It would lay down a criterion and make fresh selection out of the persons who appeared in the test for short-listing held on August 11, 2000.
The selected candidates shall be appointed.
20.
The writ petitions are allowed in the above terms.
No costs.
The photocopy of the record and the print-out produced by Mr. Sarvjit Singh, Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur in pursuance to the order dated August 28, 2002 shall be kept in a sealed cover on the brief of the case.
Petitions allowed.