HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was the Headmaster of DAV High School, Mokhra, district Rohtak when it was taken over by the Haryana Government with effect from 27.1.1969, as per communication attached as Annexure P-1 to the petition.
Paragraph 8 of Annexure P-1 which dealt with the case of the petitioner, provided that he would continue as Headmaster for certain periods till the conditions of his appointment were approved by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The petitioner was subsequently reverted as SS Master vide order dated 20th May, 1970, and he joined as such in the Government High School, Assandh, district Karnal.
The petitioner, who is a trained graduate (BA, BT), submitted his case for regularisation of his service through proper channels, but nothing concrete was done virtually up to the date of his retirement on 3091986.
A few days before his retirement, the petitioner received a communication dated 22.9.1986 Annexure P-2 to the petition in which it was stipulated that his services had been regularised w.e.f.
5.12.1967 (there seems to be some confusion about this date) and it was stipulated in para 2 thereof as under :  "He will not be entitled to any increment in the scale until he fulfils the conditions of subject combination in BA as prescribed by the Department."
Aggrieved by the aforesaid condition, the petitioner approached the authorities and stated that the instructions which governed the service did not provide for a particular subject combination for appointment as SS Master and, in any case, the aforesaid condition was incapable of fulfilment as he had retired from service w.e.f .
3091986 i.e. within four days of the communication (Annexure P-2).
2.
In reply to the petition, the respondents have denied the stand taken by the petitioner and have asserted that the instructions (Annexure R-1) provided for a specific subject combination for appointment as SS Master and as the petitioner did not have that combination, he was not eligible for the grant of any increment.
As far as the pension case of the petitioner is concerned, it has been stated that the matter has been forwarded to the Accountant-General, Haryana, for necessary action.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and find that the petition must succeed.
4.
Admittedly, the instructions (Annexure R-1), though binding, are not statutory in nature and cannot be raised to the pedestal of Rules so as to deny the petitioner the benefits claimed by him.
In Annexure P-1 there was no condition that the petitioner was required to have any particular subject combination.
It was for the State of Haryana to adjust the petitioner on a post for which he was duly qualified and suitable and, if per chance he was given the appointment of SS Master that would not have the effect of denying him his due increment.
Moreover, I find that the condition given in paragraph 2 of Annexure P-2, quoted above, would be highly arbitrary as that condition is impossible of compliance in view of the fact that the petitioner retired within four days thereafter.
It further needs to be highlighted that the school was taken over in the year 1969 and for 17 long years till 1986 the Government could not finalise the case of the petitioner with regard to his status as a regular Government employee.
The prayer for the grant of pension has, however, been conceded by the State and in the reply filed it has stated that the case has been forwarded to the Accountant General, Haryana, for necessary action,  5.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed with costs which are determined at Rs. 5000/- and a direction is issued to the State to release all increments and other benefits due to the petitioner as if he was a regular Government employee with effect from the date that the School was taken over by the Government of Haryana.
It is further directed that the arrears and pensionary benefits due to the petitioner be paid within a period of three months from today with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date the amounts fell due till the date of payment.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition allowed.