BN Srikrishna, J - Rule returnable forthwith.
Respondents, through their respective Advocates, waive service.
By consent, writ petition is taken up for final hearing and heard.
2.
This writ petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, impugns an order of the School Tribunal, Pune, dated 9th December, 1991, made in Appeal Nos. 143, 145 and 164 of 1988, under the provisions of section 9 of the Maharashtra Employees of Private Schools (Conditions of Service) Regulation Act, 1977 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
3.
The salient facts necessary for deciding this writ petition are as under :  The second respondent, inter alia, runs a Technical Education Institution at Sangli.
The petitioner is a Diploma holder in Mechanical Engineering in second class.
He applied to the second respondent for the post of Junior Lecturer in 1974.
He was selected and appointed as Junior Lecturer with effect from 26th September, 1974.
The respondent No. 6 is a Junior Lecturer in the Secondary Technical Division and holds a Diploma in Mechanical Engineering with pass class.
4.
The respondent No. 2 created the post of an Assistant Lecturer in its school.
The petitioner applied for the post of Assistant Lecturer and was appointed to the said post.
His appointment was also approved by the Deputy Director of Vocational Educational and Training (Respondent No. 4), vide his letter dated 26th July, 1988.
The sixth respondent, after the petitioner was promoted as an Assistant Lecturer with effect from 181988, challenged the order of 181988 promoting the petitioner as Lecturer by his Appeal No. 1432 of 1988 before the School Tribunal.
Two other employees VP Karajgar and SB Burale also filed Appeal Nos. 145 and 164 of 1988 respectively before the School Tribunal, Pune, challenging the appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Lecturer.
The challenge by the three employees was on the ground that they were senior to the petitioner and as such entitled to be appointed on the post of Assistant Lecturer in preference to the petitioner.
It is required to be mentioned here that the sixth respondent and the said Karajgar and Burale all hold Diploma in Engineering with pass class (third class) while the petitioner holds the said Diploma with second class.
5.
The second respondent published an advertisement in "Daily Kesari", in its issue dated 25th November, 1988, calling for applications from eligible candidates for filling up the vacancies of several posts which included, inter alia, the post of `Mechanical Technology Lecturer'.
The requisite qualifications shown in the advertisement was DME in second class or three years' Job experience or teaching experience in production engineering.
The said advertisement specifically stated that the candidates were required for filling up posts in `the Sangli High School's Terminal Vocational Secondary Section'.
The petitioner applied for the said post, was interviewed and was selected and appointed as a teacher in Terminal Course in Mechanical Technology with effect from 23rd December, 1988.
Significantly, neither respondent No. 6 nor the two other employees Karjgar and Burale applied for the said post.
6.
After the petitioner was selected and appointed to the post of Lecturer in Mechanical Technology, the three contesting employees including the sixth respondent filed supplementary appeal memos in their pending appeals before the School Tribunal, Pune, in which they challenged the appointment to the said post.
The Presiding Officer of the School Tribunal heard the parties and by his judgment and order dated 9121991 allowed the appeal of respondent No. 6 and dismissed the appeals of the other two appellants.
While allowing the appeal of respondent No. 6, the School Tribunal set aside the appointment of the petitioner as Assistant Lecturer with effect from 181988 and as Lecturer with effect from 23rd December, 1988 and directed that the sixth respondent herein be promoted as Assistant Lecturer from 181988 and as Lecturer from 23rd December, 1988, with continuity of service and all consequential benefits.
It is this order of the School Tribunal which is impugned in the present petition.
7.
It is not in dispute that, seniority wise, the petitioner was the junior most as the other three employees including the sixth respondent were senior to him in appointment.
It is also not in dispute that all four employees were holders of Diploma in Mechanical/Electrical Engineering and that while the petitioner had pass the said Diploma in second class, the other three had passed the Diploma only in pass class.
8.
Relying upon the qualifications prescribed in Schedule `B' of the Maharashtra Employees of Private Schools (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules'), the Tribunal has taken the view that the qualifications for the post of the teachers in Junior Colleges were prescribed at item 3, which did not prescribe the passing of Diploma in Engineering in any specific class.
The Tribunal, therefore, rejected the contention of the petitioner that the other three employees were not qualified and, going merely by seniority, took the view that the sixth respondent was entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant Lecturer from 181988 and to the post of Lecturer from 23rd December, 1988.
9.
Relevant provisions of Schedule `B', Part III, Items (3) and (8) read as under :  "Schedule" `B'  III.
Qualifications for Teachers In Junior Colleges.
(1) ....  (2) ....  (3) Teachers for Technical subjects :  Teachers teaching technical subjects or teaching optional technical subjects shall have the following qualification, namely :-  (i) Diploma in Engineering with three years' teaching experience or three year professional experience or;  (ii) teachers having Degree in Engineering or Technology.
(4) .....  (5) .....  (6) .....  (7) .....  (8) Qualifications for Teachers for teaching Vocational Subject or Courses :  1.
Full-time teacher : (a) Diploma in Engineering in at least 2nd Class in the appropriate branch awarded by the Board of Technical Examination, Bombay or its equivalent qualifications recognised by the Government; and (b) Three years' experience either in the teaching line or in the profession or both combined".
10.
A comparison of the two qualifications would make it clear that while a teacher in Junior College teaching technical subjects need not hold a Diploma in Engineering in any specified class, a full-time teacher teaching Vocational subjects or Courses is required to hold a Diploma in Engineering, in at least second class, in the appropriate branch.
The controversy is, whether the minimum qualifications required for the post to which the petitioner was appointed, were those prescribed in Item (3) or Item (8) of Part III of Schedule `B' to the Rules.
We think that the controversy is to be resolved by reference to the advertisement dated 25th November, 1988, calling for the applications from the suitable candidates.
It cannot be gain-said that the said application in terms states that the vacancy was to be filled in the Sangli High School's `Terminal Vocational Secondary Section'.
If the vacancy for the Mechanical Technology Lecturer's post arose in the `Terminal Vocational, Secondary Section', we are of the view that the qualifications requisite for the said post are the ones prescribed in Schedule `B' Part III, Item (8).
Since the minimum qualification for filling up the post of full-time teacher teaching Vocational subjects is a Diploma in the concerned subject with at least second class, in our view, it was only the petitioner who was qualified to hold the said post and not the other three contesting candidates including respondent No. 6.
The school Tribunal was, therefore, in error in holding that the petitioner was not qualified to hold the post of Lecturer and setting aside his appointment as Assistant Lecturer/Lecturer and in directing that the sixth respondent be appointed to the said post.
11.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order of the School Tribunal dated 9th December, 1991, is hereby quashed and set aside and appeal No. 143 of 1988 before the School Tribunal is hereby dismissed.
12.
Rule made absolute, accordingly, with no order as to costs.
Writ petition allowed.