Nirmal Singh, J - Petitioners through the medium of present writ petition are seeking a direction to the respondents for regularizing their services w.e.f.
the date, they completed seven years of service as daily wagers.
Direction is also sought for releasing other benefits in favour of the petitioners.
2.
The short case projected by the petitioners is that they were engaged as Daily rated workers/work charged employees in the year 1990-91.
As their services were not regularized in terms of SRO 64/94 after they completed seven years of service, they filed writ petition SWP No. 2070/01, which was allowed by this court vide judgment dated 4th of March '02.
As the said judgment was not being complied with, they filed contempt petition bearing COA(SW) No. 98- A/02.
It was only thereafter that the respondent authorities complied the judgment aforementioned by passing order dt. 25th of Oct '04 whereby the services of the petitioners were regularized w.e.f.
7th of July '04.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners in the present petition is that even though the services of the petitioners have been regularized w.e.f.
7th of July '04, but this benefit of regularization should have been given to them by the respondents retrospectively w.e.f.
the date they completed seven years of service as daily rated workers/work charged employees.
It is stated that similarly situated persons have been granted the said relief with retrospective effect from the date they completed seven years of service.
Reference in this regard is made to a Government Order No. 173-DLBJ of 2001 dt. 4th of Aug '01, whereby the services of seven persons have been regularised from different dates.
A copy of this order has also been placed on the record.
It is thus submitted that petitioners may also be allowed the same relief.
4.
Respondents have filed objections stating therein that the services of the petitioners have been regularized in terms of SRO 64/94 and this has been done w.e.f.
the date the posts were created by the authority concerned.
It is stated that even though in terms of provisions of SRO 64/94, a daily rated worker/work charged employee becomes entitled to regularization of service after completion of seven years of service but the said provisions nowhere provide that effect of regularization is to be given w.e.f.
the date of completion of seven years of service by the said employee and it is only when the posts become available and are created by the authority concerned that the benefit of regularization can be given which has been done in the present case and thus, the petitioners cannot claim the benefit from the date when no post was existing.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Admitted.
Before considering the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, it would be apt to notice some of the relevant provisions of SRO 64/94 which deals with the regularization of daily rated workers/work charged employees.
Rule 3 of the said SRO deals with the creation of posts.
The said provision reads as under :  "3.
Creation of the posts.
- 1.
The committee may from time to time on receipt of proposal from any administrative department approve the creation of posts for the purpose of regularization of daily rated workers or work charged employees.
2.
After the approval under sub-rule (1) above is conveyed to the administrative department, the administrative department concerned shall issue the orders of creation of the posts.
The posts so created shall be : (a) Born on the plan or non-plan establishment as the classification of the scheme or work may be on which such eligible person are deployed, and  (b) In conformity with the existing sanctioned designation in the pay scale of Rs.
750-940."
Rule 4 deals with the eligibility for regularization of daily rated worker/work charged employee.
The relevant provision i.e. Rule 4(f) may be noticed as under :  "4.
Eligibility for regularization :- (f) that he has completed seven years continuous period of working as daily rated worker or work charged employee or partly as daily rated worker and partly as work charged employee."
5.
A perusal of the aforesaid provisions shows that the Committee constituted by the Government is to approve creation of the posts on receipt of proposals from different administrative departments for the purpose of regularization of daily rated workers/work charged employees and after receipt of approval, the orders are issued by the administrative department for creation of posts.
So far as eligibility clause is concerned, alongwith other criteria which is to be fulfilled by a daily rated worker/work charged employee i.e. age, qualification etc., he has to complete seven years of continuous period of working as daily rated worker or work charged employee or partly as daily rated worker or partly as work charged employee.
There is no such provision in the aforesaid SRO that the regularization of a work charged employee/daily rated worker if he/she fulfils the requisite eligibility criteria is to be effected from the date, he completes seven years of service.
The only conclusion which can be drawn after perusing Rule 4(f) of the SRO is that a daily rated worker/work charged employee becomes eligible for being considered for regularisation after completion of seven years of service.
6.
Therefore, in view of the above, it can be said that while considering the case of a daily rated worker/work charged employee for regularization of his/her services in terms of the provisions of SRO aforementioned, after he/she completes seven years of service, availability of post is must and it is only from the date, the post is created or becomes available that the effect of regularization can be given.
Thus, unless and until the posts are created keeping in view the budgetary provisions and are accordingly available with the department concerned, no regularization of a work charged employee/daily rated worker can be ordered.
In expressing such an opinion, I am guided by a Division Bench judgment passed by this Court in the case reported as 2004(II) SLJ 612, State of J&K and others v. Maharaj Krishan Bhat and others.
What was observed in Para 17 of the judgment in the aforesaid case, is being reproduced below :  "As seen above, Rule 5 of the rules contemplates "appointment on regular pay scale."
Such appointment can be made only against a post.
If there are no posts available, sanctioned/created by the competent authority, there cannot be any appointment.
It is one thing to give notional benefit, such as in the matter of seniority, it is another thing to make appointment beyond budgetary provision.
In absence of any budgetary provisions, neither any appointment can be made on a `post' nor salary/pay etc. can be paid to the appointment......"  So far as regularization of services of a daily rated worker/work charged employee after completion of seven years of service is concerned, the Division Bench in the aforesaid case further observed as under :  "..........It is to be kept in mind that completion of seven years continuous period of working as daily rated worker or work charged employee is one of the conditions of eligibility under clause (f) of Rule 4, like other conditions enumerated in other clauses which does not mean that all those who possessed or possess the eligibility are to be regularized i.e. appointed in the regular pay scale, irrespective of the availability of posts or not...."  In the present case, it is not the case that the posts were available with the respondent State at the time when the petitioners completed seven years of service and that there was in action on the part of the respondents in passing the appropriate orders at the relevant time.
Therefore, no such direction can be given to respondents for regularizing the services of the petitioners w.e.f.
the date when there was no availability of post.
7.
So far as plea of the petitioners regarding grant of the said benefit on the basis of similarly situated-persons is concerned, a perusal of Government Order dated 173-DLBJ of 2001 dt. 4th of Aug '01, whereby benefit of regularization has been given to about seven daily rated workers/work charged employees, on which reliance has been placed, by the petitioners, shows that these employees were initially engaged in the year 1986, 1987 and 1991 respectively.
They accordingly completed their seven years in the year 1993, 1994 and 1998 but even in their case, six posts were created w.e.f.
1st of Jan '95 and one post was created w.e.f.
1st of April '99, and as such, the said daily rated workers/work charged employees were granted the benefit of regularization from the date the posts were created and not from the date they completed seven years of continuous service.
Therefore, the plea of the petitioners in this regard is without any force and is rejected.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.