RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as JBT Teachress in the Education Department in the State of Punjab on 2471959 and was confirmed as such w.e.f.
2781964.
After confirmation she was promoted as Social Studies Mistress.
According to the averments made in the Writ Petition, the petitioner while working as Social Studies Mistress in Govt.
Girls High School, Sardulgarh (Bhatinda) had applied for the post of Head Mistress in response to an advertisement issued by the Haryana Government.
According to the petitioner she had applied through proper channel.
She was selected as Head Mistress in the State of Haryana.
Petitioner got herself relieved from the Head Mistress of GGH School, Sardulgarh on 30111982 to join her new appointment as Head Mistress in Haryana.
She joined as Head Mistress in Govt.
Girls High School, Ellenabad, Haryana on 1121982.
2.
The petitioner sent an affidavit dated 1751985 to the concerned authorities in the State of Punjab that she had completed 23 years of service in the State of Punjab and wanted to get voluntary retirement from service.
She also made a claim for pension and other pensionary benefits from the State of Punjab.
Since no relief was granted to the petitioner, she filed the present writ petition.
3.
In the reply filed on behalf of State of Punjab, Director School Education, Punjab and District Education Officer, Bathinda, the stand taken in that the petitioner's application should have been recommended by the Head of the Department i.e. Director of Public Instructions, Punjab and that the District Education Officer was not competent to recommend the application of the petitioner for appointment in other State or in other department within the State.
According to the written statement, the application recommended by the District Education Officer only could not be considered an application through proper channel.
Further it has been mentioned that even if the application had been sent through proper channel the petitioner should have resigned from the job to join in Haryana State.
It is further the case of the respondents that the Head Mistress of Sardulgarh School was not competent to relieve the petitioner.
In fact, according to the respondents, it is for the State of Haryana to consider whether to give any pensionary benefits of the previous service rendered in the State of Punjab.
Accordingly, respondents' case is that the petitioner is not entitled to any pensionary benefits from the State of Punjab.
4.
This case had come up earlier before me on 3.5.1991 when the petitioner sought permission to amend the writ petition to implead the State of Haryana and DPI, Schools, Haryana as parties to the writ petition and to claim relief against them.
This prayer was allowed by me and accordingly an amended writ petition was filed.
On 2371991, Mr. RC Setia, Addl.
AG, Haryana had appeared on behalf of the newly added respondents i.e. State of Haryana, Director of Schools, Haryana and District Education Officer, Jind and had prayed for time for filing written statement on their behalf.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of newly added respondents.
Mr. Setia says that he has no instructions to defend the case on behalf of the above said newly added respondents.
5.
Mr. ML Puri, appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that in accordance with Rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II (as applicable to the State of Haryana also) and specially Note 3 thereto, the petitioner is entitled to count her service in the State of Punjab for the purpose of pensionary benefits in the State of Haryana and the pension so granted by the State of Haryana would be shared by the respective Governments to the extent such service would have qualified for grant of pension under the Rules of the respective Governments.
Petitioner is to retire on 3181994 on attaining the age of 58 years.
Rule 317 and note 3 thereunder is reproduced below :  "3.17.
In the case of an officer retiring on or after 5th January, 1961, if he was holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary or officiating service under the State Government, followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post, shall count in full as qualifying service except in respect of :-  (i) periods of temporary or officiating service in on pensionable establishment; (ii) periods of service in workcharged establishment; and (iii) periods of service paid from contingencies."
Note.
1 and 2.
Note.
3(a) In respect of temporary employees of the following categories who render service under the Central/State Governments prior to securing posts under the Central/State Govt. on their own volition in response of advertisements or circulars, including those by Union/State Public Service Commission and who are eventually confirmed in their new posts, the proportionate pensionary liability in respect of temporary service rendered under the Central/State Governments to the extent such service would have qualified for grant of pension under the rules of the respective Government will be shared by the concerned Governments on a service basis :-  (1) Those who having been retrenched from the service of Central/State Government secured on their own employment under State/Central Government either with or without interruption between the date of retrenchment and date of new appointment.
(2) Those who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Government apply for posts under State/Central Governments through proper channel/with proper permission of the Administrative authority, concerned.
Explanation :- Where an employee in category (2) is required for satisfying technical requirement, to tender resignation from the temporary post held by him before joining the new appointment, a certificate to the effect that such resignation had been tendered for Administrative reasons and/or to satisfy a technical requirement, to join with proper permission, the new posts may be issued by the authority accepting the resignation.
A record of this certificate may also be made in his service book under proper attestation to enable him to get this benefit at the time of retirement.
The gratuity, if any, received by the Government for temporary service under the Central/State Governments will, however, have to be refunded by him, to the Government concerned.
(b) Those employees who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Governments apply for post under Central/State Governments direct without permission and resign their previous post to join the new appointment under the Central/Scale Government will not be entitled to count their previous service for pension."
6.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that since the petitioner had joined the post in Haryana Government without the permission of the Punjab Government and without resigning from the job, she was not entitled to any pensionary benefits under Explanation 2 (b) to Rule 317, Note 3 quoted above.
According to the written statement, the petitioner had not put in her resignation and consequently according to the respondents, the petitioner was not entitled to any pensionary benefits.
7.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It was not the fault of the petitioner if her application was not sent to the Director, Public Instructions.
She had applied through proper channel and the District Education Officer had recommended the petitioner's application on the basis of which she was selected.
If the application was not forwarded to the DPI, no fault can be found with the petitioner.
As far as the question of resignation of the petitioner is concerned, factual position is that she was relieved by the Head Mistress.
It is only a technicality that she should have resigned from the post.
In the present case the fact remains that from 1121982 the petitioner was no more in service in the State of Punjab and no action till date has been taken against her for being absent from duty.
The respondents were taking that the petitioner had left the service in the State of Punjab to join in the State of Haryana.
That being so the respondent State of Punjab is liable to contribute to the pensionary benefits to the State of Haryana which the State of Haryana is liable to pay under Rule 317 quoted above.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is held entitled to the pensionary benefits from the State of Haryana while counting her past service in the State of Punjab.
However, both the States of Punjab and Haryana would bear proportionately pensionary liability to the extent of service which have been rendered by the petitioner in the State of Punjab and the one which would be rendered in the State of Haryana.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.