N K Sodhi, J - Petitioners are employed as language teachers in Government High Schools in the State of Haryana after having been selected through the Subordinate Services Selection Board in the year 1972.
They are drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
All the petitioners are Hindi teachers except petitioner No. 46, who is a Punjabi teacher working in the Government High School, Bighar, District Hissar.
Undisputedly, they are all matric pass (full subjects) with Prabhakar and JBT Punjabi teacher (petitioner No. 46) is Giani pass with JBT  2.
Besides the petitioners, there are other language teachers as well as in the State of Haryana who are all matric pass (full subjects) with Prabhakar/Giani and OT and some of them were recruited along with the petitioners in the year 1972.
It is common case of the parties that all the language teachers in the State prior to April 30, 1990 were drawing the same scale of pay no matter whether they possessed the qualification of OT or JBT The State of Haryana as per its letter dated August 23, 1990 revised the pay scales of language teachers w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 from Rs. 1200-2040 to Rs. 1400-2600.
It is not disputed that this revised pay scale was not given to the petitioners because they did not possess the qualification of OT while all other language teachers who possessed this qualification were given the benefit of the revised pay scales.
Petitioners represented that they be also given the revised pay scales w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 as, according to them, the qualification of OT and JBT had been treated by the State of Haryana to be equivalent all through and even at the time of their recruitment, teachers with JBT/OT qualification were considered to be possessing equal qualifications.
Petitioners also relied on the letter dated March 12, 1976 issued by the Director, Public Instructions, Haryana laying down qualifications for the appointment of language teachers.
According to this letter, the qualifications for a Hindi teacher were Matric-Prabhakar-OT or JBT and that of a Punjabi teacher were Matric- Giani-OT or JBT  3.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondent-state it has been categorically averred that the revised pay scales were given to the Hindi and Punjabi teachers who possessed the qualification of OT as prescribed under the Punjab Education Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955.
It is also the case of the respondents that Prabhakar OT is a higher qualification than JBT According to them a language teacher acquires the qualification of OT after passing Prabhakar and is specifically trained as a language teacher whereas a teacher acquires the diploma of JBT after passing matriculation and is specifically trained for teaching the primary classes and the respondents, therefore, submit that the qualification of Prabhakar/Giani and OT cannot be equated with Prabhakar/Giani and JBT  4.
I have heard counsel for the parties at length.
The question that requires consideration is as to whether the qualification of Prabhakar/Giani and JBT can be treated as equivalent to Prabhakar/Giani and OT in case the two qualifications are deemed to be equivalent, the petitioners would also be entitled to the revised pay scales as allowed to the language teachers with OT qualification.
This question came up before I S Tiwana, J in Gurcharan Singh vs. State of Haryana, C.W.P.
No. 206 of 1984 decided on April 2, 1984.
In this case the services of the Punjabi Teachers who did not possess the qualification of OT were threatened to be terminated on the ground that they were ineligible to hold the said posts under the Rules even though they possessed the qualification of JBT The learned Judge after going through the provisions of the Rules and letter dated March 12, 1976 and other correspondence in this regard, concluded that the petitioners therein were not ineligible as the qualification of OT was equivalent to that of JBT or at any rate was a substitute for the OT course.
I am in respectful agreement with the view expressed in Gurcharan Singh's case (supra) and while following the same, I hold that the qualifications of OT and JBT must be considered to be equivalent to each other more so when the department itself has been treating them as such in the matter of pay scales.
In this view of the matter, I see no reason why the petitioners should not be given the same benefit of the revised scales of pay w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 as was given in the case of those teachers who possessed the qualification of OT  5.
I am informed that the State Government has again w.e.f.
April 1, 1992 granted the higher pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 to all Hindi/Punjabi teachers possessing the qualifications of Prabhakar/Giani with JBT Learned counsel for the petitioners has produced in this regard an attested copy of letter dated June 17, 1992 from the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Finance Department sent to the office of Sub Divisional Education Officers in the State and the same is being taken on record.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to pay to the petitioners and other language teachers with JBT qualification the revised pay scales w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 as was done in the case of teachers possessing the qualification of OT The arrears be paid to them within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order failing which the petitioners shall be entitled to interest thereon at the rate of 12% per annum.
There will be no order as to costs.