S Parvatha Rao, J - The petitioner in this Writ Petition questions Government Memo.
No. 9279/Ser.IV.I/86-4 of Education (Services-IV) Department dated 611987 and the consequent proceedings RC.
No. 83/SCC/85 of the Director of School Education, the 2nd respondent herein, dated 2811987.
Under the said Memo it is stated that the Finance Department of the Government of Andhra Pradesh opined that the automatic advancement scheme applies to only service rendered and paid for from Government funds and that service rendered by a teacher in an unaided post under private management cannot count for allowing special grade posts, special promotion post/special ad hoc promotion post.
Consequent to the said Memo.
the 2nd respondent under the impugned proceedings dated 2811987 requested all the District Educational Officers to review the cases of such of those unaided staff who were subsequently admitted to aid and have been given special grades/special Promotion/Special Ad hoc Promotions and take immediate action as per Government orders to recover the excess amounts paid if any."
2.
The petitioners are working in SMRM High School at Nagaram in the Guntur District, which is a privately managed school.
The said school has been admitted to grant-in-aid.
Petitioners 1 to 6 have been working as B.Ed.
Assistants; 7th and 8th petitioners have been working as Secondary Grade Assistants; 10th and l1th petitioners have been working as Record Assistants and the 12th petitioner has been working as a Peon in the said school.
In the affidavit in support of the Writ Petition, the particulars relating to the 9th petitioner are not mentioned, however, the learned counsel for the petitioners states that he has been working as an LDC in the said school.
The petitioners state that 3 posts of B.Ed.
Assistants and 2 posts of Secondary Grade Assistants were admitted to grant-in-aid on 19.3.1975; 3 more posts of B.Ed.
Assistants were admitted to grant-in-aid on 23101975, 12121975 and 2911976.
On 331978 the two posts of Record Assistants and the one post of Attender were also admitted for grant-in-aid along with one post of an LDC Thus all the petitioners have been working in aided posts in the said school.
3.
The 1st respondent issued GOMs.
No. 164 of Finance & Planning (FIN.WING-PRC-I) Department dated 161982 extending to all teachers who are working under all managements including those under private aided managements, and who are governed by the Andhra Pradesh Revised Pay Scales of 1978, the scheme of advancement in service introduced under GOMs.
No. 117 (PRC.
1) Department dated 2551981 (automatic advancement scheme) creating special grade posts and special temporary promotions/special ad hoc promotions posts for teachers who have completed 10 years and 15 years of service respectively.
In the present Writ Petition the petitioners are concerned with special grade posts only.
As per the automatic advancement scheme extended under the said GOMs.
No. 164, teachers working in schools run by private aided managements who are governed by the Andhra Pradesh Revised Pay Scales of 1978 and who have put in 10 years service are entitled to special grade posts.
The said automatic advancement scheme was extended also to non-teaching staff working in schools under private aided managements and who were governed by the Andhra Pradesh Revised Pay Scales of 1978 as is evident from GOMs.
No. 246, Finance & Planning (FW.PC.II) Department dated 1061993 produced by the learned Government Pleader wherein it is stated that the Government Orders in GOMs.
No. 117 dated 2551981 introducing Automatic Advancement Scheme were applicable to all categories of personnel i.e., Government employees, Non- Teaching Staff of Zila Praja Parishads, Panchayati Samitis, Municipalities, Zilla Parishads, Zilla Grandhalaya Samsthas, Agricultural Marketing Committees, Non-Teaching Staff of Aided Schools and Junior Colleges/Aided Degree Colleges and Workcharged Establishment who get monthly pay in a regular pay scale in Revised Pay Scales 1978."
4.
As already stated above, petitioners 1 to 8 have been working as teachers and petitioners 10 to 12 have been employed as non-teaching staff and according to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the 9th petitioner has been working as an LDC and therefore also belongs to non-teaching staff.
In the affidavit it is asserted that all the petitioners are working in aided posts in SMRM High School, Nagaram and that all of them had completed 10 years of service in aided and unaided posts put together by 1983.
It is also stated that in 1983 they had been granted the special grade scales applicable to them.
5.
The petitioners state that the 2nd respondent herein i.e., the Director of School Education, issued proceedings in Rc.No83/SCC 85 dated 2811987 to all the District Educational Officers including the 3rd respondent herein to review all the cases of "those unaided staff who were subsequently admitted to aid and have been given the special grades special promotion/special ad hoc promotions and take immediate action as per Government Orders to recover the excess amounts paid, if any.
The Government Orders referred to therein are in Memo.
No. 9279/Services-IV.1/86-4 dated 611987 wherein it was opined that automatic advancement scheme applied to only services rendered and paid for from Government funds and that services rendered by a teacher in an unaided post under private management would not count for allowing special grade posts, special promotion posts and special ad hoc promotion posts.
This was said to be on the basis that the period of service of a teacher in an unaided post would not qualify for pension.
6.
The petitioners submit that the said Memo.
No. 9279 dated 611987 and the consequent proceedings of the 2nd respondent in Rc.No.
83/SCC/85 dated 2811987 are contrary to and go against the language of GOMs.
No. 164 dated 161982.
They rely on the relevant portion of Part-I of the Appendix to the said GO, under the heading "Special Grade Posts : Hither Scale after 10 years of service", which is as follows :  "(i) Every employee after a service of 10 years in a particular scale including the scales of pay corresponding to the existing scales of pay, as per the orders issued from time to time in pursuance of the earlier Pay Revisions, shall be eligible for the next higher scale in Schedule-I to the Andhra Pradesh Revised Scales of Pay Rules, 1979.
The higher scales referred to corresponding to the existing relevant scales are shown in Col. 4 of Annexure-I to this Appendix.
Posts carrying those higher scales shall be called Special Grade Posts.
(ii) For purposes of computation of 10 years of service, referred to in the proceedings para, all service that counts for increment in that scale shall be taken into account."
From this it is clear that for the purpose of computation of 10 years of service, "all service that counts for increment in that scale" shall be taken into account.
Therefore the service that qualifies for pension is not the test for computation of 10 years of service for the purposes of Automatic Advancement Scheme.
The learned counsel for the petitioners draws my attention to Memorandum No. 3866/E F2/78-6, Education (F) Department dated 1011980 which clarifies that the service rendered by the members of staff both teaching as well as non-teaching in unaided posts should be counted for increments in the relevant scales applicable to them.
The relevant portion of the said Memorandum is as follows :  "Government have examined the above anomaly and direct that while releasing grand-in-aid, the Director of School Education shall take into account the increments earned by the incumbents working in the posts prior to the date of admission to grant-in-aid, provided the staff are qualified and increments sanctioned are in accordance with the rule in force."
The said Memorandum recites that the clarification was given in view of several representations made against the proposals of the Director of School Education of taking the minimum admissible basic pay in the time scale for each post as the basis for release of grant-in-aid.
The said representations were made by several members of staff who earned regular increments by virtue of service prior to the date of admission to aid because they were not able to draw the pay and allowances due to them under the Rules as grant-in-aid was being released based on the minimum of the scale of pay.
The said Memorandum also referred to Rule 159 of the Andhra Pradesh Educational Rules which provides that teaching and non-teaching staff should be paid regular increments as per the scales prescribed by the Government.
7.
In view of the said Memorandum No. 3866 of the Government dated 1011980, there can be no doubt that the service rendered by the petitioners in the posts prior to their admission to aid will have to be taken into account for the computation of 10 years of service for the purposes of their eligibility to Special Grade Posts.
That was the basis on which they were rightly given Special Grade Posts in 1983.
That cannot be disturbed by the respondents under the impugned Memo No. 9279 dated 611987 of the 1st respondent and the proceedings in Rc.
No. 83/SCC/85 dated 2811987 of the 2nd respondent and they are directed not to do so.
8.
In the circumstances, the Writ Petition will have to be allowed and it is accordingly allowed.
No costs  Petition allowed.