Permod Kohli, J - Aggrieved of the order dated 9121996 (Annexure P-3) passed by the Additional Deputy Inspector General of Police, Group Center CRPF Gurgaon (Haryana) removing the petitioner from service of the Central Reserve Police Force, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Inspector General of Police, 5th Sector, Central Reserve Police Force, Camp Hallomajra, UT, Chandigarh under Rule 28 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 which has been rejected vide order dated 1231997 (Annexure P-4).
Both these orders have been assailed in the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner was posted on 2951996 in Adhoc Coy.
There was some scuffle between the petitioner and one Sita Ram, CHM.
Both of them suffered injuries.
A charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner vide Memorandum dated 2671996 (Annexure P-1)which was accompanied with the Articles of Charge and imputation of misconduct and indiscipline.
The petitioner was charged of offence under Section 11(1) of CRPF Act, 1949 and accused of causing assault with lathi on Sita Ram, CHM.
On receipt of aforesaid charge, the petitioner filed his reply dated 671997 (Annexure P-2).
The Competent Authority constituted enquiry which was entrusted to one SP Srivastav, GGM Second Command Officer.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report on 14.11.1996 holding that the charges against the petitioner are proved.
The disciplinary authority i.e. respondent No. 3 accepted the enquiry requiry report and ordered removal of the petitioner from service by way of punishment from the date of the passing of the order and all his medals and decorations have been ordered to be forfeited and his name ordered to be struck off from the strength of the CRPF with effect from 9121996, vide his order dated 9121996 (Annexure P-3).
Aggrieved of the aforesaid order, the petitioner preferred an appeal before respondent No. 2 who also dismissed the same vide his order dated 1231997 (Annexure P-5).
3.
The main grievance of the petitioner is that the Enquiry has been conducted against him in gross violation of the rules of natural justice and even the disciplinary authority and the appellate authority have violated the principles of natural justice.
His contentions are that (1) evidence in the enquiry has been recorded in his absence and he was not provided any opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses or to lead his own evidence; (2) the disciplinary authority did not furnish any report of the enquiry to him nor any show-cause to seek his explanation was ever issued; (3) the order of imposing punishment as also the appellate order have been passed without affording him any opportunity of being heard; (4) the orders impugned particularly that of the appellate authority, are without any reason much less valid reason.
4.
During the pendency of this writ petition, the petitioner made an application for placing on record copy of the enquiry report including the statements recorded by the Enquiry Officer during the conduct of the enquiry.
The said application was allowed and the report of the Enquiry Officer as also the statements evidence recorded during the course of enquiry have been placed on record.
5.
I have perused the statements recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
(1) There is nothing on record to show that the statements of the witnesses were recorded by the Enquiry Officer in presence of the petitioner; (2) the petitioner has not been afforded any opportunity to cross-examine any of the departmental witnesses.
Some questions have been asked by the Enquiry Officer himself to the witnesses; (3) the petitioner has not been afforded any opportunity to lead his own evidence or evidence in rebuttal.
6.
It is interesting to find that while issuing Memorandum of Charges dated 2671996 (Annexure P-1), the petitioner was informed that the enquiry conducted is under Rule 14 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as "the CCS (CCA) Rules").
However, the charge against the petitioner has been framed under Section 11 (1) of the CRPF Act, 1949.
The disciplinary authority in his impugned order dated 9121996 (Annexure P-3) has made reference to imposition of punishment under Section 11 (1) of the CRPF Act, 1949 read with Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955.
7.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, pleaded that the enquiry against the petitioner has been conducted under Rules 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955.
There is nothing on record to show as to which of the two procedures i.e. prescribed under Rules 14 and 15 of the CCS (CCA) Rules or under Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955 have been adopted by the Enquiry Officer and the disciplinary authority.
In view of the fact that the enquiry has been held against the petitioner and as per the allegations contained in the Memorandum and also as is evident from the enquiry report and the evidence produced before this Court, the petitioner has not been afforded any opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses or to produce his own evidence.
It is deemed necessary to examine the procedure prescribed under both the Rules.
Relevant extract from Rules 14 and 15 of the CCS (CCA) Rules are reproduced here under :-  PART VI "14.
Procedure for imposing major penalties - (1) No order imposing any of the penalties specified in Cls. (v) to (ix) of Rule 11 shall be made except after an inquiry held, as far as may be, in the manner provided in this rule and Rule 15, or in the manner provided by the Public Servants (Inquiries)Act, 1850, where such inquiry is held under that Act.
(2) Whenever the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that there are grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or misbehavior against a Government, it may itself Inquire into, or appoint under this rule or under the provisions of the Public (servant) services (Inquiries) Act, 1850, as the case may be, an authority to inquire into the truth thereof.
Explanation :- Where the disciplinary authority itself holds the inquiry, any reference in sub-rule (7) to sub-rule (20) and in sub-rule (22) to the inquiring authority shall be construed as a reference to the disciplinary authority.
(3) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry against a Government servant under this rule and Rule 15, the disciplinary authority shall draw up or cause to be drawn up - (i) the substance of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour into definite and distinct articles of charge; (ii) a statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour in support of each article of charge, which shall contain - (a) a statement of all relevant facts including any admission by whom, the articles of charge are proposed to be sustained.
(4) The disciplinary authority shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the Government servant a copy of the articles of charge, the statement of the imputations of misbehaviour and a list of document and witnesses by which each article or charges is proposed to be sustained and shall require the Government servant to submit, within such time as may be specified, a written statement of his defence and to state whether he desires to be heard in person.
(5) (a) On receipt of the written statement of defence, the disciplinary authority may itself inquire into such of the articles of charge as are admitted, or, if it considers it necessary so to do, appoint, under sub-rule (2), an inquiring authority for the purpose, and where all the articles of charge have been admitted by the Government servant in his written statement of defence, the disciplinary authority shall record its finding on each charge after taking such evidence as it may think fit and shall act in the manner laid down in Rule 15. xxx xxx xxx xxx (9) If the Government servant who has not admitted any of the articles of charge in his written statement of defence or has not submitted any written statement of defence, appears before the inquiring authority, such authority shall ask him whether he is guilty or has any defence to make and if he pleads guilty to any of the articles of charge, the inquiring authority shall record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signature of the Government servant thereon.
(10) The inquiring authority shall return a finding of guilt in respect of those articles of charge to which the Government servant pleads guilty.
xxx xxx xxx xxx (14) On the date fixed for the inquiry, the oral and documentary evidence by which the articles of charge are proposed to be proved shall be produced by or on behalf of the disciplinary authority.
The witnesses shall be examined by or on behalf of the Government servant.
The Presenting Officer shall be entitled to re-examine the witnesses on any point on which they have been cross- examined, but not on any new matter, without the leave of the inquiring authority.
The inquiring authority may also put such questions to the witnesses as it thinks fit.
xxx xxx xxx xxx (16) When the case for the disciplinary authority is closed, the Government servant shall be required to state his defence, orally or in writing, as he may prefer.
If the defence is made orally, it shall be recorded and the Government servant shall be required to sign the record.
In either case a copy of the statement of defence shall be given to the Presenting Officer, if any appointed.
(17) The evidence on behalf of the Government servant shall then be produced.
The Government servant may examine himself in his own behalf if he so prefers.
The witnesses produced by the Government servant shall then be examined and shall be liable to cross-examination, re-examination and examination by the inquiring authority according to the provisions applicable to the witnesses for the disciplinary authority.
(18) The inquiring authority may, after the Government servant closes his case, and shall, if the Government servant has not examined himself, generally question him on the circumstances appearing against him in the evidence for the purpose of enabling the Government servant to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him.
xxx xxx xxx xxx (23) (i) After the conclusion of the inquiry, a report shall be prepared and it shall contain - (a) the articles of charge and the statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour; (b) the defence of the Government servant in respect of each article of charge; (c) an assessment of the evidence in respect of each article of charges; (d) the findings on each article of charge and the reasons therefor.
Explanation - If in the opinion of the inquiring authority the proceedings of the inquiry establish any article of charge different from the original articles of charge, it may record its findings on such article of charge : Provided that the findings on such article of charge shall not be recorded unless the Government servant has either admitted the facts on which such article of charge is based or has had a reasonable opportunity of defending himself against such article of charge.
(iii) The inquiring authority, where it is not itself the disciplinary authority, shall forward to the disciplinary authority the records of inquiry which shall include - (a) the report prepared by it under Cl. (i); (b) the written statement of defence, if any, submitted by the Government servant; (c) the oral and documentary evidence produced in the course of the inquiry; (d) written briefs, if any, filed by the Presenting Officer or the Government servant or both during the course of the inquiry; and  (e) the orders, if any, made by the disciplinary authority and the inquiring authority in regard to the inquiry.
15.
Action on the inquiry report - (1) The disciplinary authority, if it is not itself the inquiring authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions Rule 14 as far as may be.
(1-A) The disciplinary authority shall forward or cause to be forwarded a copy of the report of the inquiry, if any, held by the disciplinary authority or where the disciplinary authority is not the inquiring authority a copy of the report of the inquiring authority to the Government servant who shall be required to submit, if he so desires, his written representation or submission to the disciplinary authority within fifteen days, irrespective of whether the report is favourable or not to the Government servant.
xxx xxx xxx  (3) If the disciplinary authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in Cls. (i) to (iv) of Rule 11 should be imposed on the Government servant, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 16, make an order imposing such penalty.
(4) If the disciplinary authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge and on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in Cls. (v) to (ix) of Rule 11 should be imposed on the Government servant, it shall not be necessary to give the Government servant any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed."
Rule 14 (14) clearly prescribes the recording of the evidence in presence of the delinquent officer.
He has to be provided an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses with further opportunity to lead his own evidence, if so desired.
This procedure has not been adopted at all.
Similarly, after the enquiry is made, the delinquent officer is to be served with the enquiry report as prescribed under Rule 15 (1-A) of the CCS (CCA) Rules and is further to be provided an opportunity to tender his explanation in respect to the enquiry report.
It is only on receipt of the explanation within the prescribed time or if no explanation is submitted, then the disciplinary authority has to pass order imposing punishment.
In the present case from the report of the enquiry officer and from the evidence recorded by him, it is revealed that neither the evidence was recorded in presence of the petitioner nor he has been provided any opportunity what-so-ever to cross-examine the witnesses or to produce his own witnesses in his defence.
The Enquiry Officer himself has asked certain questions to the witnesses.
This itself is sufficient to quash the impugned orders as also the enquiry.
8.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is that the enquiry has been conducted under Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955.
The relevant extract from Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955 are reproduced here under :-  "27.
Procedure for the award of punishments : (a) The punishments shown as items 1 to 11 in column 2 of the table below may be inflicted on non-gazetted officers and men of the various ranks shown in each of the headings of columns 3 to 6 by the authorities named below such headings under the conditions mentioned in column 7 : Sl.
No.
Punishment Subedar (Inspector) Sub (Inspector) Others except Const.
and enrolled followers Consts enrolled followers Remarks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1.
Dismissal or removal DIGP DIGP Comdt.
Comdt.
To be inflicted after formal departmental enquiry (Sl.
No. 1 to 7).
XXX XXX XXX XXX (c) The procedure for conducting a departmental enquiry shall be as follows :- (1) The substance of the accusation shall be reduced to the form of a written charge, which should be as precise possible.
The charge shall be read out to the accused and a copy of it given to him at least 48 hrs before the commencement of the enquiry.
(2) At the commencement of the enquiry the accused shall be asked to enter a plea of Guilty or Not Guilty after which evidence necessary to establish the charge shall be let in.
The evidence shall be material to the charge and may either be oral or documentary, if oral :- (i) It shall be direct : (ii) It shall be recorded by the Officer conducting the enquiry himself in the presence of the accused.
(iii) The accused shall be allowed to cross-examine the witnesses.
(3) When documents are relied upon in support of the charge, they shall, be put in evidence as exhibits and the accused shall before he is called upon to make his defence, be allowed to inspect such exhibits.
xxx xxx xxx xxx (4) If the Commandant has himself held the enquiry, he shall record his findings and pass orders where he has power to do so.
If the enquiry has been held by any officer other than the Commandant, the Officer conducting the enquiry shall forward his report together with the proceedings, to the Commandant, who shall record his findings and pass orders, where he has power to do so."
From the reading of Sub Rule (c) of Rule 27 it appears that the procedure prescribed in this rule has not been followed at all.
Therefore, whether the enquiry conducted is under CCS (CCA) Rules or under rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955, the prescribed procedure has not been followed.
There has been gross violation of principles of natural justice.
The enquiry against the petitioner being in violation of Rules whether CCS (CCA) Rules or CRPF Rules, 1955 is liable to be quashed for non-observance of principles of natural justice and consequently, the impugned orders as well.
This view of mine is fortified by the judgment rendered in the case of State of M.P. v. Chintaman Sadashiva Waishampayan, AIR 1961 SC 1623 wherein following observations have been made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India :-  "10..... the departmental enquiries should observe rules of natural justice and that if they are fairly and properly conducted the decisions reached by the enquiry officers on the merits are not open to be challenged on the ground that the procedure followed was not exactly in accordance with that which is observed in Courts of Law.
As Venkatarama Aiyar, J has observed in Union of India v. TR Varma, 1958 SCR 499 at p. 507 : (S) AIR 1957 SC 882 at p. 885) "stating it broadly and without intending it to be exhaustive it may be observed that rules of natural justice require that a party should have the opportunity of adducing all relevant evidence on which he relies, that the evidence of the opponent should be taken in his presence, and that he should be given the opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses examined by that party, and that no materials should be relied on against him without his being given an opportunity of explaining them".
It is hardly necessary to emphasise that the right to cross-examine the witnesses who give evidence against him is a very valuable right, and if it appears that effective exercise of this right has been prevented by the enquiry officer by not giving to the officer relevant documents to which he is entitled, that inevitably would be that the enquiry had not been held in accordance with rules of natural justice... ..." For the above reasons itself, the impugned orders are liable to be quashed.
I order accordingly.
As a consequence, the petitioner shall be deemed to be in service and will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.