KC Puri, J - This is Regular Second Appeal directed by the Punjab State through Collector, Gurdaspur and others against the judgment and decree dated 241986 passed by Sh. ML Singhal, the then Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, vide which the appeal preferred by the Punjab State and others against the judgment and decree dated 12.8.1985 passed by Sh. AC Aggarwal, PCS Senior Sub Judge, Gurdaspur, was dismissed.
2.
Briefly stated, Dalip Singh had filed suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 12.1.1982 passed by the Director, Transport Punjab, Chandigarh stopping the efficiency bar of the plaintiff for a period of one year w.e.f.
111974, was illegal.
It is pleaded that plaintiff is regular employee of Punjab Roadways, Batala.
Defendant No. 3 served a show cause notice on the basis of adverse remarks recorded in the Annual confidential Report of the year 1972-73 and ultimately vide order dated 3121981 efficiency bar of the plaintiff was stopped for one year w.e.f.
111974.
The plaintiff had assailed the said order on the ground that no enquiry was conducted and no opportunity of hearing was given to the plaintiff and the action was time barred.
3.
In the written statement, defendants pleaded that efficiency bar of the plaintiff was stopped for one year w.e.f.
111974 in accordance with law.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  "1) Whether the order dated 12.1.1982 withholding the efficiency bar of the plaintiff w.e.f.
111974 is illegal, null and void etc. as alleged on the grounds mentioned in para No. 3 of the plaintiff ?
OPA 2) Whether the plaintiff served a valid notice u/s 80 CPC ?
OPP 3) Relief".
The learned trial Court after appraisal of the evidence, decided all the issues in favour of the plaintiff and consequently, decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
The State of Punjab and others preferred appeal.
Sh. ML Singhal, the then Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur vide judgment and decree dated 241986 dismissed the appeal.
4.
Still feeling dissatisfied, the regular second appeal has been preferred by the State of Punjab.
5.
On 2022008 the State counsel had submitted that following substantial question of law have arisen in the appeal :-  "i) Whether the Courts below are competent to interfere in the orders of competent authority to see if an employee is to be allowed to cross the efficiency bar or not ?
ii) Whether stoppage of efficiency bar could be ordered for one or two lapses or consider overall performance of and employee ? "
6.
I have carefully gone through the record of the case.
The dispute in the present appeal is regarding the stoppage of efficiency bar for a period of one year w.e.f.
111974.
Both the Courts below have returned a concurrent finding that efficiency bar cannot be stopped merely because of some adverse remarks but there must be material on the service record to stop the efficiency bar.
That being a finding of fact cannot be challenged in view of Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The above noted questions raised by State counsel in fact are not the substantial questions for the decision of the present appeal.
In fact the above stated questions are questions of fact as discussed above.
So, I have no hesitation in holding that no substantial question of law has arisen.
7.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab has relied upon the judgment Prem Singh Cheema v. Development Commissioner Punjab in CWP No. 6519 of 1986 decided on 13121991.
8.
I have gone through the said authority.
That authority does not help the appellant in any manner.
In that authority it has been laid down that the efficiency bar can be stopped only if the employee is unfit to cross the efficiency bar.
If the performance of the employee has been assessed as below average or he has not been found fit to discharge the duties, only in that case efficiency bar can be stopped.
Mere some adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report are not sufficient to stop the efficiency bar.
In view of the above discussion, the appeal is without any merit and the same stands dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.