Jasdbir Singh, J (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of above mentioned writ petitions as common questions of law and facts are involved in these petitions.
Facts are taken from CWP No. 4980 of 2007.
2.
In the year 2003, State of Haryana issued an advertisement to fill up large number of the posts of Constables.
Some posts were reserved for the candidates, who had to their credit distinguished achievement in the field of sports.
To be eligible, they were to fulfil the following criteria :  "The candidates, who have secured positions in respective National games/Inter State Meets, National School Games or National level tournaments organized by recognized National Federation or who have obtained 1st or 2nd positions in State level Federation Association of particular games, will be eligible for applying for the posts of constables sportsman or woman."
Petitioner has participated in the Haryana State School Tournament (It is apparent from the document Annexure P.1).
He has also participated in 34th Haryana State School Tournament (P2).
He has to his credit State Level Sports Participation Certificates (P.3 and P.4).
He had also participated in North Zone All India Inter University Kabaddi Championship in the year 2002-2003.
It was a team event and his team secured second position in above said tournament (P.5).
3.
To get appointment, petitioner put on record Sports Certificates Annexures P.1 to P.5.
He was considered against the post reserved for Sports person and was selected.
On 1122003, he was given the constabulary number and after undergoing necessary training, he joined the service and was posted in 4th Battalion, HAP, Madhuban.
4.
On 1522006, a show cause notice was issued to him by invoking the provisions of Rule 122 (1) of Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (as applicable in Haryana), asking him, as to why he be not discharged from service, however, that show cause notice was withdrawn on 2222006.
Thereafter, Inquiry Officer was appointed on 23.2.2006.
Petitioner appeared before the Inquiry Officer and brought it to his notice that in presenting the above mentioned Certificate, he has not committed any fraud.
These certificates were issued by the competent authority.
However, inquiry went against him and it was held by the Inquiry Officer that his certificates were lower in gradation.
Thereafter, the Punishing Authority passed order dated 28.3.2007 (P.14) ordering his dismissal from service.
Hence this writ petition.
5.
It is an admitted fact that against the order under challenge appeal lies.
It is also an admitted fact that along with the petitioner many other Constables, who were posted in the same Battalion, were shunted out of service on the same grounds.
They went in appeal.
Their appeals, on getting clarification from the office of Director General of Police with regard to their qualification, were allowed and they were reinstated in service.
Taking note of the above said fact, on 17.1.2008, following order was passed by this Court :  "Counsel for the petitioner states at the Bar that after filing of the written statement in this case, six Constable from the Battalion of the petitioner, who were removed under similar circumstances, have been reinstated.
We direct the counsel for the respondent State to show as to how case of the petitioner is different from those Constables.
List on 28.1.2008.
Mr. Rathee is further directed to bring a copy of the policy dated 13112007 treating Haryana State School Tournament equivalent to State level tournament.
Copy of this order be supplied to learned State counsel under the signatures of the Court Secretary, for necessary compliance."
6.
In response to the order referred to above, Shri Rathee has filed affidavit of Sh. Rajbir Singh, IPS, Commandant, 4th Battalion, HAP, Madhuban, District Karnal, which had been taken on record, wherein it is admitted that those Constables, who had filed appeals, their case was considered and after acceptance of the appeals, they were reinstated in service.
Para No. 4 of the affidavit reads thus :  "Aggrieved with this order, some of the constables so dismissed preferred appeal to the Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban against the order of dismissal.
The Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban sought clarification from the Director General of Police, Haryana on the issue of recruitment of constables under sports quota.
The clarification was received from the Director General of Police Haryana vide endst No. 134076/E (II)-1 dated 13112007.
In these instructions, the sportsman who had participated in Haryana State School Tournaments are to be treated at par with the sportsman who have participated in State Level Tournament.
The appellant had participated in Haryana State School Tournament and hence treating them who had participated in State Level Tournament they were reinstated by way of acceptance of their appeal."
7.
In that affidavit, it is not stated that in view of the clarification, now issued by the Director General of Police on 13112007, vide enst No. 13476/E (II)-1 dated 13112007, the candidates having achieved some distinction in State Level School Tournament are not eligible to get enrolment against the posts reserved for the sports persons.
Petitioner has to his credit State Level School Participation Sports Certificate (P.5) wherein his team, in the sport of Kabaddi secured second position in Inter University Tournament.
8.
Doctor Dalel Singh, Director of Physical Education and Sports University of Kurukshetra was produced as PW4 during inquiry against the petitioner, as a witness.
Following question was put to him :  "Question : Is North Zone University Tournament higher than School State Game ?
He has answered in the following manner: Answer : Yes, North Zone University is higher than School Games."
9.
In the instructions now circulated, it is clearly mentioned that those candidates, who secured some distinction in Sports Tournament Inter Zonal Competitions, are eligible to get entry against the reserved posts for the sports persons.
10.
Shri Rathee has opposed claim of the petitioner(s) merely by saying that alternative remedy is available.
11.
We feel that in view of the facts mentioned above, it is not necessary at this stage to ask the petitioner(s) to avail the alternative remedy of appeal.
Facts are very clear.
It is not in dispute that similarly situated Constables, who were removed along with the petitioner, have been taken back in service after orders, passed by the Appellate Authority.
Undisputedly the position is the same in this case.
Accordingly, we allow these writ petitions, quash order Annexure P14 and the impugned orders in the other two aforesaid writ petitions and direct the respondents to reinstate the petitioner(s) in service with all consequential benefits as were granted to all those candidates, who were reinstated on passing orders by the Appellate Authority.
Needful be done within two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of order.
Petition allowed.