Jasbir Singh, J (Oral) - Petitioner is a former employee of respondent No. 2.
He retired from service on 31.10.1992.
The subject, as to whether Municipal Committee employees are entitled to get pension, was under process, on completion, thereafter, the Rules known as Punjab Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994 (in short, the Rules), were notified on 1631994.
2.
By filing this writ petition, the petitioner has laid challenge to the order dated 18102000 (P/3), vide which, benefit of pension, was declined to him.
3.
Upon notice, reply has been filed, wherein it has been stated that as the petitioner has failed to exercise his option, within the stipulated period, as was necessary under Rule 3 of the Rules, as such, he is not entitled to get benefit of pension, as claimed by him.
4.
Counsel for the parties heard.
5.
It is an admitted position that but for non-exercise of option, as referred to above, the petitioner is entitled to get benefit of the pension, as envisaged under the rules, mentioned above.
Rule 3 of the Rules, reads thus :  "3.
Exercise of option - (1)(sic) sub-rule (3) of rule 1 to elect to be governed by these rules, shall be exercised in the Form appended to these rules so as to reach the competent authority within a period of four months from the date of publication of these rules in the Official Gazette :  Provided that - (a) in the case of-an employee who on the date of publication of these rules was on leave, the option shall be exercised within a period of four months from the date of joining his duty after returning from leave;  (b) where an employee is under suspension on that date, the option shall be exercised within a period of four months from the date of his returning to duty, and  (c) in case of an employee who dies without exercising his option within the stipulated period, he shall be deemed to have opted for these rules.
(2) The employees, who opt for these rules, shall cease to avail the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund and the employees who opt out of these rules, shall continue to avail the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund. "
Reading of the provisions of Rule 3 indicates that the employee was to exercise his option, to get pension, within a period of four months.
Proviso to the rule further states that in case an employee is on leave on the date of publication of the Rules, he can exercise his option within a period of four months from the date of joining the duty.
It is further provided that if an employee is under suspension, he can exercise his option within a period of tour months from the date of reinstatement on duty.
It is further provided that in case an employee had died, without exercising the option within the stipulated period, he shall be deemed to have opted for the benefit of these rules.
It is also provided in this Rule that if an employee opted to get benefit under the Rules, referred to above, he shall cease to get benefit of Contributory Provident Fund and an employee who has not opted for these rules, shall continue to get benefit of the above said Fund.
6.
It is apparent from the records and is also admitted before us that there was no provision under the rules, as to within how much period, those employees, who have already retired, can exercise their option.
It is also apparent from the record that condition of exercising option was never personally notified to the employees who have retired.
If that is so, there was no occasion for the petitioner to opt within a period of four months.
Publication in the newspaper is not sufficient.
It is apparent from the records that when the petitioner came to know about the Scheme, referred to above, he immediately approached the authorities for grant of pension, which declined to him, on the basis of technical objection, as referred to above.
We feel the authorities were not justified in raising that objection, because an effective opportunity was not ever provided to the petitioner to opt for benefit of the Rules, within the stipulated period.
7.
Under similar circumstances, a Division Bench of this Court in Dilwar Singh v. Haryana Power Generation Corporation Ltd and others, 2006(3) SCT 412 : 2006(3) RSJ 689, has held that if it is not proved on record that condition of exercising option within the stipulated period, was circulated amongst the employees and was got noted down, the authority cannot raise objection.
To the same effect is the ratio of the judgment of this Court in Ram Kumar and others v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. and others, 2006(3) SCT 628 : 2006(4) RSJ 125.
8.
In view of facts mentioned above, we allow this writ petition and direct the authorities to disburse the pensionary benefits to the petitioner, as envisaged under the Rules.
Needful be done within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order, failing which, the petitioner shall be entitled to get interest @ 7% per annum (simple), from the date the amount has become due to him till its realisation.
It is further directed that if the petitioner has withdrawn amount of Contributory Provident Fund he shall deposit the same with the authorities within a period of one month from today.
Petition allowed.