Ranjit Singh, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has filed this writ petition seeking mandamus for release of her retiral benefits for the post of a Craft Teacher/Primary Teacher, for which she was appointed and on the post on which she has worked till her retirement.
2.
As per the claim made in the petition the petitioner was appointed as a Craft Teacher against the vacant post on regular basis on 31101963.
She claims to have continued to work on this post till her retirement.
In between, she filed a representation on 27081975 for release of proper pay scale, copy of which is Annexure P-12.
Her case was forwarded by Sub Divisional Education Officer, Faridabad to District Education Officer (in short "the DEO"), Gurgaon, who in turn further forwarded the case to Director Public Instructions (in short "the DPI") for sympathetic consideration.
This happened on 06011976.
The petitioner has made reference to a communication from DPI, who on 30082976, after perusing the record, was of the view that the petitioner is a junior teacher and not a Class - IV employee.
He accordingly directed the DEO to examine the case of the petitioner at his own level and asked for report.
The matter remained under consideration and the petitioner was so informed even on 23061983, copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-16.
The petitioner became due for retirement in August, 1985.
At that stage, DEO sought advise from the DPI if the petitioner is to continue till completion of 60 years of age, considering her to be Class-IV employee.
Alternative, she was to be retired on completion of 58 years of age.
The petitioner, on the other hand, claimed to have prayed for being relieved w.e.f.
31081985, after attaining the age of superannuation.
3.
The petitioner made various representations from the year 1986 to 1993 for release of her salary as Craft teacher/Primary teacher but did not hear anything.
The department failed to release the retiral claim of the petitioner despite repeated requests which necessitated filing of C.W.P.
No. 5505 of 1994 by the petitioner.
The said writ petition was disposed of with the direction to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, to reconsider the entire case of petitioner.
The petitioner was given liberty to make a representation within one month and the government was to consider and decide the same within a period of three months.
The petitioner accordingly made a detailed representation on 03052003.
The respondent failed to comply with the directions passed by this Court to decide the representation, as referred to above.
The petitioner had then filed Contempt Petition No. 270 of 2004.
The notice of contempt petition was issued when the claim of the petitioner, as raised in the representation, was rejected.
The order dated 30082004 rejecting the representation was accordingly impugned by the petitioner by filing the present writ petition.
Notice was issued on 03012005.
The writ petition was ordered to be admitted on 23052006 with the direction for hearing within a period of one year, the petitioner being a senior citizen.
4.
Written statement has been filed by DEO, Faridabad on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 6.
According to stand taken by the respondents, the petitioner was appointed as Craft Teacher by the then head master on 31101963 in the pay scale of Rs. 27/32 of a Class-IV employee against the vacancy which arose due to the resignation of one Shri Padam Lal.
Accordingly, the petitioner continued to draw this scale of a Class-IV employee during her entire service.
It is further pointed out that the petitioner did not possess the requisite qualification for the post of Craft Teacher, which is matriculate and diploma in craft.
It is also claimed that the petitioner was appointed by the head master, who was not competent to make such appointment.
The appointment, as such, is viod ab-intio.
It is further claimed that the regular grade of Class-III employee would have been given to the petitioner only in case she would have fulfilled the requisite qualification.
5.
It is also pointed out that the petitioner failed to acquire the requisite qualification during her entire service tenure till her retirement.
It is stated that if she had acquired the requisite qualification at any stage during her tenure, she could have been granted the pay scale of Class-III employee as a Craft Teacher.
It is accordingly stated that the petitioner is not entitled to Class-III employee at any stage as stated above, as she failed to acquire the requisite educational qualification.
Accordingly, it is submitted that the petitioner has not made out a case for grant of mandamus as prayed for.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
Mr. Chopra appearing for the petitioner has made reference to the facts in detail.
He has urged that the petitioner continuously worked as Craft Teacher ever since the date of her appointment.
He referred to the appointment letter of the petitioner which is as a Craft Teacher.
He has also drawn my attention to entries in the service book of the petitioner annexed as Annexure P-2 to show that her pay scale was revised.
It is accordingly prayed that the petitioner deserves to be treated as a Class-III employee with consequential benefit of fixation of her pension, as such.
8.
The prayer made in the writ petition and that as advanced by Mr. Chopra has been vehemently opposed by the counsel appearing for the State.
Referring to the stand taken by the State, the counsel says that the petitioner was neither validly appointed nor had the requisite qualification for being appointed as a Class-III employee which is a Craft Teacher or Primary Teacher.
9.
State counsel would also point to the stand taken by the State in para 8 of the reply on merit.
The counsel highlights that the petitioner did not resume her duties after 31081985 inspite of repeated reminders and thus, had remained absent w.e.f.
01091985 to 31081987.
It is accordingly pleaded that there was serious lapse on the part of petitioner for which she cannot be granted the relief claimed in the writ petition.
10.
I have considered the rival contention raised before me.
11.
The petitioner was appointed in the year 1963.
The appointment letter Annexure P-1 clearly shows that she was appointed as a Craft Teacher.
The stand taken by the State, at this belated stage.
It is too late in a day now to urge that the petitioner was not validly appointed when no action is taken to question the appointment for all those years.
Till date no order is made against (sic) that she is not validly appointed or to otherwise affect her services.
The petitioner has been permitted to work for over 22 years and now to say that she was not validly appointed, would rather sound unfair.
12.
The contention that the petitioner was not appointed as a Craft Teacher can also not be accepted.
The appointment letter indicate so that she was appointed as Craft Teacher.
Even the representation which the petitioner filed and was rejected, would show that this fact is found noticed in the order that the petitioner was appointed as a Craft Teacher.
This fact appears to have been conceded while passing the order rejecting her representation.
The order impugned in this regard is annexed with the petition as Annexure P-27, wherein it is clearly mentioned that :  "As per record, Smt. Maina Wanti was appointed as a Craft Teacher by the then head master in the year 1963 in the pay scale of Rs. 27/32 of Class- IV employee against a vacancy which arose due to resignation of one Shri Padam Lal.
Smt. Maina Wanti continued to draw the pay scale and the revised pay scale of Class-IV employee during the entire service."
13.
Though, it is mentioned in the impugned order that the head master was not competent to make such appointment, it is no where disclosed that any action was taken to terminate the appointment of the petitioner (sic) otherwise to take action against her.
In the representation filed by the petitioner, she had given example of those cases where the employees similarly situated were treated as Class-III employees.
While responding to this assertions made, the respondent State has mentioned in the impugned order that the record of those cases have been perused and it shows that they were not working as a Craft Teacher.
It is then disclosed that these employees were working as carpenter, mason, polish man and weavers.
As per the said stand taken, these employees initially were untrained, but after 20 years of service they were issued special certificates on the basis of job experience which brought them at per with Class-III employees.
It is conceded that these employees were even granted pay scale of Class-III employees on the basis of this special certificate.
It is not understood as to why the respondent would not grant similar treatment or consideration to the petitioner.
If other Class-IV employees could be issued certificate on the basis of experience gained by them for being treated as a Class-III employees, similar treatment would very well be due to the petitioner as well.
It is otherwise also not very conducive to notice that a person who has worked for over 20 years as a teacher is being treated as Class-IV employee.
The claim of petitioner is not in any manner unreasonable especially when such treatment is given in some what similarly situated employees.
The petitioner was appointed for a post of Craft Teacher.
Concededly she has worked for the said post for over 20 years.
Now treating her as Class-IV, apart from anything else, would be much de-meaning.
The little fair approach on the part of State would have resulted to an equal treatment to the petitioner.
If carpenter, mason polish-man and weaver could be treated as a Class-III employee on the basis of experience of 20 years gained, no consideration would stand before the State to give such a treatment to the petitioner, with the experience that she has gained for over 20 years.
She, as such, would be entitled to at least a special certificate which would entitle her to be treated as Class-III employee.
14.
The submission made on behalf of the State that the petitioner remained absent w.e.f 01091985 would not be of much assistance to the State.
Concededly so far, no action has been taken against the petitioner.
If the petitioner was absent, she was required to be proceeded against.
Since no action has been taken, it would obviously mean that this seems to be a stand of convenience.
The case of the petitioner is that she was required to retire after 58 years which she completed on 31081985 and as such was not on duty thereafter.
The petitioner would have no other cause of absence.
If she is to be treated as Class-IV employee, her case on that ground was that she was entitled to serve up to 60 years of age.
The respondents can inform themselves that if the petitioner is to be treated as Class-IV employee, she would have been entitled to service for two more years and for which she would have been entitled retiral benefits, besides pay and allowances for the said period.
15.
Mr. Chopra has drawn my attention to interim order passed by this Court while dealing with the writ petition.
The petition was directed to be paid all retiral benefits as due to her as a Class-IV employee.
The necessary consequence of the position as noticed above, would be that direction would go to the respondent and mandamus is issued to the respondent to issue a certificate or otherwise treat the petitioner as a Class-III employee.
16.
Direction is issued to the State to consider the petitioner as Class-III employee being a Craft Teacher/Primary Teacher.
The retiral benefit due to the petitioner as a consequence of this order, would be released to her within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Petition allowed.