Mohinder Pal, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, thereby quashing the notice dated September 26, 2002 (Annexure P-2) whereby the services of the petitioner were sought to be terminated with effect from the date of expiry of period of one month from the date on which this notice was served on him and for quashing the order dated July 23, 2007 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 'the Tribunal') whereby Original Application No. 681-PB/2006 filed by the petitioner under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to `the Act'), challenging the notice dated September 26, 2002 (Annexure P-2) was dismissed.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that on March 18, 2005, applications were invited for the post of Gramin Dak Sevak Branch Post Master (for short `GDSBPM') for Village Marar through an advertisement as well as through Employment Exchange.
In the advertisement, it was specifically mentioned that beside fulfilling other eligibility qualifications like providing of space for Post Office etc., a candidate must have independent source of income because the post of GDSBPM was a part time job and required working for three to five hours.
The petitioner applied for the post of GDSBPM, Marar, and was selected after the record of seven other candidates was scrutinised along with him and he was considered suitable for the post.
Appointment letter dated May 30, 2005 (Annexure P-1) was issued to him.
He joined on the post of GDSBPM, Marar, and continued to work for about one year and three months.
On September 26, 2006, the petitioner was issued notice (Annexure P-2), terminating his services with effect from the date of expiry of period of one month from the date on which this notice was served on him.
The petitioner challenged this notice before the Tribunal on the ground that it had been issued without assigning any reason and with the mala fide intention to accommodate some other person.
The Tribunal rejected the claim of the petitioner.
3.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents on September 06, 2007.
No written statement has been filed.
4.
In the written statement filed before the Tribunal, the respondents contested the claim of the petitioner on the ground that he had been selected ignoring the merit of other four candidates, who had secured higher marks than him in the Matriculation examination.
5.
In the replication filed by the petitioner to the written statement of the respondents before the Tribunal, he pleaded that the other candidates who had comparatively more marks than him in the Matriculation Examination, were not fulfilling the condition of having an independent source of income.
Moreover no candidate challenged the appointment of the petitioner before the respondent-Department or any Court of law.
6.
We have heard Mr. BS Mittal Advocate, appearing for the petitioner and Mr. Namit Kumar, Advocate, appearing for respondents Nos. 2 to 6 and have gone through the records of the case.
7.
The petitioner was appointed as GDSBPM, Marar after he was found suitable for the post.
We have perused the Report of Genuineness of Applications of Candidates for the Post of GDSBPM, Marar (Annexure R-6 to Annexure P-4 i.e. written statement of the respondents before the Tribunal) and the instructions (Annexure R-VII to Annexure P-4) issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Communications, Department of Posts.
In Annexure R-6, bio-data of eight candidates, whose applications were considered after scrutiny, has been mentioned.
It shows that out of eight candidates, petitioner was having higher monthly income of Rs. 3000/- per month from his Motor Binding Shop at Village Marar than the other candidates besides owning a 7 Marlas House.
The candidates mentioned at serial Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 8, who were having more marks than the petitioner in Matriculation, the candidates at serial Nos. 2 and 3 were having no source of income whereas candidates at serial Nos. 4 and 8 were having monthly income of Rs. 1200/- each from labour work.
However, they were not having any residential accommodation or space for providing Branch Office etc.
In para No. 4 of the instructions (Annexure R-VII to Annexure P-4) it has been specifically mentioned that the sole criteria for selection to the posts of all categories of Gramin Dak Sevaks will be the merit subject to orders on reservation and fulfilling other eligibility conditions like providing of space for Branch Office, taking up residence in the Branch Office before appointment.
Keeping in view, the said criteria and the merit of the petitioner, no fault can be found with his appointment as GDSBPM for Village Marar.
The candidates who had comparatively more marks than the petitioner in the Matriculation Examination were not fulfilling the other conditions.
The petitioner continued to work on the post of GDSBPM, Marar, for about one year and three months.
It is not the case of the respondents that any complaint was ever received against the petitioner.
No candidate ever challenged his selection either before the respondent Department or before any Court of law.
In these circumstances, the stand of the respondents that the petitioner had been selected ignoring the merit of other candidates is not a valid one and cannot be sustained in the eyes law.
The notice dated September 26, 2006 (Annexure P-2) terminating his services has, thus, been issued to him without any basis and no reason could be assigned for the same.
For the aforesaid reasons, this writ petition is allowed, the notice dated September 26, 2006 (Annexure P-2) and the order dated July 23, 2007 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Tribunal are set aside.
Petition allowed.