SS Saron, J - The petitioners who are JBT Teachers at the Daya Nand High School, Model Town, Yamunanagar, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seek quashing of the order dated 1842000 (Annexure P-8) passed by the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana Chandigarh (respondent No. 2) and the order dated 5.8.1999 (Annexure P-9) passed by Director of Primary Education, Haryana Chandigarh (respondent No. 3).
Besides, they claim for the grant of higher pay scale on acquiring the higher qualifications of Intermediate or BA in accordance with the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case; State of Haryana v. Rajpal Sharma, 1996(4) SCT 75 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 449 and of a Division Bench of this Court in Jai Parkash Gupta and others v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) SCT 310 (P&H) : 1997(1) RSJ 49 (Civil Writ Petition No. 11224 of 1995, decided on 10101996).
2.
The Daya Nand High School, Model Town, Yamunanagar where the petitioners are working is a privately managed government aided institution receiving grant-in-aid from the State Government.
The petitioner No. 1 was appointed as JBT Teacher in the aforesaid School on 151970 and on 2511974 he obtained higher qualification, on the basis of which higher pay scale is claimed in this petition.
The petitioner No. 2 was appointed on 771980 and had acquired the higher qualification on 5121970.
Petitioner No. 3 was appointed on 151973 and had obtained higher qualification on 1861970.
The petitioners represented for the grant of higher scale and thereafter, they also served a legal notice dated 3011997 (Anneuxre P-3).
This Court in terms of order dated 17.12.1998 passed in an earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 19143 of 1998 filed by the petitioners claiming the same relief directed for consideration of the representation of the petitioners within three months from the receipt of copy of the order.
The said representation was rejected by the Director Secondary Education Haryana (respondent No. 2) vide order dated 1842000 (Annexure P-8).
The Director Primary Education Haryana (respondent No. 3) vide separate order dated 5.8.1999 (Annexure P-9) had also rejected the representation/legal notice of the petitioners.
The said orders dated 5.8.1999 (Annexure P-9) and 1842000 (Annexure P-8), as already noticed, are impugned in this writ petition.
Besides, directions are sought against the respondents for the grant of higher pay scale on acquiring the higher qualifications by the petitioners in accordance with the Punjab Government letter dated 23.7.1957, which the petitioners claim they are entitled to on the basis of the afore-referred judgments.
3.
The respondents put in appearance and the District Primary Education Officer, Yamunangar filed written statement on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 3.
It is stated that the District Primary Education Officer (respondent No. 3) is concerned with petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 only.
It is also stated that these petitioners joined service after the formation of Haryana State on 1111966 and that the instructions dated 23.7.1957 issued by the Punjab Government are not applicable to the said petitioners.
Besides, it is stated that the Haryana Government had allowed parity of pay scales to teachers working in privately managed aided schools with their counterparts in Government schools with effect from 1121967, 1.4.1979 and 111986.
In view of this, the letter dated 23.7.1957 regarding grant of higher pay scale on the basis of qualifications is not automatically applicable to the employees of privately managed aided schools.
The order dated 5.8.1999 (Annexure P-9) passed by the Director Primary Education (respondent No. 3), it is stated is quite legal.
Besides, the respondent-State has allowed parity of pay scale and dearness allowance to the teachers working in privately managed aided schools with their counterparts in Government schools on the basis of protection provided under Section 4 of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971 (for short - "1971 Haryana Act") and not in respect of any other benefits which is granted to the teachers working in Government schools.
4.
Shri Shish Pal Laler, Advocate, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has contended that the petitioners are entitled to the higher pay scales on acquiring the higher qualification in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case; State of Haryana v. Rajpal Sharma etc. (supra) and also followed by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Jai Parkash Gupta v. State of Haryana (supra).
Besides, it is contended that the respondents vide letter dated 741999 have already generalized the matter and granted the higher pay scale on acquiring the higher qualifications to the teachers of Government schools.
However, the teachers of government aided schools are not getting this benefit and it is only on directions of the Courts or by the pick and choose policy of the respondents that such benefits are given.
Therefore, it is contended that the action of the respondents in not granting the higher pay scale on acquiring the higher qualifications is arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
In response, Shri Girish Agnihotri, learned Addl.
Advocate-General Haryana appearing for the respondents has contended that the orders dated 1842000 (Anneuxre P-8) and 5.8.1999 (Annexure P-9) are legal and valid and the petitioners are not entitled to the higher pay scale on acquiring higher qualifications as claimed.
In support of his contentions he has relied upon the decisions of the Apex Court in the case; State of Punjab v. Om Parkash Kaushal, 1996(4) SCT 302 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 2584, as also in State of Punjab v. Narain Dass, 1999 SCC (L&S) 932 and on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Smt. Pushpa Devi v. State of Haryana, 2001(2) SCT 643 (P&H).
It is contended that the Haryana Government had allowed parity of pay scales to teachers working in privately managed aided schools with their counterparts in Government Schools with effect from 1121967, 1.4.1979 and 111986 and that the letter dated 23.7.1957 regarding grant of higher pay scales on the basis of qualification is not automatically applicable to the employees of privately managed government aided schools.
Besides, it is contended that the teachers working in privately managed aided schools are governed by the provisions of 1971 Haryana Act as also the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974 ("1974 Haryana Rules" - for short) which do not provide for the grant of higher pay scales on acquiring higher qualifications.
6.
The question, therefore, that requires consideration is whether the petitioners, who are employees of government aided private institution are entitled to the grant of higher pay scale on their acquiring higher qualifications in terms of the Punjab Government letter dated 23.7.1957.
It is appropriate to note that the claim of the petitioners has been rejected in pursuance of the impugned orders Annexures P-8 and P-9, which are identical in nature.
The case of the petitioners was considered by the respondents by taking into account the order passed in the clarification application filed in Rajpal Sharma's case (supra) and in the light of the judgment rendered in Gulshan Lal Aul's case, which was disposed of alongwith the judgment in State of Punjab v. Om Parkash Kaushal, AIR 1996 SC 2584.
It is observed in the impugned orders that keeping in view the judgments of Rajpal Sharma (supra) Sri Ram Atri's case (1998) 1 SCC 195, the Hon'ble Apex Court had referred the matter to a larger Bench for clarification.
It is appropriate to note that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Ram Atri, (1998) 1 SCC 195, referred the judgments rendered in State of Punjab v. Om Parkash Kaushal (supra) and State of Haryana v. Rajpal Sharma (supra) to a three -Judge Bench as it was observed that in the later judgment in Rajpal Sharma's case, the earlier judgment in Om Parkash Kaushal's case had not been noticed and that the views taken in both the judgments run counter to each other.
However, vide order passed in Civil Appeal No. 3329 of 1997 arising out of S.L.P.
(C) No. 1014 of 1997 on 151997, which is reproduced in the case State of Punjab v. Narain Dass, 1999 SC (L&S) 932, it was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that there was no conflict in the two decisions in Rajpal Sharma's case and Om Parkash Kaushal's case.
The order dated 151997 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court reads as under :-  "We do not find any conflict between the two judgments.
Nothing, therefore, requires to be resolved insofar as the two judgments are concerned.
We have examined the order impugned before us.
As we understand the decision of the High Court, it implies that the cases of the respondents shall be considered in accordance with law in the light of the judgments of this Court referred to in the impugned order and the respondents be granted relief, if they are found entitled to the same, in law and on facts.
Learned counsel for the appellants submits that there are some other judgments of this Court, which have a bearing on the matter and the appellants should not be restricted to confine the consideration of the cases of the respondents only on the basis of the judgments referred to in the impugned order.
We, therefore, clarify that the appellant-State shall be entitled to take into consideration, any other judgment of this Court also, relevant to the subject under consideration, while deciding the cases of the respondents."
7.
In the impugned orders Annexures P-8 and P-9 passed in the case in hand, after quoting the latter portion of the above order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court it was observed :-  "Keeping in view the clarification given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as mentioned at above, the claim of the petitioners is hereby rejected in the light of Sri Ram Atri's case."
8.
The case of the petitioners for the grant of higher pay scales on acquiring the higher qualifications, as already noticed, is based on the judgments in the cases : State of Haryana v. Rajpal Sharma (supra) and Jai Parkash v. State of Haryana (supra).
In Rajpal Sharma's case (supra), the respondents were JBT teachers in privately managed aided schools in Ambala District in the State of Haryana.
They were employees much prior to the formation of Haryana State.
The State of Haryana issued a Notification dated 311968 revising the pay scales of the teaching personnel with effect from 1121967.
The teachers therein acquired higher qualifications while continuing in service and claimed the same scales of pay as were available to their counterparts in Government schools.
The State Government declined their prayer and they approached this Court by way of writ petitions.
This Court relying on an earlier decision granted the relief, which resulted in the matter being taken to the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajpal Sharma's case.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court following the decisions in Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1663 and Chaman Lal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 1621, dismissed the appeal preferred by the State of Haryana.
In the said case this Court had directed that the teachers would be entitled to the same scales of pay and privileges as are available to their counterparts in Government schools.
The teachers in the said case had acquired higher qualifications while continuing in service and therefore, claimed higher scales of pay as was admissible to their counterparts in Government schools.
It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the respondents were entitled to the same salary and dearness allowance as was being paid to teachers of Government schools.
In Jai Parkash Gupta's case (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the learned Counsel for the petitioners, the petitioners therein who were working as teachers in privately managed Government aided schools claimed that on acquiring high qualifications, they should be given higher pay scale in accordance with the Government instructions dated 23.7.1957 issued by the erstwhile State of Punjab.
Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rajpal Sharma's case and this was conceded by the State in the said case before a Division Bench of this Court.
Accordingly the writ petition was allowed and the respondent State was directed to release the higher pay scale to the petitioners therein with effect from the date when they so calculated which was to be confined to three years and two months prior to the filing of the said writ petition, which had been filed on 281995.
9.
In Om Parkash Kaushal's case (supra) the Supreme Court considered the cases of teachers employed in various privately managed aided schools in the State of Punjab.
Prior to 1967 there had been considerable disparity in the emoluments of the teachers employed in the private schools.
The Government of India had appointed the Kothari Commission to examine the conditions of service of teachers with the object of improving the standard of education in the country.
The said Commission recommended that the scales of pay of school teachers belonging to the same category and working under different managements such as Government, Local Bodies and Private Organisations should be the same.
Almost all States, including the State of Punjab, decided to implement the recommendations of the Kothari Commission.
The State of Punjab revised the pay scales of the teachers of the privately managed aided schools with effect from 1121967 and brought the same at par with the teachers of the same status in the Government service.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Haryana Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1663 and Haryana Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1990 SC 968, directed that the Haryana teachers employed in the private aided schools were entitled to the same pay scales and dearness allowance as were being paid to teachers in Government schools.
The State of Punjab had thus granted uniform pay scales to the teachers which were similar to the pay scales drawn by the Government teachers with effect from 1121967.
Thereafter, the Punjab State enacted the Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (1979 Punjab Act - for short) which came into effect from 23.1.1981.
In terms of Section 7 of the 1979 Punjab Act, the pay scales and dearness allowance of the employees of privately managed aided schools were not to be less than those of the employees of the State Government holding corresponding posts in the schools run by the State Government.
However, the private teachers in the said case of Om Parkash Kaushal made a claim on the basis of Punjab Government instructions dated 23.7.1957, which it was observed were applicable to Government teachers holding corresponding posts.
It was observed that a peculiar and wholly untenable claim had been made by the teachers based on the Punjab Government instructions - applicable to Government teachers only - which were issued four decades back when none of the respondents therein were in service.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the aforesaid 1979 Punjab Act came into force on 23.1.1981 and Section 7 thereof granted parity to the private teachers in the matter of scales of pay and dearness allowance with the Government teachers.
Prior to that the Punjab Government had granted unified pay scales and dearness allowance to the private teachers at par with Government teachers by the executive instructions with effect from 1121967.
It was held, that the teachers were given parity under the executive instructions only in respect of pay scales and dearness allowance.
The other conditions of service relating to Government teachers were not extended to the private teachers.
The incentive provided in 1960 instructions in the shape of advance increments to the Government teachers who improved their educational qualifications could not be automatically extended to the private teachers.
It was held that in the two cases of Haryana Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court allowed the benefit of pay scales and dearness allowance to private teachers and declined to go into the other benefits like house rent allowance, city compensatory allowance, LTC, bonus etc.
The case of Om Parkash Kaushal (supra) relates to the private teachers of Government aided schools in State of Punjab.
This case, as already noticed, at one stage was referred to a larger Bench by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Ram Atri (supra) in view of the later decision in Rajpal Sharma's case, however, a Bench of three Hon'ble Judges vide order dated 151997 observed that there was no conflict between the two judgments and that nothing, therefore, required to be resolved insofar as the two judgments were concerned.
As such in the light of the judgment in Om Parkash Kaushal's case, keeping in view the statutory enactment i.e. the 1979 Punjab Act, the parity between the Government teachers and those of the privately managed aided schools only in respect of the pay scales and dearness allowance.
The parity was not given or extended on the basis of the executive instructions including the instructions dated 23.7.1957, on the basis of which the petitioners herein have made their claim.
10.
The decision in Om Parkash Kaushal's case (supra) was referred to and taken into consideration for the purpose of grant of entitlement of increment in pay on the basis of acquiring higher qualifications in State of Punjab v. Narain Dass & others (supra).
It was observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the teachers in privately managed aided schools in the State of Punjab could claim parity in the pay scales with teachers in the Government schools but they could not claim the benefit relating to increments which have been granted to teachers in Government schools under instructions dated 191960 which instructions were no longer operative after the passing of the order dated 19.2.1979.
Insofar as the entitlement to increment in pay on the basis of acquiring higher qualifications is concerned, it was observed as follows :-  "But as regards entitlement of increment in pay on the basis of acquiring higher qualifications, we find that the said benefit has been made available to teachers in Government schools under instructions dated September 1, 1960.
In State of Punjab & ors. v. Om Parkash Kaushal and others (supra) this Court has expressed the view that under Section 7 of the Act (i.e. 1979 Punjab Act) protection is available to teachers in privately managed aided schools in respect of parity in pay scale and dearness allowances only and not in respect of any other benefit which is granted to teachers in Government schools and, therefore, teachers in privately managed aided schools cannot claim the benefits which were being given to teachers in Government schools under the instructions dated September 1, 1960.
We are in agreement with the view taken by this Court in State of Punjab & Ors. v. Om Parkash Kaushal and others (supra) in that regard.
In the circumstances, these appeals are disposed of in terms of the judgment in State of Punjab & Ors. v. Om Parkash Kaushal & Ors (supra) and it is held that while respondents are entitled to a higher pay scale as is available to teachers in Government schools on the basis of Higher Qualifications but they cannot claim benefit of any increments in such pay scale on the basis of their acquiring higher qualifications which benefits had been granted to teachers in Government schools.
No order as to costs".
The above judgment in Narain Dass's case (supra) was in the context of the 1979 Punjab Act wherein it was held that the employees are entitled to higher pay scale as is available to teachers in Government schools on the basis of higher qualification but they are not entitled to any increment given to teachers in Government schools on acquiring higher education.
Besides, Rajpal Sharma's case (supra) and Om Parkash Kaushal's case (supra) were considered in Narain Dass's case and the judgment in latter case was endorsed.
It is pertinent to note that the relief was granted on the basis of the statutory enactment and not on the basis of executive instructions, which were specifically held to be inapplicable in respect of teachers of the privately managed aided schools.
11.
In the case in hand also, as already noticed above, the Haryana State has framed the 1971 Haryana Act.
Section 4 thereof provides for uniform Code of service for employees.
Section 4(c) of the 1971 Haryana Act reads as under :-  "4.
Uniform Code of service for employees.
- Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may prescribe :- (a) xxx xxx xxx (b) xxx xxx xxx (c) uniform, scales of pay for various classes of employees : Provided that the State Government may exempt any aided school or class of aided school from the operation of the provision of this section for such a period as it may think fit on ground of economic capacity thereof."
Section 8(1) of the 1971 Haryana Act confers power on the State Government by issuing a notification to make rules for carrying out of the purposes of the said 1971 Haryana Act.
It is in exercise of the said powers conferred by Section 8(1) of the 1971 Haryana Act, that the Haryana Government has framed the 1974 Haryana Rules.
Part III thereof relates to Pay, Allowances and Service Record.
Rule 10 relates to scale of pay, dearness allowance and payment of salary and the same reads as under :-  "10 Scale of pay, dearness allowance and payment of salary.
[Section 4] (1) The scales of pay of the employees shall be as specified in column 4 of Appendix A to these rules.
(2) The rates of dearness allowance payable to the employees shall be the same as are admissible from time to time to Government employees."
Rule 11 relates to `leave'.
Rule 12 relates to `Traveling Allowance and Daily Allowance' and Rule 13 to `Service Record'.
The said statutory 1974 Haryana Rules, therefore, provided the scale of pay of the employees which are specified in column 4 of Appendix A to the Rules.
Besides, the rates of dearness allowance payable to the employees are to be the same as are admissible to the Government employees from time to time.
Therefore, the scales of pay are statutorily fixed by the 1974 Haryana Rules.
The effect of the 1971 Haryana Act and the 1974 Haryana Rules was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Pushpa Devi v. State of Haryana (supra).
In Pushpa Devi's case an earlier decision of this Court in the case of Kanwaljit Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1996(1) RSJ 325, was reiterated.
It was held in Pushpa Devi's case that the circular dated 23.7.1957 was in existence when the 1971 Haryana Act was enacted and the 1974 Haryana Rules framed and if the Legislature and its delegatee wanted to confer the benefit of higher pay scale/grade to the teachers of the private aided schools who possessed qualifications higher than those prescribed for the post at the time of recruitment or who acquired such qualification after joining the service then they would have incorporated, the circular dated 23.7.1957 either in the 1971 Haryana Act or in the 1974 Haryana Rules.
However, this was not done.
Therefore, the contention of the private teachers claiming higher pay scales on acquiring higher qualifications was rejected.
The Division Bench in Pushpa Devi's case also noticed the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Chaman Lal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 1621, Punjab Higher Qualified Teachers Union and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(1) SLR 768, State of Haryana v. Rai Chand Jain, 1997(3) SCT 27 (SC) : 1997(1) Judicial Reports (L&S) 1, State of Haryana v. Ravi Bala, 1997(2) SCT 300 (SC) : (1997) 1 SCC 267, Wazir Singh v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 431 (P&H) : 1995 Suppl.
(3) SCC 697 and State of Punjab v. Narain Dass (supra).
Besides, the decisions of this Court in Nasib Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(4) SLR 301, Rattan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 711 (P&H) : 1995(1) SLR 401, Gurjeet Kaur v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 727 (P&H) : 1996(1) RSJ 503 and Champa Devi v. State of Haryana, 1998(3) SCT 449 (P&H) : 1998(1) RSJ 675, as also some other decisions.
The instructions dated 23.7.1957 on the basis of which the claim of the present petitioners is based as also the subsequent circular dated 931990 whereby the Government of Haryana issued revised instructions in the matter of grant of higher pay scale were considered and noticed in extenso.
In terms of the instructions dated 23.7.1957 insofar as the teachers in the Education Department were concerned it was decided that all the teachers according to their qualifications should be placed in the following two head categories :  CATEGORY `A' BA/BSc/B.Com./BSc(Agriculture) and BT/Diploma in Physical Education/Diploma in Senior Basic Training.
CATEGORY `B' Group I : Matric with Basic Training (including JTs) Group II : J.Ts.
(including Assistant Mistress with BA/Inter/Matric Plus J.A.V.
Training).
Group III : (i) Shastries, (ii) Gianies, Prabhakars, Drawing Masters and Craftsmen Certificate Holders, (iii) Munshi Fasil, (iv) S.Ts.
including S.Vs with training in physical education or Agriculture.
Group IV : Untrained teachers with qualifications like B.Com., BSc (Agriculture) etc.
In addition, there are smaller categories of special posts, such as Head Master/Headmistresses/District Inspectors of Schools, with qualifications of Category `A' above.
Teachers in these categories, regardless of men and women cadres, should carry the following scales of pay :  CATEGORY `A' Rs. 110-3-190-10-250 with a higher start for MA or MSc.
as at present, the existing percentage of posts fixed by Government for the scales of Rs. 110-8- 190-10-250 and Rs. 250-10-300 should remain unchanged at 85 per cent and 15 per cent respectively.
CATEGORY `B' Lower : Rs. 60-80/5-100-5-130 Middle : Rs. 120-5-175 Upper : Rs. 140-10-220.
12.
The Haryana Government on 591979 issued the following order :-  "Sanction of the Governor of Haryana is hereby accorded w.e.f.
591979 of the grant of Master grade to unadjusted JBT teachers who have passed BA, B.Ed., subject to the following conditions : i.
That the expenditure involved would be met from the savings of the current year revised sanctioned estimates.
ii.
That these teachers will not be allowed any seniority in the cadre of masters.
iii.
That it will not form a precedent for future.
iv.
That the award of Master's grade to the concerned teachers would be personal to them."
The Government of Haryana thereafter issued revised instructions dated 931990 in the matter with regard to grant of higher pay scale.
The relevant extract of the said instructions is as follows :-  "I am directed to refer to composite Punjab Govt. Finance Department circular No. 5056-FIR-11/57 dated the 23rd July, 1957 on the subject noted above, which contains the details regarding the revision of the pay scales of various categories of subordinate services (including teachers) done on the recommendation made by the Pay Revisions Committee, then appointed to examine this matter.
While evolving revised pay scales in respect of different categories of teachers in the Education Department, in para 3 of above- mentioned circular, two broad categories namely, category `A' and category `B' of teachers were mentioned, inter alia, laying down the requirements of academic qualifications in their cases.
It would not have been intended by the Government that on their acquisition of High academic qualification, various categories of teachers in the lower grades shall automatically be placed in the different higher grade commensurate with their academic qualification.
Normally, pay scales of various category of posts in any Department are sanctioned keeping in view the minimum qualification required for each category of posts, besides the duties prescribed for them.
Similarly, the teaching posts are sanctioned for various educational institutions keeping in view the subjects and classes, the incumbents of these posts are required to teach and for that specific qualifications are prescribed in the service rule as well at the time of recruitment.
For example, if a BA B.Ed.
pass candidate with the qualifications of Matric JBT also applied for the post of Matric J.B.T and is taken into service on the basis of higher qualification, he/she cannot claim the grade of Master/Mistress but will get the sanctioned scale of pay of teacher meant for Matric JBT Similarly, if a Matric JBT teacher improves his qualification during the course of service and acquires degree of BA B.Ed.
or of language teacher i.e. OT Giani or Prabhakar, he cannot claim the scale of Master i.e. BA B.Ed or of language teacher unless he is appointed as Master against the post of Master and language teacher for which the minimum qualifications are BAB.Ed.
and OT (Giani or Prabhakar) respectively.
2.
As the instructions contained in paragraph 3 of the above-mentioned letter dated 23rd July, 1957 did not bring out the above-mentioned intentions of the Government in unambiguous terms, it has resulted in different interpretations i.e. automatic grant of high scales of pay on the basis of qualifications irrespective of number of posts available in the Department in that category ...... it was never the intention of the State Government to undertake the continuing heavy financial burden that has developed on it because of the faulty framing of the above-mentioned instructions.
3 to 5.
(Omitted) 6.
In order to remove the confusion being created by misconstruing the intention of the Government the whole matter has been reconsidered by the State Government.
As a result of the reconsideration, the Governor of Haryana is pleased to clarify that the teachers of the Education Department are not entitled to be placed in the higher scales of pay in terms of para 2 of the Punjab Government letter No. 5056-FR-11/57/6600 dated 23rd July, 1957 or any subsequent letters/notifications issued by the Haryana Government referred to in the preceding paras, which letters already become inoperative on their improving/acquiring higher qualifications during the course of their service automatically.
The masters/teachers in the Education Department will be placed in the scales of pay of their respective categories to which they are appointed against the sanctioned posts and mere possession/acquiring of higher qualification will not entitle them automatically to claim higher pay scales."
(emphasis added).
The instructions dated 931990, therefore, clarify the instructions dated 23.7.1957 on which the claim of the petitioners is based and in terms of the later instructions dated 931990 it is evident that the masters/teachers in the Education Department will be placed in the scales of pay of their respective categories to which they are appointed against the sanctioned posts and mere possession/acquiring of higher qualification does not entitle them automatically to claim higher pay scales.
13.
The position, therefore, is that in terms of the statutory enactment of the 1971 Haryana Act and the statutory 1974 Haryana Rules, the petitioners are not entitled to higher pay scales on account of their possession of acquiring higher qualifications and the salary is to be given in terms of the statutory provisions.
The scale of pay of the employees in the service of the aided schools is to be given as specified in column 4 of Appendix A of Rule 10 of the 1974 Haryana Rules.
Besides, the dearness allowance payable to the said employees is to be as is admissible from time to time to their counterparts in Government service.
In Pushpa Rani's case (supra) it was held that a careful reading of the decisions showed that neither the Supreme Court nor this Court had examined the issue relating to the grant of higher pay scales to the teachers of different categories with effect from the date of acquiring higher qualifications in the context of the relevant recruitment rules and pay rules.
Rather in all the cases the Supreme Court and this Court proceeded on the assumption that the instructions contained in the circular dated 23.7.1957 held the field even after the promulgation of the recruitment rules and the pay rules.
Therefore, it was held that the aforesaid decisions cannot be treated as a preposition of law that the benefit of higher pay scales can be claimed by a teacher from the date of acquisition of higher qualifications irrespective of the fact that he/she was recruited on a particular post carrying a particular pay scale and the higher pay scale has been prescribed for a different post forming part of a different cadre.
The said decisions as referred to in Pushpa Rani's case, it was held, cannot be read as laying down a preposition of law that a teacher can claim the benefit of higher grade irrespective of the fact that he/she may not be entitled to be appointed on the posts for which the higher pay scale was prescribed.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Om Parkash Kaushal (supra) as also in State of Punjab v. Narain Dass (supra) while declining the claim for advance increments on the basis of Government instructions in the former case and that of increment in pay on the basis of acquiring higher qualifications in the latter case kept in view the provisions of the 1979 Punjab Act and the relief claimed was also declined in view of the statutory provisions.
Therefore, the claim of the petitioners on the basis of executive instructions dated 23.7.1957 in the face of statutory provisions of 1971 Act and the 1974 Haryana Rules, is clearly unsustainable.
In the circumstances, there is no merit in this petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.