Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the employment notice published by Coal India Limited on February 13, 2005 inviting applications for management trainee (mining) against one hundred ninety-six (SC 136 and ST 60) notified vacancies.
Case of the petitioner is that steps taken for filling all the one hundred ninety six notified vacancies by reserved category candidates is violative of provisions of art. 16(413) of the Constitution of India.
2.
Sometime in May 2001 Coal India Limited published an employment notice inviting applications for recruiting and appointing management trainees.
In response thereto the petitioner applied for the post of management trainee (mining).
He participated in the selection process, and his case is that he was selected for appointment.
However, he did not get any appointment.
When the impugned employment notice was published on February 13, 2005 he approached this Court with this writ petition contending that Coal India Limited was under the obligation to act upon the previous recruitment process.
3.
Council says that Coal India Limited was not empowered to initiate the recruitment process for filling all the one hundred ninety six available vacancies by reserved category candidates.
He criticizes the manner in which the company dealt with the situation in connection, with the previous recruitment process.
As to the case made out in the opposition of the company (its application for modification of the interim order CAN 7243 of 2005 was directed to be treated as its opposition to the writ petition), his submission is that the company was not empowered to carry forward the backlog reserved category vacancies from the year 1989.
He argues that when by letter dated October 22, 2003 the appropriate authority directed the company to take steps for recruitment of management trainees in mining and also for filling the backlog vacancies for reserved category candidates, no justification has been given by the company why the panel prepared in connection with the previous recruitment process was to acted upon, or any a recruitment process was not simultaneously initiated for recruiting general category candidates.
4.
I am unable to agree with him.
I agree with counsel for the company that in the absence of any provision forbidding the company to carry forward the backlog from the year 1989, it was empowered to initiate the recruitment process in question for filling all the reserved category vacancies which remained unfilled during the period from 1989 to 1998.
It is apparent that the employment notice in question was not published proposing to recruit reserved category candidates against vacancies arising in the year 2005.
Vacancies arising in the years 2001 or in the subsequent years were not taken into consideration either for calculating the backlog vacancies I therefore, do not see how the petitioner can contend that by initiating the process the company has violated provisions in Art.16(4B) of the constitution.
5.
It has been stated in the opposition that the panel prepared in connection with the 2001 recruitment process was not only the subject-matter of certain Court cases, but that also expired long ago.
I agree with counsel for the company that at the date of the writ petition was filed, the petitioner was not entitled to claim as a matter of right an appointment on the basis of that panel.
I must say that counsel for the company is absolutely right in saying that as far as the impugned recruitment process is concerned, the petitioner had no right to question it.
6.
Admittedly, he does not belong to any reserved category.
It is therefore clear that by the recruitment process in question he cannot be said to be an aggrieved person.
What he actually wanted is an order directing the company to appoint him in connection with the recruitment process of 2001 that reached finality with the death of the panel concerned in natural course.
It is unfortunate that the petitioner did not get an appointment though according to him he was successful.
But at this distance of time I am unable to give him any relief in exercise of writ powers.
7.
For these reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
The application (CAN 7243 of 2005) shall be deemed to be disposed of.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.