Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - Since these two writ petitions are connected with the same selection process that was initiated by the authority of Dhanghara Jnanendra Vidyapith, Purba Medinipur for appointing a member of the non-teaching staff in the institute, they have been heard together.
In terms of prior permission granted by the district inspector of schools the process was initiated.
There is no dispute that the process was to be governed by the guidelines issued by the director of school education by his memo number 1736 (21) G.A.
dated November 1st, 1999.
2.
In terms of those guidelines names of the eligible candidates were to be obtained from the employment exchanges.
Uttam alleged that the employment officer concerned had wrongfully deprived him of the benefit.
He took out the writ petition No. 10402 (W) 2005 in which an order dated May 20th, 2005 was made directing the authority of the institute to permit him to participate in the process.
It was made clear that if he was selected, then that would abide by the result of the writ petition.
In terms of that interim order he participated in the process and was empanelled as the first selected candidate.
3.
Amritangshu was one of the candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges for the same post.
As such he participated in the selection process, but was not selected by the committee.
The candidates were interviewed on May 29th, 2005 when the panel of three selected candidates were prepared.
On June 29th, 2005 he took out writ petition No. 12752 (W) of 2005 contending that Uttam had been wrongfully permitted to participate in the process.
His contention is that Uttam was not eligible, since his name had not been sponsored by any employment exchange.
4.
During pendency of the writ petition the district inspector of schools, being the competent authority, approved the panel by his order dated July 27th 2005.
Consequently Uttam was offered appointment and he accepted it.
By order dated October 7th, 2005 the district inspector of schools approved his appointment subject to the result of his writ petition.
It is argued that since during pendency of the writ petition filed by Amritangshu the district inspector of schools, approved the panel and the appointment, his action should be declared as nullity.
5.
I am unable to agree with counsel.
There was no order made in the case filed by Amritangshu restraining the district inspector of schools from approving the panel and the appointment.
On the contrary, order was made in Uttam's case making it clear that his selection, if any, would abide by the result of his writ petition.
In my opinion, in the absence of any restraint order, nothing was there to forbid the district inspector of schools to approve the panel and the appointment given to Uttam.
6.
Counsel for Amritangshu contends that the decisions approving the panel and the appointment are bad for want of reasons.
I do not find any merit in the contention, first for the reason that Amritangshu has no right to question the steps taken, since he was not one of the empanelled candidates and secondly, no provision of law casting any obligation on the district inspector of schools to record reasons while approving tale panel and the appointment, has been brought to my notice.
In my opinion, the district inspector of schools was not under any obligation to record any reason while approving the panel and the appointment.
The decisions he took were pure administrative ones.
7.
As to the question of Uttam's eligibility to participate in the selection process, counsel for Amritangsha argues that the five judge bench decision of this Court in Rabindra Nath Mahata v. State of West Bengal and ors., 2005(3) CHN 337 will, not apply to the present case, since their Lordships did not consider the effect of government notification No. 97- SE(S)/4A-6/2000 ated January 21st, 2003.
By that the Governor ordered that in all cases regarding recruitment of non-teaching members of the staff in recognized non-government aided institutes guidelines issued by the director of school education by his memo No. 1736 dated November 1st, 1999 would be followed.
8.
His contention is that the moment the government order dated January 21st, 2003 was issued, the guidelines dated November 1st, 1999 acquired the status of statutory rules, and hence Uttam having not been sponsored by any employment exchange was not eligible to participate in the process.
He also gave me the apex Court decision in Arun Kumar Nayak v. Union of India & Ors., 2006 AIR SCW 5296.
I am unable to agree with him.
It was held in the case I am referred to that since the guidelines issued by the director were not statutory in nature, a candidate, even if not sponsored by the employment exchange, was entitled to participate in the process.
I do so not see how because of the government order dated January 21st, 2003 the guidelines dated November 1st, 1999 issued by the director acquired the status of statutory rules.
9.
The government order dated January 21st, 2003 was not issued in terms of any provisions of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963 or the Management of Recognized Non-government Institutes (Aided and Unaided) Rules, 1969.
The director issued the guidelines in exercise of powers conferred on him by provisions in R. 28 of the 1969 Rules.
The guidelines indicating the recruitment procedure to be followed for appointing a member of the non-teaching staff were not statutory in nature, and that was exactly what their Lordships of the five judge bench held in the decision.
It is irrelevant that the effect of the government order dated January 21st, 2003 was not considered by their Lordships.
The statutory recruitment rules were framed and brought into effect only in 2005.
10.
For these reasons, I do not find any merit in the writ petition filed by Amritangshu, and accordingly I dismiss it.
With respect to the one filed by Uttam, I say that since he has already participated in the process, no further order is needed in his case.
In view of the five judge bench decision he was entitled to participate.
His writ petition and application shall be deemed to be disposed of.
There shall be no order for costs in the cases.
11.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.