Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J.- This writ petition was filed against the order of removal dated March 4, 2003 and also against inaction on the part of the authority before whom the petitioner's appeal dated March 21, 2003 was pending.
The petitioner also challenged the several steps taken by the authorities in connection with the disciplinary proceedings.
2.
The admitted position is that after filing the writ petition dated August 6, 2003, the appellate authority gave his decision dated September 15, 2003.
The order of the disciplinary authority removing the petitioner was varied by the appellate authority.
The removal order merged into the order of the appellate authority dated September 15, 2003.
The fact that the appellate authority gave final decision in the appeal was stated by the petitioner by filing a supplementary affidavit.
3.
The question is whether in the present writ petition the petitioner can be permitted to question the order of the appellate authority dated September 15, 2003.
I agree with counsel for the respondents that during pendency of the appeal the petitioner was not entitled to take out a writ petition challenging the removal order (see : State of Punjab v. Punjab Fibres Ltd., AIR 2005 SC 437), though he was free to take it out questioning inaction on the part of the appellate authority.
4.
Though he questioned he inaction on the part of the appellate authority, the writ petition was admitted on October 29, 2003 directing the parties to file affidavits.
Perhaps it was not brought to the notice of the Court at that point of time that the statutory appeal was pending decision.
In my opinion, in the present writ petition the petitioner is not entitled to question the order of the appellate authority dated September 15, 2003.
That order has remained unchallenged, though the petitioner was at liberty to initiate original proceedings challenging that.
5.
Counsel says that out of the impression that the petitioner would be entitled to question the order of the appellate authority in the present proceedings, he did not initiate further original proceedings.
He says that if it is held that this writ petition has lost its utility, then the petitioner may be granted liberty to initiate original proceedings challenging all the steps and actions taken by the authorities.
To this, counsel for the respondents leave the matter to the discretion of the Court.
6.
On the facts of the case, I am of the view that since this writ petition has lost its utility, the petitioner should be granted leave to take out a fresh writ petition, if so advised, for questioning the order of the appellate authority dated September 15, 2003 and all actions and steps taken by the authorities in connection with the disciplinary proceedings.
7.
For these reasons, I dismiss the writ petition making it clear that nothing in this order shall prevent the petitioner from taking out a fresh writ petition questioning the order of the appellate authority dated September 15, 2003 and all other actions and steps taken by the respondents in the disciplinary proceedings.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.