Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J -The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Director of School Education, West Bengal dated May 25th, 2005 rejecting his application for compassionate appointment.
His mother was the head teacher in Rampur Junior Basic School, Uttar Dinajpur.
At the age of fifty-one she died in harness.
On July 9th, 2001 he applied for compassionate appointment.
The application was recommended by the chairman of the district primary school council concerned to the director of school education.
Alleging that the director was not taking any decision, the petitioner moved this Court by filing writ petition No. 11420 (W) of 2004.
By order dated January 25th, 2005 that was disposed of directing the director to give a decision in the matter.
This is how the impugned decision came to be given.
2.
The director rejected the application for compassionate appointment saying, after going through the papers, records and submission of the petitioner and the council representative, it has been observed that the primary contention of the petitioner that the director of school education has not taken a decision, does not appear to be true.
On the contrary, it is evident that the director of school education, after careful consideration of this case, rejected the prayer on the ground that the family of the petitioner is composed of two members i.e. the petitioner himself and his father.
His father is getting two pensions i.e. one for himself and another for his deceased wife and such family cannot be treated as financially distressed that cannot provide two square meals and essentials to the surviving members, in terms of SE Deptt's Memo No. 12-SE(B) dt.
18199."
3.
He concluded by saying, "In this circumstance, the undersigned after careful consideration, do not find any cogent reason to reverse the decision taken by his predecessor.
Hence the proposal for appointment on compassionate ground is not approved."
The director noted that the case of the petitioner had been rejected previously by the competent authority by order dated June 4th, 2002, and that the decision had been communicated to the district primary school council that in turn communicated the decision to the petitioner.
In this writ petition the petitioner, however, disputed the fact of communication of the order dated June 4th, 2002 to him by the council.
Be that as it may, in compliance with the order of this Court the director gave a fresh decision.
4.
The director held that the family of the deceased teacher was not in such financial distress as could call for a compassionate appointment for the petitioner.
He noticed that the family consisting only of the petitioner and his father was enjoying a regular income through the father who was receiving his pension and family pension on account of death of his wife that is the petitioner's mother.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that in view of government order No. 807-Edn (S) dated August 20th, 1990, in the absence of a certificate from the panchayat authority, the director was not competent to decide the question of financial distress.
His contention is that the panchayat authority having certified that the family was in financial distress, the director was bound to approve the request for offering appointment on compassionate ground.
5.
The director referred to and relied on a government order dated January 18th, 1999.
Counsel does not say anything, regarding that order.
I am unable to agree with him that the director was not competent to give decision regarding the financial condition of the family of the deceased teacher.
He was not supposed to go by the certificate of the panchayat authority, though it could have been a relevant material for consideration.
He noticed the regular income of the family through pension and family pension.
I do not find any reason to say that he gave a wrong approach to the issue in question.
There is absolutely no reason to say that the grounds on which the request was rejected are not good grounds.
As is known, a compassionate appointment is given only for helping the distressed family of a deceased employee.
6.
I do not find any merit in the contention that in some identical cases the director approved the proposals for giving compassionate appointment.
A case of compassionate appointment is to be decided on the facts of that case alone.
Since the petitioner has no legal right to get a compassionate appointment.
In my view, he is not right in saying that he has a fundamental right (given by art. 14) to be treated equally with others favoured with compassionate appointment.
7.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.