Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner in this writ petition dated February 28th, 2006 is alleging inaction on the part of the authorities of Balurghat Joichandlal Pragati Vidyachakra, Dakshin Dinajpur.
2.
Her husband was a teacher in Dakshin Dinajpur Free Primary School (within the jurisdiction of District Primary School Council, Dakshin Dinajpur).
He died in harness on November 23rd, 2002.
Thereupon the petitioner applied to the counsel for her compassionate appointment.
Council sent the matter to the District Inspector of Schools (SE).
Alleging inaction on the part of the respondents she then moved this Court by filing writ petition was disposed of recording that the prayer for compassionate appointment would be considered by the authority concerned within the period mentioned in the order.
Alleging that the authorities did not comply with the order dated January 6th, 2004 she again moved this Court by filing writ petition No. 11463(W) of 2005.
By order dated July 28th, 2005 that writ petition was disposed of directing the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Dakshin Dinajpur to sponsor the name of the petitioner to any secondary school for appointment on compassionate ground against any existing vacancy for a group `D' staff.
In compliance with that direction the district inspector of schools issued a letter dated September 23rd, 2005 sponsoring the petitioner's name to Balurghat Joichandlal Pragati Vidyachakra, Dakshin Dinajpur.
Her name was sponsored against a vacancy for a group `D' post existing in the institute from March 1st, 1992.
Since the authorities of the institute did not take any steps to consider the petitioner, she took out the present writ petition.
3.
The writ petition was admitted by order dated April 28th, 2006 when a mandatory interim order was made directing the authorities of the institute to appoint the petitioner and pay her salaries and allowances.
It was made clear that the interim order would continue till the disposal of the writ petition.
The admitted position is that the petitioner was not appointed, and that she did not take any steps either for execution of the order dated April 28th, 2006.
The institute has filed opposition, and the writ petition has come up for final hearing now.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that at the present stage he wants a final decision in the case.
4.
From the opposition of the institute it appears that the question of selecting and appointing the petitioner was not considered, since the managing committee of the institute, as will appear from its resolution dated November 14th, 2005, was of the view that it would not be appropriate to appoint a woman in the school, a boys school.
Counsel for the institute finds little to justify the decision of the managing committee.
In my view, counsel for the petitioner has rightly said that the decision of the institute is patently violative of the provisions in Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
In terms thereof the petitioner could not be discriminated against for the purpose of employment in the institute, a recognized and government aided institute receiving hundred percent grant from the state for payment of salaries and allowances to its employees, on the ground of sex.
Simply because the petitioner is a woman, the managing committee of the institute is not empowered to say that she should not be considered for appointment in the institute, a boys' school.
I, therefore hold that the institute was totally wrong in not considering the petitioner for the post she had been sponsored by the district inspector of schools.
I, however do not find any reason to say that the institute must appoint her, because only if she is selected, the authority of the institute would incur the obligation to offer her appointment.
5.
For these reasons I1 dispose of the writ petition ordering that the authority of the institute shall immediately initiate the necessary recruitment process for appointing the group `D' member of the staff, the vacancy for which occurred as back, as March 1st, 1992 aril for which the district inspector of schools sponsored the petitioner's name by letter dated September 23rd, 2005.
The selection process shall he initiated and concluded within eight weeks from the date of communication of this order.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition allowed.