Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is an employee of the Food Corporation of India.
At the date the writ petition was taken out and also at the relevant points of time he was working as a departmental ancillary worker.
On July 27, 2003 he took a loan from Canara Bank, Kidderpore Branch, Kolkata.
According to terms and conditions his employer was to deduct Rs. 3480/- per month from his salary and the loan was to be repaid in sixty instalments.
From August 2003 his employee started deducting the instalment amount.
2.
Though for paying the instalments moneys were deducted from his salary from August 2003 to December, 2003 and again from January 2004 to Apri12004, his employer did not deposit the deducted amounts.
In February 2006 he came to know of the position, and submitted a representation dated February 21, 2006.
It is his case that he also met the officers concerned who did not want to hear anything from him.
He demanded justice by notice dated April 20, 2006.
His employer did not give any attention to his representations and notice demanding justice.
3.
He was not informed whether the instalments payable during the aforementioned periods had been paid, and if so when.
Facing with the situation he took out this writ petition dated July 31,2006.
It was moved upon notice to his employer that chose not to enter appearance.
In the circumstances by order dated August 30, 2006 the writ petition was admitted directing the corporation to file counter.
It has filed counter to which the petitioner has filed a reply.
4.
In the counter the corporation has said that instalments payable during the periods mentioned hereinbefore were not paid, since the bank had not sent the necessary notices.
The corporation has further said that the instalments in question were paid belatedly.
There is no explanation why the petitioner had not been informed about the position before he took out this writ petition.
5.
I agree with counsel for the petitioner that if any interest is payable for delay in paying instalments during the above mentioned two periods, then that should be paid by the corporation that was at fault.
It is not necessary for me to examine whether the bank has demanded interest for delayed payment.
This question has been raised by counsel for the corporation.
The question is if any interest is to be paid, then who is to pay it.
6.
At the relevant points of time the corporation did not inform the petitioner that it was unable to pay the instalments, since the bank concerned was not sending the requisite notices.
If it had given such notice perhaps in that case it could take the plea that it was not at fault, and that the petitioner, in the absence of steps taken for ensuring notices from the bank, should be made liable to pay interest.
This being the position, I am of the view that if the bank demands any interest for delayed payment of the instalments for the above mentioned two periods, then that should be paid by the corporation, not by the petitioner.
7.
Facing with the claim for costs, counsel for the corporation finds little to resist.
He does not find anything to say why the corporation had not taken appropriate steps to prevent this avoidable litigation.
By responding to the representation or to the notice demanding justice, the corporation could prevent this unnecessary litigation.
I agree with counsel that the poor petitioner has been driven to Court for no valid reason.
Hence, I hold that the corporation should pay litigation costs to the petitioner.
8.
For these reasons, I dispose of the writ petition ordering that if for delayed payment of the instalments for the above-mentioned two periods any interest is to be paid to the bank, then that shall be paid by the corporation, and not by the petitioner.
I further order that the corporation shall pay costs amounting to rupees three thousand, and that the amount shall be paid to the petitioner within a period of three weeks from the date of communication of this order.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied, for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition allowed.