Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Director of Library Services, West Bengal dated July 12th, 1999 that there was no scope to appoint him as a cycle peon in Ramkrishna Biswas Smriti Pathagar, Nadia, since he had failed to qualify on merit in the selection test.
2.
By letter dated April 23rd, 1986 the then authority of the library engaged the petitioner to work in the library as cycle peon.
With effect from February 3rd, 1990 the library was recognized as a government sponsored rural library in terms of provisions of the West Bengal Public Libraries Act, 1979 and the Rule framed thereunder Service rules for the employees in government sponsored public libraries were made in 1985.
Employees were to be appointed in terms of those rules the petitioner was not appointed according to those rules.
3.
Alleging that though he was entitled to get permanent appointment by way of regularization, the authorities were not taking any steps, he moved this Court by filing a writ petition CO 8332(W) of 1995.
By order dated June 7th, 1995 that was admitted and an order was made that in case the authority decided to fill the post on regular basis, his case would be considered with other eligible candidates.
Recruitment process was initiated, and with others he participated.
He took the written test on February 8th, 1996 and appeared before the selection committee for viva voce on April 12th, 1997.
No appointment was given to him.
4.
In the circumstances, he called upon the authorities to give him appointment, and then alleging inaction he moved this Court for the second time by filing a writ petition : No. 24191 (W) of 1998.
By order dated December 24th, 1998 that writ petition was disposed of directing the authority concerned to give a reasoned decision.
This is how the impugned decision came to be given by the director.
5.
Though the director recorded that there was no scope to appoint the petitioner, since he had failed to qualify on merit in the selection test, the decision was not challenged till December 24th, 2003.
In the meantime the first writ petition filed by the petitioner had come up for final hearing, and by order dated July 10th, 2003 that was dismissed making it clear that if he had any reason to question the selection process initiated in 1996, he would be at liberty to initate appropriate proceedings before the appropriate forum.
Apparently on the basis of such observation he took out this writ petition.
6.
Counsel submits that the selection committee did not give any mark to the petitioner for experience.
There in nothing to show that the candidates were to get mark for experience.
The director examined the proceedings of the selection and recorded clear findings that the petitioner had failed to qualify on merit in the selection test.
The director was absolutely right in saying that by merely participating in the selection test the petitioner had not acquired a right to get appointment.
7.
Candidate selected on merit was only to be appointed.In course of hearing today counsel submits that no panel was prepared and no one was appointed.
Even if I accept his submission to be correct.
I do not see how on the basis of those facts I can hold that the selection test was bad.
The petitioner, who remained unsuccessful in the selection test, cannot be declared successful by me in exercise of my writ powers.
If the authority abandoned the selection process, that will not create any right either in favour of the petitioner to get a permanent appointment.
8.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.