Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning promotion given to the seventh respondent (Sri Debasish Guha) to the post of executive engineer (civil) with effect from June 20th, 1995 and the seniority list dated September 1st, 1990 in which he was shown below Sri Guha.
2.
The writ petition was taken out on April 19th, 1999.
In para 7 of the opposition filed by the port trust it has been stated that for promotion to the post of senior scientific officer for which persons holding the posts of assistant engineer and assistant scientific officer were eligible, the selection committee considered the petitioner according to the recruitment rules, and that he was placed in second position of the panel concerned.
It has been further stated that he was offered to work in the post of senior scientific officer on officiating basis, but he declined to accept the offer.
3.
The port of trust has further stated that in the interests of the Organisation the post of executive engineer (electronics) was converted to the post of executive engineer and that both Sri Guha and the petitioner were considered by the departmental promotion committee for promotion to the post of executive engineer (civil).
It has been further stated that since the petitioner did not possess requisite qualifications for the post, the selection committee recommended Sri Guha for promotion.
It has been mentioned that both the posts of senior scientific officer and executive engineer (civil) were selection posts at the relevant points of time.
4.
From the petitioner's representation dated July 6th, 1995 (at page 49 of the writ petition) it is apparent that he was fully aware of the fact of supersession by Sri Guha.
He was also aware of the fact that the post of executive engineer (electronics) had been converted to the post of executive engineer (civil).
Questioning the conversion or the supersession he did not approach the Court of law till the present writ petition was taken out.
In the meantime, the seniority list dated September 1st, 1998 of officers belonging to classes I and II of the port trust came to be prepared and published.
He submitted an objection, and in that he once again made grievance regarding conversion of the post before June 1995.
5.
I do not find any merit in the argument of counsel for the petitioner that the authorities converted the post of executive engineer (electronics) to the post of executive engineer (civil) mala fide.
The port, trust, in my view, as employer, possessed the inherent power to convert any post in administrative interest.
In my view, the petitioner was not entitled to question the conversion effected sometime before June 1995, by taking out this writ petition long thereafter in 1999.
There is no clinching material before me to hold that the decision to convert the post was taken with the singular motive of depriving the petitioner or causing prejudice to him.
The allegation that the authority acted mala fide, it seems to me, is absolutely baseless.
6.
I do not find any merit either in the argument that when vacancies for posts for which the petitioner possessed the requisite qualifications were existing, instead of considering him for a post for which he did not possess the requisite qualifications, the port trust authorities were rather under the obligation to consider him against the other available vacancies.
Only on the ground that vacancies for some posts for which he possessed requisite qualifications were available, in my view, he was not entitled to say that his employer was under an obligation to consider him against those vacancies.
7.
It is not his case that though steps were taken for filling those vacancies, he though was eligible, was not considered.
Mere existence of a vacancy does not create a right of an eligible employee to call upon his employer to take steps for filling it.
It is entirely up to the employer to decide whether he will fill an existing vacancy.
Hence there is no reason to say that by considering his case for promotion to the post of executive engineer (civil), instead of considering him for promotion to other posts for which vacancies were available, the authorities committed any wrong.
In my view, by acting in the manner alleged by the petitioner his employer did not commit any wrong, far less to speak of acting mala fide.
8.
As to the seniority list dated September 1st, 1998, I find that the petitioner was rightly placed below Sri Guha, since by then Sri Guha had been promoted to a higher post.
Since there is no reason to hold that promotion given to Sri Guha was bad, I do not see how the petitioner is entitled to say that the authorities were under an obligation to show him in the gradation list above Sri Guha.
His objection regarding conversion had nothing to do with his placement in the seniority list below Sri Guha.
9.
For these reasons, I hold that no relief can be given to the petitioner by the writ Court.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
10.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.