Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - On instructions counsel for the council of higher secondary education submits that the matter may be decided at the admission stage on the basis of the records produced.
His submission is that if this court holds that on the facts of the case the council authority ought to have granted registration to the student, then for the lapses admitted by the school authority it should be directed to pay exemplary costs.
To this, counsel for the school authority leaves the matter entirely to the discretion of the court.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that unless registration is granted to the petitioner, a gross miscarriage of justice will take place for the lapses on the part of someone working in the school.
2.
It is the common case of both the petitioner and the school authority that with all other students intending to take the Higher Secondary Examination, 2007 the petitioner submitted the duly filled in application seeking registration from the council.
The case of the school authority is that while applications submitted by all other students were duly forwarded to the council and they got registration, at a later stage it detected that for some mistake committed by some clerk application of the petitioner had not been sent to the council.
This case of the petitioner and the school authority did not impress the authority did not impress the council authority.
That authority rather recorded a finding that the petitioner in collusion with the school authority concocted a story to cover up the negligence.
3.
In my view, the authority was not justified in recording the finding that the petitioner and the school authority entered into a collusion for covering up the lapses on the part of the petitioner.
When the head of the institute informed the council that the petitioner had duly submitted his application for registration, but for lapses on the part of the school the application did not reach the council office, in my view, the authority of the council, in the absence of any clinching evidence, was not competent to record a finding of fact regarding collusion.
The other difficulties indicated by the council authority, it seems to me, are not insurmountable.
4.
The council ought not to have taken such a rigid stand as was reflected in the decision.
The authority ought to have remembered that to err is human.
For the mistake committed by the school, in my opinion, the council ought not to have decided to punish the petitioner.
1, however, agree with counsel for the council that the school authority must pay exemplary costs for generating this unnecessary litigation.
5.
For these reasons, I set aside the impugned order of the council dated August 28th, 2006 and allow the writ petition to this extent.
I order that within a fortnight the school authority shall send all the necessary papers seeking registration for the petitioner.
Eligibility certificate, registration fees, etc. shall accompany the papers to be submitted in terms of this order.
On account of costs it shall pay to the council a sum of rupees twenty thousand by a demand draft.
On receipt of the papers and the amount of costs, the council shall examine the question of registration, and if there is no legal impediment, shall grant that immediately.
The decision shall be given and communicated within a fortnight from the date of receipt of the papers from the school authority.
6.
It is made clear that the school authority will be free to initiate appropriate proceedings against the person who was responsible for the lapses, for imposing appropriate punishment, and also for recovery of the costs amount and other amounts on account of financial loss suffered by it.
7.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if appalled for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Order accordingly.