VK Bali, J (Oral) - This appeal under clause X of the Letters Patent has been filed against judgment dated April 24, 2001, passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 15912 of 1999, vide which award dated March 15, 1999 (Annexure P-7) passed by the Labour Court was set aside and the respondent-workman was re-instated with continuity in service and 75% back wages from the date of demand notice.
Whereas the Labour Court held that the respondent-workman had not completed 240 days in service in twelve calendar months preceding the date of his termination and thus vide order dated March 15, 1999, answered the reference against the workman, the learned Single Judge reversed the finding of the Labour Court with the result already indicated above.
2.
The only question that has been raised in this case and on which there is a debate by learned counsel representing the parties naturally pertains to the service period of the workman in twelve calendar months preceding the date of his termination.
Whereas it has been the case of the workman that he was first appointed at Moga depot on October 20, 1986 and continued at the said depot upto January 31, 1987 and thereafter he was appointed at Muktsar depot on February 1, 1987, where he remained upto January 15, 1988, the case of the appellant-State was that the workman was employed on May 15, 1987 and his services were terminated on December 11, 1987.
The learned Single Judge, while reversing the finding of the Labour Court on crucial issue, as mentioned above, relied upon the statement of Hari Chand (WW1), who deposed that the workman was issued duty slips for obtaining spare parts from the store on December 12, 1987, December 17, 1987, December 28, 1987, December 29, 1987, December 30, 1987, January 8, 1988, January 9, 1988, January 11, 1988 and January 12, 1998.
On the basis of deposition of WW1, the learned Single Judge had drawn a conclusion that the respondent worked in the months of December, 1987, and January, 1988 and atleast upto January 12, 1988.
The learned Single Judge also relied upon the statement made by Munshi Ram, Clerk of the appellants-Department, who was examined as MW1.
He had produced the details of the service of the workman at Ex. M1, according to which, the total working days of the workman came to be 180 from May 15, 1987 to December 11, 1987.
The learned Single Judge also relied upon the statement of the workman, who had deposed that he had worked at Muktsar from February 1, 1987 to January 15, 1988.
The appellants-Department were in a position to substantiate their plea by way of documentary evidence, yet no records were produced before the Labour Court.
3.
While drawing adverse inference, the learned Single Judge also relied upon judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gopal Krishanji Ketkar v. Mohmed Haji Latif, AIR 1968 Supreme Court 1413.
In the manner aforesaid, if the service period of the workman at Muktsar was to be excluded, the workman would have still completed 240 days in twelve calendar months preceding the date of his termination.
4.
Miss Nirmaljit Kaur, the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, however, argues that there was no justification to set aside the findings of fact which were recorded by the Labour Court as in writ jurisdiction under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, findings of facts should not be disturbed.
For her aforesaid contention, learned counsel for the State relied upon judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Harbans Lal v. Jagmohan Saran, 1986(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 82 : AIR 1986 Supreme Court 302.
5.
We have heard learned counsel representing the parties and have carefully examined the records of the case.
6.
In the context of facts and circumstances of this case, there does not appear to be any substance in the only contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellants.
The facts in Harbans Lal's case (supra) would reveal that the High Court in writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India had disturbed the finding of fact on reappraisal of evidence.
The prescribed authority as well as the learned Second Additional District Judge, Bulandshahr, had found one Madan Lal to be sitting on the shop on behalf of the appellant in the said case and carrying on the business of selling vegetables.
The finding of both the authorities rested on evidence and there was no warrant for disturbing that finding in the writ petition.
It appears that the dispute between landlord and tenant pertained to a shop.
The petition for eviction was filed under Section 12 read with Section 16 of the UP Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction), Act 1972 alleging that the accommodation had been sub-let by the appellant to one Yadram.
There were other grounds also for eviction that were taken in the petition aforesaid.
The prescribed authority made an order rejecting the petition on finding that the plea of sub-letting could not be proved.
An appeal carried against the order aforesaid was dismissed by the learned Second Additional District Judge, Bulandshahr.
It is clear from the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Harbans Lal's case (supra) that the authority under the Rent Act had appraised the evidence with a view to arrive at a conclusion on certain facts, which was reappraised by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The facts of the case decided by the Supreme Court in Harbans Lal's case (supra) have no parity with the facts of the present case.
In the present case, the findings of fact recorded by the Labour Court have been reversed by the learned Single Judge under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The jurisdiction of the High Court to interfere in the finding of fact where a writ petition is filed directly against the order of the Tribunal/Labour Court, is in our view different than the powers of the High Court in disturbing a finding of fact in a matter which is routed through various Courts.
Even otherwise, if there be a parent error of facts, which can be demonstrated to the hilt before a Writ Court, there is no embargo as such that even such an error cannot be corrected by the High Court.
Further, the findings of the Labour Court have not been upset by reversing its finding on facts only.
The learned Single Judge has also drawn an adverse inference, and in our view rightly so, on account of non-production of documentary evidence, which was certainly in possession of the State alone.
7.
In so far as thus the order of reinstatement passed by the learned Single Judge is concerned, the same in our view does not suffer from any error and needs to be upheld.
However, in so far as back wages are concerned, we are of the view that the workman, whose services had been terminated in January, 1988, and who had sought reference for settlement of the dispute by the Labour Court in 1993, i.e., after a period of five years, was not entitled to 75% of back wages.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the ends of justice would be met if the workman is held entitled to 50% of the back wages from the date of the demand notice.
To that extent only, we modify the judgment passed by the learned Single Judge.
The Letters Patent Appeal is partly allowed in the matter of wages as mentioned above.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal partly allowed.