Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the first respondent not to appoint him in the services of the corporation in terms of provisions of the HPCL Employees' Superannuation Benefit Fund Scheme Rules, R 8(b).
2.
According to the provisions in R 8(b) of the rules, on the discharge of a member, who is married, from the services of the corporation on account of permanent total disablement while in service, that member may as an alternative to r.8(a) and not later than 180 days of the date of his such discharge from the services of the corporation, opt for employment in the corporation of eligible dependent spouse or son or daughter of that member and the candidate fulfilling the required recruitment criteria at the entry level vacancy, such employment is to be provided by the corporation within three years from the date of exercise of the option.
3.
In the present case the petitioner's father, an employee of the corporation was discharged on account of permanent total disablement while in service.
On his discharge on June 5th, 2001 he exercised option in terms of R 8(b) on April 16th, 2001.
On the basis of his option the corporation took steps for considering the case of the petitioner for providing him an employment in the corporation at the entry level vacancy.
It has been stated in the counter filed by the corporation that according to the relevant rules it was required that the petitioner was found medically fit for employment in the corporation.
He was medically examined by the competent doctor was gave his report dated April 26th, 2002 that while because of his main functional disability, i.e., poor ability to communicate verbally due to poor articulation of speech, the petitioner was not fit to work in a plant location, he, however, was perfectly fit to work in an administrative location where skilled verbal communication would not be important.
4.
In view of the medical report, the corporation wrote letter dated September 1st, 2003 informing the petitioner's father that since it was not possible to provide an employment to the petitioner he was liberty to change his option from the one provided in r.8(b) to the one provided in r.8(a).
It was mentioned that on changing the option he would be entitled to monthly pension at the rate of Rs. 3351/-.
There is nothing to show that he reacted in any manner to the advice of the corporation for changing the option.
When he apparently did not take any step in the matter, the petitioner decided to approach this Court questioning the actions and inactions of the corporation, and consequently he took out this writ petition dated January 13th, 2005.
5.
Submissions of counsel for the petitioner are these.
When the provisions in r.8(b) did not say anything regarding complete medical fitness for getting an employment, the corporation was not right in saying that since the petitioner was not found one hundred per cent medically fit, he was not entitled to get an employment.
According to the medical examination report the petitioner was perfectly fit for getting employment in any administrative location.
The stand of the corporation that the petitioner could not be employed only in an administrative location, since employment in the corporation is transferable, is unfair and unreasonable.
If appointed, the petitioner would have been appointed only as a class four member of the staff, and in that case the question of transfer would not have been relevant.
On the ground that the corporation is already burdened with surplus manpower, the petitioner cannot be deprived of the benefit of the scheme that has been kept in operation.
6.
On the other hand, submissions of counsel for the corporation are these.
Since according to the recruitment rules employment could be provided to the petitioner only on his satisfying the full medical fitness requirement, the corporation was not wrong in expressing its inability to provide employment to him.
In view of the law declared by the apex Court in A.P.S.R.T.C.
and ors, v. Kaiser Begum, 1991(1) CLR 702 an employment could not be provided to the petitioner taking a decision contrary to the provisions of the scheme and the recruitment rules.
7.
The question is whether the corporation was right in saying that since the petitioner, on medical examination, was not found fit, it was not possible to provide him an employment keeping it limited only to the administrative locations of the corporation.
It is not disputed that on medical examination the petitioner was found unfit for employment in plant locations.
There is nothing to show that the features of the recruitment rules mentioned by the corporation in its counter were or are not in existence.
8.
According to the provisions in r.8 (b) under which the petitioner seeks employment the corporation was to consider his case provided he fulfilled the required recruitment criteria for the entry level vacancy.
One of the mandatory requirements for getting employment at the entry level vacancy was not hundred percent medical fitness.
It is immaterial that the extent of medical fitness required for any employment was not mentioned in r.8 (b).
That was not necessary.
It was specifically mentioned that employment would be provided only or fulfillment of the required recruitment criteria.
The recruitment criteria are to appear from the recruitment rules, and in them complete medical fitness is one of the mandatory requirements.
9.
There is no reason to say that once appointed the petitioner could not have been subjected to the rules of transfer.
It has been specifically said in the counter that appointment, if any, given to him would have been subject to the existing rules of transfer.
Hence it cannot be accepted that though he was not fit for employment in any plant location, he could be given employment in any administrative location for which he was medically fit.
The requirement was complete medical fitness.
Employment provided to a person who is partly fit is bound to be contrary to the recruitment rules, and that is not permissible.
The authority relied on says so.
10.
I therefore, do not find any reason to say that by expressing its ability to provide employment to the petitioner the corporation acted arbitrarily or unfarily or unreasonably.
Its decision does not call for interference.
Needless to say that though father of the petitioner did not say anything regarding change of option, the corporation, shall give the benefits of the changed option, if the heirs of the deceased employee (I am told that in the meantime the father of the petitioner died) ask the corporation to give benefits in terms of r.8 (a).
11.
For these reasons, while I say I am unable to make any order directing the corporation to provide employment to the petitioner in terms of provisions in r.8 (b), I dispose of the writ petition ordering that if the heirs of the deceased employee inform the corporation within two months about their acceptance of advice of the corporation for changing the option from the one in r.8 (b) to the one in rule 8(a), then within a fortnight from the date of receipt of the written intimation from the heirs, the corporation shall release all benefits to the heirs of the employee, with all arrears, in terms of provisions in r.8(a) of the rules.
12.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
13.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Order accordingly.