Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the selection of the ninth respondent for the post of clerk in Anantapur Madhyamik Siksha Niketan, Nadia.
Both the petitioner and the ninth respondent participated in the selection process with other eligible candidates.
According the recruitment rules the candidates were to take a written test and thereafter they were to participate in the type writing test.
In all four candidates participated in the test.
2.
In written test the petitioner secured the highest mark.
The selection was to be made on the basis of total mark obtained by the candidates.
In type writing test he secured lowest mark.
As a result, he was found fourth among the four contesting candidates.
The ninth respondent improved his position from third upto written test stage to first after the type writing test.
The candidates participated in the tests on December 4th, 2005.
3.
On December 7th, 2005 the petitioner submitted a representation dated December 5th, 2005 to the present of the managing committee of the institute.
That representation was, however, addressed to the district inspector of schools to whom it was not sent.
In that representation the petitioner alleged that after the typing test the scripts were mixed, and that thereafter he was asked to put signature on script, though he had no idea whether that was the script he had used.
4.
He further alleged that the ninth respondent was given extra time.
He said that he had reasons to apprehend that the authorities indulged in malpractice.
Alleging inaction on the part of the district inspector of schools he has taken out the present writ petition.
I agree with counsel for the respondents that the allegation of inaction on the part of the district inspector of schools cannot be maintained for the simple reason that the representation dated December 5th, 2005 was never sent to that authority.
5.
I also agree with them that the petitioner started making allegations only after finding himself unsuccessful in the selection process.
If what he says is correct, then in all probability he would have lodged a complaint on December 4th, 2005 itself.
He sent a letter allegedly to the president of the managing committee on December 7th, 2005.
It is also to be noted that other unsuccessful candidates who participated in the selection process did not make any allegation that without obtaining their signatures the scripts of type writing test were mixed by the selection committee.
6.
I agree with counsel for the respondents that the allegation, on the face of it, cannot be believed.
Counsel wants me to consider the comparative merit of the candidates.
There is no scope to undertake that process.
The selection committee was the authority to assess the comparative merit of the candidates.
The writ court is not to substitute its assessment for that of the selection committee.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
7.
Urgent certified xerox copy and also copy duly authenticated by AR (C) or ACO shall be supplied to the parties, applied for.
Petition dismissed