MM Kumar, J - In this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioner has sought directions to the respondents that he is entitled to continue in employment till the date of attaining 60 years of age as per the instructions dated 441985 (Annexure P-2) issued by the State of Punjab (respondent No. 1).
The petitioner has claimed that he is son of a freedom fighter and is, thus, entitled to avail the benefit of the aforementioned instructions.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Engineer (Apprentice) on 1611976 and he joined as such on 2711976.
The date of birth of the petitioner is 26.8.1948 and he was to retire on attaining the age of superannuation on 31.8.2006.
It is appropriate to mention that the petitioner has been working on the post of Additional Superintending Engineer.
He has claimed that on 441985 instructions (Annexure P-2) have been issued by the respondent No. 1 to the effect that the freedom fighters in the State service were to be re-employed uptil the age of 60 years.
As the petitioner has attained the age of 58 years, he has filed this petition claiming that he cannot be retired at the age of 58 years and he should be retired only at the age of 60 years.
3.
On the basis of the instructions dated 441985 as clarified on 2851987 (Annexure P-3), this Court, on 2982006, has passed the following order:-  "Present : Ms. Jagdeep Bains, Advocate for the petitioner.
Contends that the petitioner is a ward of a freedom fighter and, therefore, covered by the instructions, Annexure P-2.
Notice of motion for 24.10.2006.
On the asking of the Court, Mr. JS Chandail, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, accepts notice on behalf of respondent No. 1 and seeks time to file reply.
May do so within six weeks with an advance copy to the counsel opposite.
In case copies of the writ petition, corresponding to the number of respondents plus one are not supplied to Mr. Chandail personally by this evening, the writ petition shall be deemed to have been dismissed.
Dasti for the other respondents.
We direct that the petitioner be allowed to continue in service till the next date.
Dasti order.
August 29, 2006" In view of the above, the petitioner continued in service.
On 26.3.2007, we have vacated the stay order by stating that the order dated 2982006 was not to operate any further.
4.
The stand of the Punjab State Electricity Board (respondent Nos. 2 and 3) in their written statement is that the petitioner has obtained the interim order dated 2982006 by suppressing material facts as the instructions dated 441985 (Annexure P-2) have been modified by another set of instructions dated 1072000 (Annexure R1/T) which have been adopted by the Board as well.
According to the later instructions, the benefit of re-employing the wards of the freedom fighters upto the age of 60 years has been withdrawn and the benefit is confined only to the freedom fighters themselves.
Similar stand has been taken by respondent No. 1 in its short reply.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length and perusing the record, we are of the considered view that this petition lacks merit.
It would be appropriate to make a reference to the instructions dated 441985 which read as under :-  "The State Govt. have granted concessions like the re-employment to a freedom fighter in the State service uptil the age of 60 years, the reservation in the State Medical Colleges of 2% seats in MBBS/BDS Courses, the reservation of 2% seats at the time of direct recruitment in the State Services and reservation in residential plots etc.
In this regard, I am directed to say that for the entitlement to above cited concessions, in future only those freedom fighters and their wards will be eligible who have either been granted a freedom fighters pension from the Punjab Govt. or have been awarded Tamra Patras for their political sufferings during pre-independence freedom movements.
The Deputy Commissioner of the District to which a freedom fighter belongs to will be the only competent authority to provide an eligible certificate to this effect i.e. for the grant of all types of those concessions to a freedom fighters or his wards."
However, the aforementioned instructions were modified and superseded by the instructions dated 1072000.
The aforementioned instructions clearly stipulate that only those freedom fighters who are getting pension from Punjab Government and who are holders of Tamra Patras were to be given the facility of re-employment upto the age of 60 years and the same is not available to their children, grand sons and grand daughters.
The aforementioned instructions read as under :-  "It has come to the notice of the Government that in view of the above instructions, some of the departments have granted the facility of re- employment to the dependents of freedom fighters.
In this regard, it is clarified that those freedom fighters who are getting pension from Punjab Government or who are holders of Tamra Patras, have been granted the facility of re-employment upto 60 years of age, but this facility is not granted to their children, grand sons and grand daughters."
It is, thus, obvious that the petitioner who is admittedly a son of freedom fighter would not remain entitled to be employed upto the age of 60 years.
Therefore, there is no merit in the petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons aforementioned, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
However, we make it clear that the service rendered by the petitioner, after the date of his superannuation at the age of 58 years with effect from 192006 till the date of his relieving, shall not be considered as qualifying service for the purpose of pension or any other purpose.
However, no recovery of salary paid to the petitioner from 192006 till the date of his relieving be effected.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the above terms.
Petition dismissed.