GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against order dated 941997 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 16408 of 1994 vide which he quashed the appointments of the appellants on the posts of Instructors (Cutting and Tailoring) and directed that consequential vacancies be filled by issuing a fresh advertisement.
The Facts :  2.
In pursuance of advertisement issued by Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab (respondent No. 2) in September, 1992 for recruitment of Instructors in different trades and other posts, the appellants, respondents No. 3 to 8 and others applied for the posts of Instructors in Cutting and Tailoring.
After a gap of one year and five months, they were interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee (for short, the Committee).
The appellants were selected by the Committee and their names were included in the merit list of 13 candidates.
All the selected candidates were appointed against the advertised posts (5) and additional posts/vacancies, which had become available in the meanwhile, due to promotion, retirement and death of the incumbents.
3.
Respondent No. 3 challenged the selection and appointment of the appellants and proforma respondents on the following grounds :  (a) Respondent No. 2 did not have the jurisdiction, power or authority to select candidates in excess of the advertised posts; (b) one of the selected candidates, namely, Smt. Amrit Kaur (appellant No. 1 herein) was over-age; and (c) the recommendations made by the Selection Committee were vitiated by arbitrariness, inasmuch as, more meritorious candidates were left out from the zone of selection and candidates having inferior academic record were selected.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents, it was averred that as per the advertisement, the number of posts was liable to be varied.
It was further averred that the advertisement for recruitment of five Instructors was issued on the basis of determination of vacancies made by the department on 2531992.
Later on, additional vacancies became available due to promotion, retirement and death of the incumbents and all the vacancies which were available at the time of interview were taken into consideration by the Committee and the selected candidates were given appointment.
It was further averred that the additional posts/vacancies had been taken into consideration because there was a long time gap of 1-1/2 years between the date of advertisement and actual selection.
The consideration of the candidature of appellant No. 1 was defended on the premise that being a member of Backward Class, she was given benefit of relaxation of five years in the age limit as per Punjab Government letter No. 2/116/78/8001 dated 2411979.
5.
During the pendency of the writ petition, one more candidate, namely, Smt. Raj Rani was appointed as Instructor in Cutting and Tailoring in pursuance of the direction given by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 7190 of 1995 filed by her claiming appointment on the reserved vacancy ear-marked for Scheduled Caste (Majhabi Sikh).
6.
The learned Single Judge held that the Committee did not have the power to select candidates in excess of a advertised posts and, therefore, the appointments of the appellants were liable to be nullified.
7.
Shri Vivek Sharma argued that the appointments made in excess of the advertised posts cannot be regarded as illegal per se because the note appended in the advertisement clearly postulated variation in the number of posts and in fact, the additional vacancies/posts had become available in the interregnum of one year and none months between the determination of vacancies by the department and the actual selection.
In support of this argument, the learned counsel relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in Prem Singh and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board, JT 1996(5) SC 219 : 1996(3) SCT 563 (SC) and of Himachal Pradesh High Court in HP Public Service Commission v. YR Pathak and others, 1997(7) SLR 370 : 1999(3) SCT 364 (H.P.).
Shri Sharma also questioned the locus standi of respondent No. 3 by arguing that after having taken part in the process of selection, she is estopped from questioning the recommendations of the Selection Committee on any ground whatsoever.
He further argued that even if the Division Bench agrees with the conclusion of the learned Single Judge that appointments could not have been made in excess of the advertised posts, the directions contained in the impugned order may be set aside because the appellants have already served for almost 10 years without any blemish.
8.
Ms. Rita Kohli, learned Deputy Advocate General supported the cause of the appellants and argued that the appointments made in excess of the advertised posts cannot be termed as illegal because the advertisement issued by respondent No. 2 envisaged variation in the number of posts.
She submitted that the vacancies which had become available after 2531992 on account of promotion, retirement and death of the incumbents could legitimately be taken into account while preparing the select list and there was no necessity to issue fresh advertisement.
9.
Shri HS Gill, Senior Counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that he did not commit any error by quashing the appointments made in excess of the advertised posts.
Shri Gill relied on the judgments of this Court in Satbir Singh Bura and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others, 1996(2) SLR 373 : 1996(1) SCT 437 (P&H) and of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar v. Chairman, Banking Services Recruitment Board and others, 1996(1) SLR 307 : 1996(1) SCT 660 (SC).
10.
We have given serious thought to the rival contentions/submissions and gone through the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the parties.
Although, we are inclined to agree with the learned Single Judge that the note incorporated in the advertisement with regard to possible variation in the number of posts postulated marginal increase or decrease in the number of advertised posts and selection of 13 candidates as against 5 advertised posts was not warranted, in the peculiar facts of this case, we are inclined to set aside the impugned order because, --  (a) no evidence has been produced before the Court to show that selection of the appellants was tainted by mala fides or extraneous considerations or that they had made manipulations or played fraud in securing their selection : (b) the appellants have continuously worked as Instructors and at this belated stage, it will be wholly inequitable to deprive them of their source of livelihood; and (c) respondent No. 3 is not going to be benefited by quashing the appointments made in excess of the advertised posts because she was not among the five most meritorious candidates.
11.
In Prem Singh v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others (supra), the Supreme Court approved the judgment of this Court in Satbir Singh Bura v. Haryana State Electricity Board (supra) vide which the selections made in excess of the advertised posts were quashed, but held that anticipated vacancies could be taken into consideration while making selections.
Their Lordships also upheld the appointments made against the vacancies caused due to promotion, retirement and death of the existing incumbents.
Paragraphs 25 and 26 of the judgment, which are relevant for our purposes, are reproduced below :  "25.
From the above discussion of the case law it becomes clear that the selection process by way of requisition and advertisement can be started for clear vacancies and also for anticipated vacancies but not for future vacancies.
If the requisition and advertisement are for certain number of posts only the State cannot make more appointments than the number of posts advertised, even though it might have prepared a select list of more candidates.
The State can deviate from the advertisement and make appointments on posts falling vacant thereafter in exceptional circumstances only or in an emergent situation and that too by taking a policy decision in that behalf.
Even when filling up of more posts than advertised is challenged the Court may not, while exercising its extra ordinary jurisdiction, invalidate the excess appointments and may mould the relief in such a manner as to strike a just balance between the interest of the State and the interest of persons seeking public employment.
What relief should be granted in such cases would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
26.
In the present case, as against the 62 advertised posts the Board made appointments on 138 posts.
The selection process was started for 62 clear vacancies and at that time anticipated vacancies were not taken into account.
Therefore, strictly speaking, the Board was not justified in making more than 62 appointments pursuant to the advertisement published on 2.11.1991 and the selection process which followed thereafter.
But as the Board could have taken into account not only the actual vacancies but also vacancies which were likely to arise because of retirement etc. by the time the selection process was completed it would not be just and equitable to invalidate all the appointments made on posts in excess of 62.
However, the appointments which were made against future vacancies - in this case on posts which were newly created - must be regarded as invalid.
As stated earlier, after the selection process had started 13 posts had become vacant because of retirement and 12 because of deaths.
The vacancies which were likely to arise as a result of retirement could have been reasonably anticipated by the Board.
The Board through oversight had not taken them into consideration while a requisition was made for filling up 62 posts.
Even with respect to the appointments made against vacancies which arose because of deaths, a lenient view can be taken and on consideration of expediency and equity, they need not be quashed.
Therefore, in view of the special facts and circumstances of this case, we do not think it proper to invalidate the appointments made on those 25 additional posts.
But the appointments made by the Board of posts beyond 87 are held invalid.
Though the High Court was right in the view it has taken, we modify its order to the aforesaid extent.
These appeals are allowed accordingly.
No order as to costs."
12.
In Ajit Singh v. Services Selection Board, Haryana, 1988(1) SLR 352, the Supreme Court ordered regularisation of the appointments by suggesting relaxation in the qualification of age.
13.
In HC Puttaswamy and others v. The Hon'ble Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court, Bangalore and others, 1991(1) S.C.T.
116 : 1991(1) SLR 167, the Supreme Court, while decrying the appointments made by the Chief Justice in violation of the statutory rules, declined to nullify the same by making the following observations:  "Having reached the conclusion about the invalidity of the impugned appointments made by the Chief Justice, we cannot, however, refuse to recognise the consequence that involves on uprooting the appellants.
Mr. Gopala Subramanayam, counsel for the appellants while highlighting the human problems involved in the case pleaded for sympathetic approach and made an impassioned appeal for allowing the appellants to continue in their respective posts.
He has also referred to us several decisions of this Court where equitable directions were issued in the interests of justice even though the selection and appointments of candidates were held to be illegal and unsupportable.
There is good sense in the plea put forward for the appellants.
The human problem stands at the outset in these cases and it is that problem that motivated us in allowing the review petitions.
It may be recalled that the appellants are in service for the past 10 years.
They are either graduates or double graduates or post graduates as against the minimum qualification of SSLC required for Second Division Clerks in which cadre they were originally recruited.
Some of them seem to have earned higher qualification by hard work during their service.
Some of them in the normal course have been promoted to higher cadre.
They are now overaged for entry into any other service.
It seems that most of them cannot get the benefit of age relaxation under Rule 6 of the Karnataka Civil Services (General Recruitment) Rules 1977.
One could only imagine their untold miseries and of their family if they are left at the midstream.
Indeed, it would be an act of cruelty at this stage at ask them to appear for written test and viva voce to be conducted by the Public Service Commission for fresh selection (See : Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan), 1981(1) SCR 370 at 326.
The precedents apart, the circumstances of this case justify an humanitarian approach and indeed, the appellants seem to deserve justice ruled by mercy.
We take note of the fact that the writ petitioners also would be appointed in the High Court as stated by learned Advocate General of the State."
14.
In Dr. Mrs. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan, 1993(1) SLR 544 : 1993(2) SCT 273 (SC), their Lordships of the Supreme Court accepted the plea of the appellant that some of the selected candidates were not eligible for consideration but refused to quash the appointments solely on the ground of long lapse of time.
15.
In Darshan Singh and another v. State of Punjab, (1973-2) P.L.R.
529, a learned Single Judge of this Court held that appointments of the respondents were illegal but refused to quash the same on the ground that the writ petitioners were not going to be benefited by such direction.
16.
In Gurbux Rai v. State of Punjab and others, 1984(1) SLR 83, a Division Bench of this Court refused to quash the appointments only on the ground that the appointees had remained in service for a long period of 7 years.
The same view was expressed in Prem Chand v. State of Haryana, 1989(2) SLR 556 and Shanti Devi and another v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(2) SLR 259 : 1999(2) SCT 575 (P&H).
17.
By applying the ratio of the above judgments to the facts of this case which show that the appellants have been in continuous service for almost one decade, we deem it proper to nullify the direction given by the learned Single Judge quashing their appointments.
In the result, the appeal is allowed and the order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Consequently, the writ petition filed by respondent No. 3 shall stand dismissed.
Appeal allowed.