In response to a requisition for employment of drivers, the employment exchange sponsored the names of the petitioners.
Apart therefrom, an employment advertisement was otherwise issued in the newspaper issue dated 11102003.
The petitioners were appointed.
The vacancies to be filled up were announced to be contractual and for a duration of 89 days or till the arrival of a regular appointee, whichever was earlier.
The term of the contract of the petitioners came to be extended from time to time.
The last extension was granted for the period 10.4.2006 to 7.7.2006.
Their term of contract was not extended any further and their services were terminated as no longer required.
2.
The petitioners filed Original Application No. 276/CH/2006 before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the "Tribunal").
While making a grievance of the termination of their services, the petitioners applied for the grant of a direction by the Tribunal that they should be allowed to continue against certain vacant sanctioned posts, which were still available with the Chandigarh Transport Undertaking.
3.
The Tribunal declined to interfere on a finding that the petitioners having been appointed on contractual basis, could neither claim a right (to continue) under the law nor had they been able to evidence a corresponding duty cast upon the respondents to allow them to continue in service.
4.
The respondents have taken up a categorical stance that the appointment of the petitioners on contractual basis had been made against the vacancies reserved for SC/OBC and that it had been announced at the time of appointment itself that the duration of contractual appointment would be for 89 days or till the arrival of the regular appointees, whichever was earlier.
Regular appointees have indeed arrived on the scene.
The petitioners had to make way for the regular appointees.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners raised a plea that the petitioners are entitled to continue in service as the entire procedure, which is otherwise followed for making a regular appointment, had been followed and the petitioners cannot be said to be back-door entrants.
In order to draw sustenance for the advocated plea, the learned counsel pointed out that a regular employment advertisement was issued in the press, a requisition was sent to the employment exchange and they were subjected to drug test, driving test and also the medical test before they came to be appointed.
Yet another plea raised in the context is that a large number of vacancies are even presently available and the respondents cannot be allowed to replace the petitioners by any other set of contractual employees.
At the same time, a plea raised in the alternative was that the petitioner may be allowed to continue against the available vacancies till the induction into the service of (further) regular appointees.
6.
In view of the fact that the petitioners had been otherwise concededly appointed on contractual basis, for a fixed duration and the terms and conditions of their appointment categorically informed them that their services would be liable to be terminated as soon as the indication duration is over or the arrival of the regular appointees, whichever was earlier, it is not open to the petitioners to make a presentation for compulsive continuation of service just because the procedure meant for regular appointments had been followed.
The following of that procedure for induction into the public service, be it even for a fixed period and/or contractual basis, would at best indicate a desirable inclination on the part of the competent authority to adopt a transparent attitude and to afford equal opportunity to whosoever was desirous of entry into the public service.
The plea raised by the petitioners (in the alternative) about the availability of a number of unfilled vacancies was categorically denied in the written statement.
The petitioners did not join issue on that factual averment by filing a rejoinder.
In view of that proven factual position, the request made by the petitioners in the alternative ceases to be any legal relevance or effect.
7.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners upon Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 100 : 1998(4) RSJ 708 is misconceived.
In that case, the petitioners (who had been appointed on ad hoc basis and whose services were terminated on the arrival of the regular appointees) were relieved in March 1997.
Inspite thereof, they were thereafter informed by post that they should come and join against vacant posts as there was sufficient workload and their services were needed.
It was in response to that offer that the petitioners in the Civil Writ Petition had joined duties.
However, this time there were appointed on contractual basis on a consolidated salary.
The petitioners in that matter filed a writ petition for quashing the nature of their appointment and had also laid a claim for the grant of a regular pay scale.
The ruling aforementioned was rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in the light of the facts which are completely alien to the matter before us.
As against the own plea of the employer in Shamsher Singh's case (supra) regarding the availability of vacancies against which the petitioners were invited to join, the respondents in the present matter have denied the availability of any vacant post.
In that view of things, the view taken by this Court in Shamsher Singh's case (supra) does not buttress the advocated view.
8.
Though there can be no dispute with the expounded proposition that contractual employees cannot be replaced by another set of contractual employees, that established legal proposition does not advance petitioners' plea in any manner in the present case in view of the proven position that the petitioners have been concededly replaced by regular appointees and there are presently no further vacancies for employment.
However, if the respondents wish to engage drivers on contractual basis at a future date, they shall be legally bound to offer that employment to the petitioners before us in the first instance.
9.
For the foregoing reasons and subject to the observations made above in the preceding para, this writ petition is held to be without any force.
The view obtained and the line of reasoning adopted by the Tribunal is in order and is affirmed.
10.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.