Vijinder Jain, C.J.
- The present appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent is directed against judgment dated 2122007 vide which the learned single Judge, while disposing of CWP No. 13284 of 2001 filed by respondent No. 1- H.P.S.
Chawla, directed the appellant along with respondent No. 2 to release the requisite benefits to him without delay and within a period of two months and in the event of their failure to do so, he was held entitled to get back those benefits with interest at the rate of 6% per annum with effect from 1922000, i.e. from the date of the order passed by the Appellate Authority.
2.
Respondent No. 1 was alleged to have committed certain irregularities, as a result of which, after the disciplinary proceedings had confirmed the allegations against him, he was directed to be removed from the appellant's service by the competent authority.
However, while removing him from service, it was observed by the disciplinary authority that his removal shall not be disqualification for his future employment and that he will be eligible to receive terminal benefits as are admissible to him.
Since the benefits flowing from the order of the disciplinary authority were not being awarded to him, respondent No. 1 filed the aforesaid writ petition which has been disposed of in the manner indicated hereinabove.
3.
The appellant, which was the principal employer of respondent No. 1, has filed the present appeal for setting aside the impugned judgment.
4.
Shri RS Mittal, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellant has contended that as per Regulation 22(1) of the UCO Bank (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995 (for short, `the Regulations'), resignation or dismissal or removal or termination of service of an employee of the bank shall entail forfeiture of his entire past service and consequently, he shall not qualify for pensionary benefits.
He further contended that similarly, Rule 10 of the Employees Gratuity Fund Rules (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules') framed by the appellant in exercise of the powers conferred by the provisions of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 provides for forfeiture of whole of the gratuity payable to an employee if his services have been terminated on account of any misconduct resulting in financial loss or damage to the Bank or for any act involving moral turpitude.
5.
On the strength of the aforesaid provisions, learned counsel urged that the judgment of the learned Single Judge is liable to be set aside as the services of respondent No. 1 were terminated on account of grave misconduct.
6.
We have thoughtfully considered the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant and have perused the whole record, but are unable to agree with him.
Regulation 22(1) of the Regulations and Rule 10(b) of the Rules, which are relevant for the purpose of this appeal are reproduced below :-  "Regulation 22(1) of the Regulations  22.
Forfeiture of Service.
- (1) Resignation or dismissal or removal or termination of an employee from the service of the Bank shall entail forfeiture of his entire past service and consequently shall not qualify for pensionary benefits.
Rule 10 of the Rules  10(b) The gratuity payable to an employee shall be wholly forfeited if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act which constituted an offence involving moral turpitude provided that, such offence is committed by him in the course of his employment."
7.
The disciplinary authority of the appellant-Bank had passed the order of removal of respondent No. 1 from service, but had taken a benign view of the situation by observing that "he should be given the retiral benefits along with the penalty of removal from the service.
This will give respite to him for putting his life in the dreary world.
I feel it certain that he deserves the penalty of termination from service....." Thereafter, it went on to impose the penalty by ordering his removal, but also by observing that it shall not be a disqualification for his future employment and that he shall be entitled to the terminal benefits.
8.
The appellant as a principal employer did not agitate against the aforesaid observations of the disciplinary authority and accepted the verdict.
Once respondent No. 1 came to the Court for getting the order implemented, then it did not lie in the mouth of the appellant to take up the plea that the Regulations debarred the grant of retiral benefits to an employee who is removed or terminated from service.
The disciplinary authority consciously took a benign decision and turned a blind eye to the Regulations, which was accepted by the appellant and consequently, it cannot now rake up the plea as aforesaid to deny the benefits to respondent No. 1.
Moreover, the perusal of the impugned judgment shows that these contentions have been noticed and adequately met and we do not find any infirmity therein.
Consequently, we find no merit in the appeal which is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.