Counsel for the respondents wants to place on record a civil miscellaneous application.
The application is not numbered, therefore, cannot be taken on the record.
The respondents are at liberty to file the application in the office.
2.
The petitioner is claiming relief of annual increments for the service rendered by her.
3.
The husband of the petitioner expired during service on 2111986.
He was working as Chowkidar with the respondent-Board.
Under the policy of the Board, the petitioner was appointed as Sewadar in the pay-scale of Rs. 300-5-350-10- 430 on compassionate grounds vide appointment Memo No. 68981 dated 1151987.
Unfortunately, one Surjit Kaur alias Amarjit Kaur filed a complaint to the respondents that she is the widow of the deceased and, therefore, the retiral benefits be released to her.
The respondents issued a charge-sheet to the petitioner on 16.1.1990.
On completion of inquiry, the petitioner has been exonerated by the Inquiry Officer.
The inquiry report is dated 1291992.
The respondents have not taken any further action on the inquiry report.
On the other hand, without any justification, the petitioner has not been granted the benefit of annual increments since 151989.
The petitioner was reinstated subject to the final decision taken on the basis of the inquiry report.
Aggrieved by the inaction of the respondents, the petitioner submitted a representation for the release of the annual increments.
The petitioner also brought to the notice of the respondents that she had filed Civil Revision No. 5833 of 2002 in this Court, which has been admitted and an interim order has been granted in her favour.
She has been receiving only initial pay for the last 17 years.
This representation was submitted on 2162004.
The respondents rejected the claim of the petitioner by order dated 8.7.2004 mentioning that she had been suspended on 27121989 and reinstated on 1011991.
It is accepted that no annual increments had been granted to her after 151989.
Since no decision had been taken in the case of the petitioner, the increments have not been released, which shall be released on the final decision of the Board.
4.
In response to the notice of motion, the respondents have filed reply.
It is stated that in the proceedings under Section 372 of the Hindu Succession Act, a Succession Certificate has been granted by the Competent Authority in favour of Surjit Kaur alias Amarjit Kaur.
Against that, the appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed by the Appellate Court.
It is, however, admitted that the Civil Revision filed by the petitioner is admitted.
Since the inquiry is still pending against the petitioner, no order for release of annual increments has been passed.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the increments are due to the petitioner on the basis of satisfactory service rendered by her since her appointment.
The dispute between her and Surjit Kaur alias Amarjit Kaur with regard to the succession for the retiral benefits of the deceased is a wholly independent cause of action.
In any event, in the domestic inquiry, it has been held that the petitioner is the widow of the deceased.
Therefore, the findings recorded in the domestic inquiry cannot be disregarded by the respondents.
6.
Mr. Saini submits that the findings given in the inquiry would only become final if the same are approved by the Board.
Since the Board has not taken any decision, the inquiry proceedings cannot be said to be finalised.
7.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8.
We are of the opinion that injustice has been done to the petitioner.
In the domestic inquiry, it has been held that the petitioner is the rightful legal heir of the deceased.
The petitioner has been in service of the respondents since 1151987.
In such circumstances, the respondents were duty bound to consider the claim of the petitioner for grant of annual increments on the basis of her performance.
The increments could not have been denied only on the ground that the inquiry proceedings have not been finalised.
Furthermore, we are unable to appreciate the delay in consideration of the inquiry report by the Board for the last 14 years.
We are of the opinion that the petitioner has been deprived of the benefit of increments without any justification.
9.
The petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the increments of the petitioner in accordance with the applicable rules.
Let the increments be released to the petitioner within a period of one month from today.
Petition allowed.