PS Patwalia, J - At the outset learned counsel for the appellant submit that he would restrict his claim for payment of service element of disability pension only.
2.
The substantial question of law that therefore arises for consideration in this regular second appeal is as to whether the plaintiff is entitled to payment of service element of disability pension.
3.
The appellant had filed a suit claiming disability pension stating that he had been discharged from the Army on March 14, 1962 after he contacted the disease of Tuberculosis.
He was granted disability pension which was, however, stopped after April 12, 1980 on the ground that a Resurvey Medical Board found that he was cured of the disease and the disability was re- assessed at less than 20%.
The suit was instituted on May 2, 1992 claiming disability pension.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellant states that he would restrict his claim to the service elements of disability pension only.
For this relief he relies upon a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12311 of 1996, decided on February 27, 1997 `Amarjit Singh v. Union of India and others' and another judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2611 of 2003, decided on September 6, 2006 : 2007(1) SCT 162 (P&H), `Dalip Singh v. Union of India and others'.
It is submitted that his case for receipt of service elements of disability pension is fully covered by the aforesaid judgments.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for Union of India could not distinguish the said judgments.
However, he states that arrears of pension be restricted to 38 months prior to the filing of the suit.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the claim of the appellant for grant of service element of disability pension is fully covered by the aforesaid two judgments.
The question of law posed as to whether the plaintiff is entitled to payment of service elements of disability pension is therefore answered in favour of the appellant-plaintiff.
Keeping in view the aforesaid judgments the respondents are directed to pay to the appellant-plaintiff service element of disability pension.
The pension would be payable from a period of 38 months prior to the date of institution of the suit which was instituted on May 2, 1992.
The arrears of pension shall carry interest at the rate of 8% per annum.
The arrears along with interest shall be released to the appellant-plaintiff within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before the respondents by the appellant-plaintiff.
Petition allowed.