Vijender Jain, C.J.
(Oral) - Learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that the case of the petitioner in the instant petition was similar to that of Ex. Constable Balbir Singh, as he had also been dismissed from service vide order dated May 28, 1990 and that the statutory appeal had been filed before the Appellate Authority, which was also dismissed vide order dated March 21, 1991 and further the revision petition filed against the same was also dismissed vide order dated December 26, 1991.
The aforesaid orders had been challenged by way of invoking extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India vide CWP No. 4266 of 1992 (Ex. Constable Nirmal Singh v. State of Punjab and others), which has been dismissed vide order dated December 8, 1998.
This judgment has been challenged by way of the instant appeal.
2.
The aforesaid Balbir Singh had also challenged the order of his dismissal vide CWP No. 4584 of 1992, which was allowed vide judgment dated September 2, 1996 by a learned Single Judge.
This judgment, which has been placed on record, appended as Annexure P-7, was never ever challenged by the State Government.
3.
Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the case of the instant appellant is verbatim as the charges in both the cases were similar.
Upon the aforesaid contention, a direction had been issued vide order dated 30.11.2006 to the learned Additional Advocate General for seeking instructions as to whether the charges in both the cases were similar and whether the appeal had been filed or not.
4.
Learned Additional Advocate General states that the charges are identical in both the cases and that no appeal had been filed against the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Constable Balbir Singh.
However, he has stated that the writ petition filed by the appellant in the instant appeal had been dismissed as the learned Single Judge passed the order in favour of the State.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book and the judgment dated December 8, 1998 rendered by the learned Single Judge.
We have also perused the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge in re : Balbir Singh's case (supra) wherein it has been categorically observed that the authorities made simple reference to the activities of the petitioner and the so-called satisfaction of the authority has been found in regard to the activities of the delinquent official, which warranted his dismissal from service.
There is no indication as to what were the activities of the delinquent official nor it had been shown as to on what dates the authority came to the conclusion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
Resultantly, the impugned order has been vitiated on the ground of total non-application of mind and absence of any basis for exercising powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
It has also been held that the orders passed by the Appellate Authority and the revisional authorities are merely orders of affirming the orders, which cannot be held to be legal orders.
Resultantly, it has been held that the orders are not sustainable under law and, therefore, deserve to be quashed.
However, liberty has been granted for holding inquiry against the delinquent official for any act of misconduct.
It has also been observed that such decision shall be taken by the authority within three months of the receipt of certified copy of the order.
It has also been observed that if the competent authority decides to hold inquiry then the question of payment of salary to the petitioner from the date of dismissal to the date of the order passed by the learned Single Judge, would be dependent upon the outcome of such inquiry.
If no such inquiry is ordered to be held or they fail to initiate a fresh inquiry within the time framed i.e. three months, then the delinquent official would become entitled to payment of salary for the aforesaid intervening period.
A rider has been provided that the delinquent official in that situation would submit an affidavit before the competent authority that he was not gainfully employed by disclosing the source of sustenance during the intervening period.
6.
The orders in the instant case passed against the appellant suffer from the similar vice.
We are afraid, learned Single Judge has not considered this aspect at all.
The perusal of the impugned order dated May 28, 1990, also does not disclose any fact, which culminated into forming an opinion that it was not possible to hold an inquiry against the appellant nor the order disclosed as to what kind of activities of the appellant warranted his dismissal from service.
Similarly, the Appellate Authority, has virtually reiterated the factual status mentioned by the controlling authority.
The revisional authority has also acted in a similar fashion as is indicative from the orders appended as Annexure P-3 and P-5 respectively.
We are in respectful agreement with the judgment rendered by the learned Single Judge in Balbir Singh's case (supra).
Thus, the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated December 8, 1998, in the instant appeal is set aside.
The petition is disposed of with the similar directions i.e. the petition is allowed and the orders dated August 28, 1990, March 21, 1991 and December 26, 1991, copy Annexure P-1, P-3 and P-5 respectively, are quashed.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner in service forthwith.
The liberty is granted to the respondents for taking a decision for holding regular inquiry against the petitioner-appellant for the act of misconduct during the said period and that in that regard the decision for holding the inquiry shall be taken by the competent authority within three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
If such decision is taken within the aforesaid period the matter relating to the payment of salary to the petitioner-appellant from the date of termination of service i.e. 2851990 upto the date of the instant order would depend upon the outcome of such inquiry.
In case, it is decided not to hold the inquiry or the respondents fail to take any such decision in that regard within the aforesaid period, the petitioner-appellant would become entitled to the payment of the salary for the interregnum, as indicated above.
The petitioner-appellant would be obligated to submit an affidavit before the competent authority after the expiry of the aforesaid period or if the favourable decision is taken by the competent authority for not holding the inquiry, whichever is earlier, an affidavit would be filed specifically indicating that he was not gainfully employed and that a disclosure statement shall be made by him in the affidavit vis-a-vis the source of sustenance during the interregnum.
The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
Appeal allowed.