MM Kumar, J - The prayer made by the petitioner who is a retiree is that the charge-sheet dated 30102003 (Annexure P-1), the order dated 2172004 (Annexure P-3) imposing a ten per cent cut upon his pension and the letter dated 9112004 (Annexure P-4) appointing an Enquiry Officer for holding regular departmental enquiry be quashed.
It is appropriate to mention that learned counsel for the respondent has stated that the order dated 2172004 (Annexure P-3) imposing a cut of 10 per cent on the pension of the petitioner was passed without holding enquiry and the same has been withdrawn on 382005 without prejudice to the rights of the respondents to hold enquiry against the petitioner.
Therefore, the legality of orders dated 30102003 (Annexure P-1) and order dated 9112004 (Annexure P-4) survive for our consideration.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Draftsman in the erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board which was later on separated in various Nigams.
The petitioner was allocated to HVPN.
He retired on 3061997 from the post of Assistant Executive Engineer from the office of respondent No. 2 on attaining the age of superannuation.
After more than six years of his retirement, the Superintending Engineer, respondent No. 2 issued him a charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 read with Regulation 7 of the Haryana State Electricity Board Regulation, 1990.
In the summary of charges the following acts of omission and commission are alleged to have been committed by the petitioner :  "1.
That you did not carry out proper inspection of sub-letting of TL Nos. 98 to 107 during the period May 1994 to July, 1994.
2.
That you even did not properly supervise the information of bulbs in the piles and casting of piles upto proper length.
3.
That you did not fill up the concrete control register of TL Nos. 98 to 107 properly and left in blank.
4.
That due to above negligence on your part the Nigam suffered a financial loss of Rs. 50 lacs (approx).
The above acts of omission and commission on the part of Shri OP Kharb constitute a grave misconduct on your part and warranting strict action against you."
3.
The petitioner sent his reply to the aforementioned charges on 13112003 (Annexure P-2) by taking the stand that under Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II no disciplinary proceedings could be initiated against an employee after his retirement if the event is more than four years old.
He also submitted that the charges in the impugned charge-sheet related to the period prior to 3051998 and therefore no disciplinary action was to be initiated against him.
His reply was considered but it was concluded by the respondents that the petitioner was to ensure to get the work done as per design and quality but he failed to carry out the proper inspection of the infrastructure.
It was concluded further that he failed to properly supervise the formation of bulbs in the piles and casting of piles upto proper length.
The towers failure was due to negligence on the part of the petitioner.
It was further concluded that the officer has caused financial loss to the Nigam by his negligence and cut of 10 per cent in his pension was imposed.
4.
The aforementioned order dated 2172004 (Annexure P-3) was passed without holding any enquiry or appointing anyone as enquiry officer.
On 9112004, respondent authorities issued another letter appointing Shri SS Gakhar, Superintending Engineer Office of the Chief Engineer, HVPN as Enquiry Officer to conduct a regular departmental enquiry in respect of the charge-sheet dated 30102003 (Annexure P-1).
On 6122004 (Annexure P-5), the petitioner through his counsel served a legal notice.
When the matter came up for consideration on 5122005 we have passed an interim order directing that the enquiry proceedings may continue but no final order be passed.
5.
In the written statement, the stand taken by the respondents is that the order dated 2172004 imposing a cut of 10 per cent upon the pension of the petitioner has not been acted upon as the order was passed without holding any departmental enquiry against the petitioner.
It is for this reason that on 9112004 (Annexure P-4) an enquiry officer was appointed to hold a regular departmental enquiry.
According to the respondents, the petition is premature and it could not be concluded as to whether the petitioner would be exonerated or is likely to be found guilty of the charges.
In respect of the provision contained in Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, (as applicable to State of Haryana) the stand of the respondents is that they are entitled to withhold or withdraw pension or any part thereof in respect of an event which might have taken place not more than four years prior to the date of institution of proceedings.
There is thus no dispute that proceedings could be instituted only in respect of an event which has occurred within four years preceding the date of institution of proceedings.
The claim however made is that ten number of towers of the Nissang-Kaithal Line fell down on 162000.
An inspection report of the Committee was submitted on 2172000 retirement of the petitioner and the charge-sheet issued on 30102003 must be held within time.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, perusing the writ petition as well as the stand of the respondents we are of the view that this petition deserve to succeed.
It is admitted position that the petitioner had retired on 3061997.
A charge-sheet against the petitioner could have been issued in respect of an event which has taken place four years preceding the institution of such proceedings.
The aforementioned legal position would be explicit from the bare reading of Rule 22(b) of Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, (as applicable to the State of Haryana) and the same reads as under :  "2.2(b) The Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if the pensioner is found in departmental or judicial proceedings, to have been guilty of grave misconduct or to have caused pecuniary loss to Government by misconduct or negligence, during his service including service rendered on re-employment after retirement : Provided that - (1) Such departmental proceedings, if instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement, or during his re-employment shall after the final retirement of the officer, he deemed to be a proceeding under this rule and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by which it was commenced in the same manner as if the officer had continued in service; (2) (sic) officer was on duty either before retirement or during his re- employment : (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government; (ii) shall be in respect of any event which took place not more than four years before the institution of such proceedings; and (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such place or places as the Government may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made : (3) Such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was on duty either before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall be instituted in respect of an event as is mentioned in clause (ii) of proviso (2); and (4) The Public Service Commission should be consulted before final orders are passed.
Explanation.
- For the purposes of this rule - (1) department proceedings shall be deemed to have been instituted when the charges framed against the pensioner are issued to him or, if the officer has been placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such date; and (2) Judicial proceedings shall be deemed to have been instituted.
(i) in the case of criminal proceedings, on the date on which the complaint is made or a challan is submitted to a criminal court; and (ii) in the case of civil proceeding, on the date on which the plaint is presented or, as the case may be, an application is (sic) 7.
A perusal of the aforementioned Rule shows that the respondents could order the recovery from pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the government if a pensioner is found in a department or judicial proceedings to be guilty of grave misconduct or he had caused pecuniary loss to the government by mis-conduct or negligence during his service provided that such an enquiry has been instituted during the period when the officer was on duty.
However, if such an enquiry has not been instituted while the officer was on duty and before his retirement then it cannot be instituted in respect of an event which took place more than four years preceding the institution of such proceedings.
In other words, an enquiry can only be instituted in respect of an event which has occurred four years before the date of the institution.
The explanation appended to Rule 22(b)(4) further clarifies that departmental proceedings would be deemed to have been instituted when the charges framed are issued to him.
In other words, the date of institution of departmental proceedings would be the date when the charge-sheet is issued to the petitioner.
8.
On the basis of the aforementioned principle laid down in Rule 22(b) it has to be concluded that the charges are more than four years old from the date the charge-sheet was issued.
It is evident from the facts that the charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner on 30112003 in respect of events commencing from May, 1994 to July, 1994 or at best of the year 1998.
On the date of issuance of charge-sheet all those allegations were in respect of an event which has occurred more than four years ago.
The principle adopted in explanation to Rule 22(b)(4) is a wholesome principle which has backing of judicial precedents.
In the case of Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : 1991(4) SCC 109 the aforementioned principle has been applied by Hon'ble the Supreme Court to a case of promotion by holding that promotion cannot be deferred to an employee on the basis of mere pendency of departmental proceedings unless a charge-sheet has been issued.
It is only after the issuance of charge-sheet that disciplinary proceedings could be deemed to be pending.
Accordingly, the issuance of charge-sheet dated 30102003 (Annexure P-1) and the appointment of Enquiry Officer on 9112004 (Annexure P-4) appointing Enquiry Officer for holding a regular departmental enquiry against the petitioner along with consequent proceedings of the enquiry officer are hereby quashed.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 30102003 (Annexure P-1) issuing charge-sheet to the petitioner and the order dated 9112004 (Annexure P-4) appointing Enquiry Officer for holding a regular departmental enquiry against the petitioner along with consequent proceedings of the enquiry officer are hereby quashed.
Petition allowed.