KS Garewal, J - This petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by Jaspal Singh seeking quashing of order dated June 27, 2006 (Annexure P-2) whereby his services had been terminated and consequently direction has been sought that he should be taken back in service since his conviction had been set aside.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that Jaspal Singh joined the Punjab State Electricity Board as a Telephonist on May 10, 1977 and was sent on deputation to Bhakra Beas Management Board.
On February 11, 2001 he was promoted as Sub Station Attendant with effect from January 4, 1999.
3.
On February 17, 1991 at 530 pm at Power Colony, Anandpur Sahib, an incident took place in which one Gulzar Singh's wife was allegedly abused and punched by four persons including Jaspal Singh.
When Gulzar Singh reached the spot all the four including Jaspal Singh abused him as well.
Gulzar Singh and his wife were medically examined.
Gulzar Singh approached the police but when no action was taken he filed a criminal complaint against the four attackers and the two medical officers.
The learned Chief Judicial Magistrate did not summon the medical officers but summoned the four accused including Jaspal Singh.
After trial, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ropar, vide order dated February 25, 2005, convicted Jaspal Singh and one Tarsem Kaur under Sections 325/323 IPC and Jaspal Singh was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months and to pay fine of Rs. 500/-.
Jaspal Singh was awarded other lesser sentence as well.
However, Tarsem Kaur was released on probation.
4.
Jaspal Singh and Tarsem Kaur filed an appeal against the order of the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ropar, which was allowed on August 5, 2006 by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Ropar and both Jaspal Singh and Tarsem Kaur were acquitted of the charges framed against them.
5.
Long after the petitioner had been convicted, order dated June 27, 2006 was passed whereby the services of the petitioner were terminated on the basis of his conviction.
This order is annexed with the petition as Annexure P-2.
The services were terminated under Rule 14(1) of the Punjab State Electricity Board (P&A) Regulation 1979.
It was a few weeks after termination order that the petitioner was acquitted on August 5, 1006.
The judgment of the learned Additional Sessions Judge is annexed as Annexure P-3.
6.
In the written-statement filed by the Executive Engineer, Punjab State Electricity Board, Anandpur Sahib certain preliminary objections were taken, in which it was pleaded that mere conviction of an employee was enough to terminate his services.
The petitioner did not avail the remedy of appeal against the impugned order which was provided under Regulation 14 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1971 and had received the benefit of doubt, therefore, his claim for reinstatement was not tenable.
On merit, the petitioner's case was controverted and contents of the preliminary objections were reiterated.
Learned counsel also relied upon certain judgments of the Supreme Court in which employees had been denied backwages after they were reinstated in service on the basis of conviction being set aside.
These cases are not really germane to the issue which has arisen in the present case.
7.
Jaspal Singh faced trial and was convicted on February 25, 2005.
It took his department sixteen months to terminate his services on June 27, 2006.
However, five weeks thereafter the conviction was quashed and the petitioner was acquitted on August 5, 2006.
This is a clear case which deserves to be allowed.
Furthermore, the allegations against the petitioner of beating up a couple were not regarding something which he had done during the course of his official duty or which could be said to be official misconduct.
It is not necessary to go into the details of the dispute but suffice it to say that it was a private matter which was raked up by Gulzar Singh against the petitioner.
The matter went to trial and after the petitioner was convicted, he appealed and was acquitted.
It is true that the petitioner had no order of stay of conviction in his favour when his appeal was admitted on August 28, 2005.
On that day only sentence was suspended but even so the impact of conviction was not felt for another one year thereafter.
For the above reasons, the petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner with full back wages with immediate effect.
Petition allowed.