We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners have prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the orders dated 3082005 passed by the Chairman, Punjab School Education Board rejecting the claim of the petitioners for counting their service rendered with Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar and Punjab University, Ludhiana (hereinafter referred to as "the University"), as part of the qualifying service, for the purposes of pension.
3.
The petitioners joined service as Clerks in the University on the following dates :-  Petitioner No.  Name  Name of University  Date of joining as Clerk.
1.
Om Parkash Bansal  Punjab University,, Chandigarh  24.51970 2.
Gamdur Singh  Punjab University,, Chandigarh  2.6.1969 3.
Sardul Singh  Guru Nanak Dev University,, Amritsar  21101970 4.
Surinder Singh  Punjab Agricultural University,, Ludhiana  1061970 4.
The petitioners who were working on regular basis, had been contributing Contributory Provident Fund (in short "CPF") as at the relevant time, the service in the University was not pensionable.
However, subsequently, the Pension Rules/Regulations have been framed by the University and the service in the University has been made pensionable and now the service in the University is pensionable.
5.
Subsequently, all the petitioners applied in response to advertisement dated 811978 issued by the Board for filling up various posts.
The petitioners were selected and appointed on the posts of Assistant.
The petitioners were confirmed as Assistants by order dated 12.11.1979 Endorsement No. 8866-PSEB-BC-79/39 dated 711980.
The petitioners had been contributing CPF under the Punjab School Education Board (Provident Fund) Regulations, 1970, as at the relevant time, the service in the Board was not pensionable.
The service in the Board, however, became pensionable under the Punjab School Education Board (Employees Pension, Provident Fund and Gratuity) Regulations, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as "the 1991 Regulations") which were framed by the Board and came into force w.e.f.
141991.
All the employees of the Board who were employed after the inception of the Board were asked to give option to be governed by the Pension Regulations or the Provident Fund Regulations.
All the petitioners opted to be governed by the Pension Regulations.
In due course, they were promoted on the posts of Superintendent and Assistant Secretary.
The petitioners retired from the Board on the post of Assistant Secretary on the following dates :-  Sr. No.  Name  Designation  Date of retirement 1.
Om Parkash Bansal  Assistant Secretary  28.2.2005 2.
Gamdur Singh  Assistant Secretary  30.9.2005 3.
Sardul Singh  Assistant Secretary  30.6.2005 4.
Surinder Singh  Assistant Secretary  31.7.2004 6.
At the time of retirement, the petitioners were in the pay scale of Rs. 7880-11669 plus Rs. 1,000/-.
The order of retirement passed in the case of petitioner No. 1 is attached as Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
Since all the petitioners had been issued identical orders of appointment as well as retirement, the petitioners have only attached orders (Annexures P-3 and P-7), respectively, both pertaining to petitioner No. 1.
All the petitioners have retired from service after serving the Board for a period of more than 26 years.
Their experience of working as Clerk in the University was for the period of more than seven years.
Thus, the total service of the petitioners was more than 33 years at the time of retirement.
The petitioners are entitled to the pension under Regulation 6 of 1991 Regulations.
Regulation 51 of the 1991 Regulations defines qualifying service as under :-  "(i) "Qualifying service" generally includes all periods spent on duty without interruption and all periods of leave in which leavy salary is paid."
Regulation 6 was amended by the Board on 2631994 w.e.f.
141991 which reads as follows :-  "An employee shall be eligible to add to his service qualifying for superannuation pension (but not for any other pension) the actual period not exceeding one fourth of the length of his service or the actual period by which his age at the time of recruitment exceeded twenty five years or a period of five years, whichever is less, if the post to which he is appointed is one :- (a) for which post-graduate research or specialized qualification, or experience in scientific technology or professional field is essential.
(b) to which candidates of more than twenty five years of age are normally recruited; (c) for which special qualification and experience is required at the time of recruitment.
The experience so prescribed shall be counted in full towards qualifying service : Provided that this concession shall not be admissible to an employee whose actual qualifying service at the time of retirement is less than 10 years in the Board."
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the respondents have wrongly not given benefit to the petitioners of the service rendered in the University on the post of Clerk prior to their selection and appointment on the post of Assistant in the Board.
The orders passed by the respondents on 3082005 are liable to be quashed.
Again identical orders have been passed in the case of all the petitioners, and therefore, the petitioners have only attached the order passed in the case of petitioner No. 1 which is appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-12.
Learned counsel submits that on a combined reading of Regulation 5(1) and 6(c), the petitioners would be entitled to the grant of pension on the basis of entire period of service i.e. the period of service in the University together with the period of service rendered in the Board.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has relied on an earlier decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (SS Nijjar, J) was a member, in the case of Harlal Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 2004(4) SCT 88.
Learned counsel also submits that against the aforesaid judgment, the respondents-Board had filed Special Leave Petition CC No. 6333 of 2005 before the Supreme Court which has been dismissed by order dated 15.7.2005.
8.
Mr. Kanwaljit Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submits that the petitioners cannot be granted the benefit of service rendered in the University as the benefit of Regulation 6 could only be given to the employees who came to the Board on transfer or deputation and are subsequently absorbed in the Board.
The Regulation would not apply in the case of the petitioners who are directly recruited on the post of Assistant.
Furthermore, according to the learned counsel, the petitioners are disentitled to the concession in view of the proviso to Regulation 6.
Mr. Kanwaljit Singh submits that the aforesaid judgment rendered in the case of Harlal Singh (supra) would not be applicable in this case as the petitioner therein had come to the Board on deputation and was subsequently absorbed in the service of the Board.
9.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
It is not denied by the respondents that the petitioners are entitled to pension under the Regulations.
The only question is as to whether the petitioners are entitled to add the entire service on the posts, on which the pension and retiral dues are to be computed.
It is not disputed that earlier the petitioners had been serving in the two Universities since 1969- 1970.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners were directly appointed on regular selection pursuant to the advertisement dated 811978.
They joined the posts of Clerks in the years 1969-1970.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners are regular/confirmed employees of the Board.
They were recruited in the Board on the basis of the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement published on 811976 which were as under :-  "(4) Assistants (Rs. 225-500) Qualifications : Graduate of a recognized University with at least 7 years service as a Clerk in a Govt. department or Semi-Govt./Autonomous Organisation."
10.
A perusal of the aforesaid qualification makes it abundantly clear that the petitioners were required to possess the experience of seven years as a Clerk in a Government department or some government/autonomous organization.
Without these qualifications, the petitioners would not have been eligible for appointment on the post of Assistant.
Therefore, the experience on the post of Clerk was an integral part of the essential qualifications.
The petitioners would, therefore, clearly be entitled to the benefit of service rendered by them on the post of Clerk to be included in the qualifying service rendered by them in the Board for the purpose of pension.
We are unable to accept the submission of Mr. Kanwaljit Singh that the petitioners would not be entitled to the concession in view of the Proviso to Regulation 6(c).
A perusal of the aforesaid proviso makes it abundantly clear that the benefit of the concession under Regulation 6(c) shall not be admissible to an employee whose actual qualifying service at the time of retirement is less than 10 years in the Board.
In the present case, all the petitioners have more than 26 years of qualifying service in the Board prior to retirement.
We, therefore, see no justification in the denial of the benefit of service rendered by the petitioners in the two Universities for the purposes of pension.
11.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition and quash the impugned orders dated 3082005 and direct the respondents to re-fix the retiral benefits of the petitioners.
Consequential benefits be released to the petitioners within a period of two months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.