VK Bali, J (Oral) - Written statement on behalf of the respondents has been filed in Court today.
Copy whereof has been handed-over to counsel opposite.
CWP No. 2524 of 2004  The only question involved in this case is as to whether the petitioner answers the requisite requirements of minimum height for recruitment as Constable in the CRPF.
While issuing notice of motion on 2622004, following order was passed :-  "Notice of motion returnable today.
Mr. MS Guglani, Addl.
CGSC, who is present in Court, accepts notice on behalf of the respondents.
A copy of the petition has been handed-over to him.
Counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner is also prepared to submit for height measurement before the Medical Officer of this High Court.
On 1512003, the Ist Division Bench had ordered the remeasurement of the petitioner in CWP No. 463 of 2003.
2.
We follow the same course.
We direct that the height of the petitioner be measured by Dr. Manjit Singh, Medical Officer, Civil Dispensary, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh.
Dr. Manjit Singh, Medical Officer, is directed to measure the height of the petitioner at 10.00 A.M. on 2722004 and place the height measurement on the record of this case.
To be listed for hearing along with CWP No. 463 of 2003."
A copy of this order, under the signature of the Bench Secretary of this Court, be given to the counsel for the petitioner, to be produced before Mr. Manjit Singh, Medical Officer."
3.
Pursuant to the order passed by this Court, as reproduced above, Dr. Manjit Singh, Medical Officer, Civil Dispensary, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh, has submitted his report.
Same reads thus:-  "Height of Mr. Sanjay, whose signatures are attested below, was measured in High Court Dispensary on 27122004 at 11.30 A.M. and is 167 cm.
(one hundred and sixty seven cm.
only)."
4.
As per medical examination conducted earlier by the authority concerned, the petitioner was found to be of a height of 1645 cm.
thus, short by 005 cm of the prescribed height, i.e., 165 cm.
In view the conflicting reports, one given by the concerned authority and the other by Dr. Manjit Singh, Medical Officer, Civil Dispensary, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh, learned counsel representing the parties jointly state that height of the petitioner may be measured once over again by concerned authority in presence of Dr. Manjit Singh, Medical Officer, by using Standard Measuring Iron Stand.
5.
In view of joint statement made by the learned counsel representing the parties, the petitioner is directed to appear before the concerned authority for height measurement on 1932004 at 145 PM at Civil Dispensary, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh, and if in this exercise, the petitioner is found to be answering requisite requirement of height, he shall be recruited subject to his fitness in other requirements.
Disposed of accordingly.
Disposed of.