AS Naidu, J - The petitioner, widow of one late Bhagaban Pandey, an ex Service man of the Indian Army, has approached this Court being aggrieved by the inaction of the opposite-party authorities in sanctioning and disbursing service pension to her deceased husband and communicating the same to her deceased husband as per letter dated 7th November, 1996, vide Annexure-1 to the Writ application.
The petitioner has prayed to quash the said communication Annexure-1 and direct the opposite party authorities to sanction and disburse pension payable to her deceased husband besides other consequential benefits at par with other pensioner.
2.
According to the petitioner her deceased husband Bhagaban Pandey was enrolled as a Gunner (Cook Special) in the Army Medical Corps on 6th December, 1994 and he worked as such till 18th March, 1956 when he was discharged.
Thereafter once again he was enrolled in the Regiment of Artillery on 17th September, 1958 as a Cook Special (Non-Combatant) and serve the Army till 21st August, 1961 when he was discharged.
According to the petitioner, her husband had rendered a total service of about 18 years and he was entitled to receive pension.
It is averred that from the communication Annexure-1 it is revealed that the authorities have only taken into consideration the period of service from 28th September, 1958 till 30th July, 1964 rendered by the deceased husband and denied him service pension on the ground that he had served the Army only for 5 years 10 months and 16 days and that the minimum qualifying service required to earn service pension is 15 years which he did not have.
The communication Annexure-1 is mainly assailed on the aforesaid ground.
3.
On receiving the Rule a counter-affidavit has been filed by the opposite parties.
In paragraphs 4 and 6 thereof the opposite party-authorities have noted the total service rendered by the deceased husband of the petitioner and have observed that taking into consideration the previous service the total length of service was reckoned as 17 years 1 month and 27 days.
But then a stand has been taken that as it is the mandatory requirement that one must have rendered 20 years, qualifying service for earning service pension in respect of Non-Combatants (Enrolled) as per regulation 145 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
Part-1, the deceased husband of the petitioner was not entitled to receive pension.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and have perused the documents annexed to the Writ application and other documents available on record meticulously.
The averment made by the Petitioner that her deceased husband was enrolled in the Indian Army for different spans and he has served from 6th December, 1944 to 18th March, 1956 and thereafter again from 28th February, 1961 to 30th July, 1964, thus for a total period of near about 18 years is not disputed in the counter-affidavit.
The question that needs determination in this Writ application is whether the deceased husband of the petitioner who had served the Indian Army for more than 17 years was eligible to receive pension and/or other retirement benefits.
The impugned communication Annexure-1 clearly stipulates that the minimum qualifying service required to be rendered to earn service pension is 15 years and therefore the deceased husband of the petitioner was not entitled to receive pension.
5.
Admittedly the deceased husband of the petitioner had served the Indian Army for more than 15 years and therefore the communication Annexure-1 was based on erroneous facts and there was an error apparent on the face of the record.
In the counter-affidavit, however, the opposite parties have taken a stand that the qualifying service required to be rendered is 20 years and not 15 years as wrongly stated.
But then a perusal of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 clearly reveals that different slabs of pension are provided for the Army personnel.
The Regulations further reveal that those who have rendered service for more than 15 years but less than 20 years are also entitled to proportionate pension and other retirement benefits.
6.
In view of the aforesaid clear position, the stand taken by the opposite parties cannot be sustained.
The reasons assigned in Annexure-1 for denying service pension to the deceased husband of the petitioner being that he did not render minimum 15 years of qualifying service being factually not correct, this Court has no hesitation to quash Annexure-1 and direct the opposite party-authorities to reconsider the application filed by the petitioner on 4th November, 1996 and sanction and disburse service pension payable to the ex Serviceman in favour of his widow, the petitioner, within six months from the date of communication of this judgment, and I direct accordingly.
The Writ application is allowed.
Petition allowed.