AK Shrivastava, J - This petition was originally filed before the Madhya Pradesh State Administrative Tribunal at Jabalpur and was registered as OA No. 550/1995.
Since the Tribunal has been abolished, this matter has been received by this Court for its adjudication.
2.
The prayer which has been made by the petitioner in this petition is that he be placed above respondent No. 4 in the gradation list.
3.
The petitioner is serving on the post of Forest Ranger in the department of Forest of State of Madhya Pradesh.
His services are governed by the Rules known as M.P. Class III (Non-Ministerial) Forest Service Recruitment Rules, 1967 (in short `the Rules').
According to the petitioner, there is no provision made under the rules for direct recruitment of the candidates on the post of Forest Ranger.
However, it is prescribed that a selection is to be made by the Committee or the Commission as the case may be for preparing a list for admission of the candidate in Forest Training Colleges to undergo the training of Forest Ranger.
On completion of the training, the candidates are to be given appointment from the date of convocation.
Under Rule 11, it is mentioned that direct recruitment to various posts in the service shall be held at such interval as the Government may from time to time determine.
Sub- Rule (2) prescribes that the direct recruits will be appointed by the appointing authority either after selection or after undergoing prescribed course of training.
Rule 13 speaks about the direct recruitment for the Forest Rangers and according to this rule the direct recruits who would undergo the prescribed course of training in Forest Rangers or Foresters Course, will on completion of training be appointed from the date following the date of convocation according to the merit obtained in the final examination at the college.
4.
It is said that in pursuance to the rules, an advertisement was issued by the State Public Service Commission of Madhya Pradesh inviting the applications from the suitable candidates for their admission in the Forestry Course for the Session 1978-80, a copy of which is placed as Annexure A/1.
The said notification is dated 4th August, 1977.
In para 8 of this advertisement, it was specifically stated that selected candidates will be required to undergo two years training in Forest Ranger Course.
The petitioner in pursuance to this advertisement submitted an application for his selection.
The petitioner had undergone the examination and was declared successful vide Annexure A/3 dated 20th February, 1978 and the name of petitioner has been shown at serial No. 17 of reserve list.
There is a note in the last that the sending of candidates for training out of the reserve list will depend on availability of further seats in training institute.
According to the petitioner after undergoing the training an order of posting was issued posting him at Jabalpur Forest Circle.
The said order was issued on 5-10-1981 (Annexure A/5) by Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, Bhopal.
In this annexure, the name of petitioner is at serial No. 42.
Later on, order of appointment was issued in respect of the petitioner appointing him on the post of Forest Ranger with effect from 1-11-1981, copy of which is Annexure A/6.
5.
It is further case of the petitioner that Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission again issued an advertisement on 18th July, 1978, a copy of which has been placed as Annexure A/7.
According to the petitioner, respondent No. 4 made an application and he was selected for the training for the session 1979-81 which is clear from bare perusal of Annexure A/7.
The Public Service Commission issued Press communication which is Annexure A/8 and the name of respondent No. 4 finds place in it at serial No. 1.
The respondent No. 4 was also sent for training some where in the year 1979.
On completion of the training respondent No. 4 was also appointed as Forest Ranger in the department.
6.
As per the petitioner, he came to know that provisional gradation list showing the seniority of Forest Ranger of the Department as on 1-4-1992 has been circulated and on obtaining the copy of the said gradation list, it came to know to the petitioner that the name of respondent No. 4 has been mentioned at serial No. 859 showing his appointment in the department with effect from 1-5-1980 whereas the name of petitioner has been shown at serial No. 963 showing the date of appointment as on 1-11-1981.
Extract copy of the gradation list has been placed as Annexure A/9.
According to the petitioner on coming to know about these facts while he was serving at Sausor, he made a representation to respondent No. 3 on 22-9-1993 through proper channel, a copy of which is Annexure A/10.
His representation was forwarded vide Annexure A/11 dated 3-11-1993.
Along with this Annexure, according to the petitioner, he submitted all relevant documents for ready reference.
However, the same was rejected on 8-1-1994, a copy of which is Annexure A/12, on the ground that petitioner was sent for training for the period 1979-81 and he was appointed on 1-11-1981 and therefore the question of giving seniority above respondent No. 4 does not arise.
The petitioner thereafter again submitted a detailed representation to respondent No. 2 Principal Chief Conservator of Forest pointing out the irregularities by respondent No. 3 in considering the representation of the petitioner but the same has not yet been decided and is pending for consideration.
According to the petitioner without considering his representation gradation list has been issued by respondent No. 3 showing the position of temporary Forest Ranger as on 1-4-1994 and in this gradation list the same mistake is committed and respondent No. 4 has been shown above petitioner at serial No. 255 whereas the name of petitioner is at serial No. 328, a copy of the extract of the gradation list is annexed as Annexure A/15.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that circulation of the impugned gradation list virtually amounts to the rejection of his representation.
The contention of learned counsel is that since the respondent No. 4 completed the training after him, he cannot be appointed in the year 1980 as he was required to undergo training for two years (1979-81) as envisaged in Annexure A/7 as well as in Annexure A/8 and therefore without completing the mandatory and requisite training respondent No. 4 could not have been appointed in the year 1980.
On these premised submission, it has been put forth by Shri Trivedi, learned counsel for petitioner that petition be allowed and respondent be directed to place petition above respondent No. 4 in the gradation list.
7.
Refuting the submissions and the averments made in the petition, a return has been filed by the respondents.
According to the return, seniority has been rightly given to respondent No. 4 over the petitioner since petitioner was appointed vide order dated 11-3-1982 on the post of Ranger with effect from 1-4-1981.
So far as the applicability of the rules is conceded, though it has been pleaded that they are applicable, but, according to the stand of respondents, the rules are not correctly stated.
However, this fact has not been disputed in the return that for the period 1979-81 respondent No. 4 was called to undergo the training in pursuance to the advertisement Annexure A/7.
As per respondents in the merit list of the advertisement for the year 1979-81, the name of respondent No. 4 was at serial No. 1 and in the list of selection in which the present petitioner applied, his name was in the reserve list which lapsed and in that regard the letter dated 29-4-1979 (Annexure R/2) has been filed.
As per the stand of the respondents, the list of 1978-80 was revalidated in accordance with the sanction of Public Service Commission and communicated to the Head of the Department vide letter dated 17-7-1979 (Annexure R/2) and according to which the persons selected for Forest Ranger Training course in the year 1979-81 would be given preference and persons who are in the reserved list of 1978-80 would be placed below.
them.
According to respondents, in this manner, since respondent No. 4 is at serial No. 1 in the list of selection of 1979-81, he has been placed above the petitioner.
8.
Inter alia, learned Government Advocate has also submitted that since the original petition was filed before the Tribunal, the same is barred by prescribed period of limitation under Section 21 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 but this submission was made by him in flimsy manner because now this Court is exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Moreover, the representation of the petitioner was rejected on 15th December, 1993 and this petition was filed on 21-2-1995 meaning thereby after near about one year and two months and therefore it cannot be said that the same should be thrown on account of so called lapse and delay.
9.
I have considered the rival contentions of learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
This fact is not disputed that the parties are governed by the above said rules.
This fact is also not in dispute that petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 were recruited directly and not by promotion.
The method of recruitment of candidates who have applied for direct recruitment has been shown in rules 11 & 13.
According to rule 11 (2) the direct recruits will be appointed by appointing authority after selection or undergoing prescribed course of training.
It is no more in dispute that petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 were directed to undergo the prescribed period of training.
According to Rule 13 the direct recruits to the post of Forest Ranger are required to undergo the prescribed course of training and on completion of the training they will be appointed from the date following the date of convocation.
At this juncture, it will be germine to re-write Rule 13(1) which reads thus :-  "Appointment of direct recruits - (1) Subject to the provisions of these rules, the candidates will be considered for appointment to the various posts except Forest Rangers and Foresters against the available vacancies in the order in which their names appear on merit basis in the list drawn up by the Government.
The direct recruits who undergo the prescribed course of training in Forest Rangers and Foresters Course will, on completion of training be appointed from the date following the date of convocation and according to the merit obtained in the final examination at the College/School."
Thus, the direct recruits had to undergo the prescribed training according to the rules and the period of training is 2 years as the same is shown in the advertisement itself.
According to Rule 19 the appointment is to be made after successful prescribed period of training.
Thus condition of successful prescribed training is pre-supposed and without completion of the said training appointment cannot be accorded.
The date of appointment of respondent No. 4 has been shown as 1-5-1980 and the date of appointment of petitioner is 1-11-1981.
Unless respondent No. 4 completes the prescribed training of two years, he cannot be given appointment.
On bare perusal of Annexure A/7, it is revealed that respondent No. 4 was sent for training for the period 1979-81, and if that is the position, then how he could be appointed on 1-5-1980 without completing two years prescribed training.
Since respondent Nos. 1 to 3 are treating respondent No. 4 to be the appointee of 1-5-1980, therefore their stand is that petitioner is junior to him as he was appointed on 1-11-1981.
The stand of the Government, on its face value, is arbitrary and dehors the rules, particularly Rules 13 and 19.
According to the material which is placed on record, it is luminously clear that respondent No. 4 must have completed the training in the year 1981 only, therefore he could not have been appointed on 1-5-1980.
10.
In view of the reasons stated hereinabove.
this petition is hereby allowed and the order of rejection of representation of petitioner dated 15-12-1993 is hereby quashed and respondent No. 2 the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, Bhopal is hereby directed to re-examine the matter and the representation of petitioner Annexure A/13 and thereafter may take the decision in accordance with the law.
Looking to the facts and surrounding circumstances, parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.