Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is challenging the decision of the district inspector of schools stated to be dated July 04, 2004.
By that decision the District inspector of schools approved the appointment of the sixth respondent (group transfer) as a language teacher in the school.
Her initial appointment was as a work education teacher in the school.
2.
There is no dispute that on the basis of the government order the district inspector of schools was empowered to permit group transfer sought by a teacher working in a school provided the school consented to the transfer.
There is no dispute either that in the present case the district inspector of schools exercised his power with the consent of the school.
3.
Case of the petitioner is that once the West Bengal School Service commission Act, 1997 came into force, the district inspector of schools lost the power to permit group transfer on the basis of executive instructions.
Her further case is that in view of provisions in the 1997 Acct, the executive instructions permitting group change by existing teachers of secondary schools lost all force.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner says that his client was an existing teacher in the school at the date the district inspector of schools gave the impugned decision.
He says that from time to time his client made representations to the authorities pointing out the illegality committed by the school and the district inspector of schools.
5.
I agree with counsel for the respondents that questioning the decision, the petitioner (she has taken out the present writ petition in her individual capacity) is not entitled to approach the writ court.
It is known that for maintaining a writ petition seeking mandamus the petitioner thereof must be a person aggrieved.
By the order of district inspector of schools, in my view, the petitioner cannot be said to be aggrieved.
She is apparently espousing a public cause.
6.
That apart the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay.
The decision was given by the authority in July 2004.
The petitioner had full knowledge thereof.
She took out the writ petition only in February 2006.
Her case that she continued to make representations to the authorities is absolutely insignificant, since by making repeated representations one is not entitled to keep a cause of action alive.
7.
For these reasons I summarily dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
8.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by Assistant Registrar (Court) or A.C.O.
shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on the usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.