Ashok Parihar, J - Since on similar set of facts same relief has been claimed, all the above writ petitions have been heard together and are being decided by this common order.
2.
Petitioners applied for the post of Assistant Engineer (Mechanical) in pursuance to the advertisement issued by the respondent-Commission on 18-1- 1997.
Last date for submission of the application form was 15-3-1997.
All the candidates, who had applied for the post, were allowed to appear in the written examination provisionally subject to eligibility of the candidates.
After completion of the written examination and having scrutinized the application forms, candidature of the petitioners was rejected by the respondent Commission only on the ground that they were not having requisite qualifications, as prescribed under the Rules and notified in the advertisement itself.
3.
There is no dispute that the required qualification for the post in question had been BE in a particular branch from which the appointments were to be made.
Petitioners had applied for the post of Assistant Engineer (Mechanical).
However, they were having requisite Degree of Engineering in Production & Industrial faculty.
There is nothing on record to show that the above Degree of BE (Production & Industrial) has been recognized as equivalent to BE (Mechanical).
The State Government has also taken a categorical stand that on the basis of opinion given by the Dean of the Malviya Regional Engineering College, Jaipur, the State Government could not decide the Degree of BE (Production & Industrial) as equivalent to BE.
(Mechanical).
It is for the competent authority to decide the equivalence as per report of the experts and the syllabus of different specialities.
This Court under its writ jurisdiction cannot decide such issues.
4.
Having considered entire facts and circumstances, since petitioners were not having requisite qualifications as required under the Rules notified by the respondent-Commission, in the facts and circumstances, no further interference is called for by this Court.
All the writ petitions are dismissed accordingly as having no merit.
Petitions dismissed.