Nirmal Yadav, J - Vide this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has sought direction for grant of pensionary benefits by counting the period of work-charge service with effect from 1261964 to 19.9.1966 along with regular service rendered by him and has further sought a direction for quashing the impugned order dated 2012004 (Annexure P-3).
2.
The petitioner was appointed as T-Mate on work-charge basis on 1261964 in City Division Rohtak.
On 2091966 he was promoted to the post of Assistant Line Man on regular basis.
The petitioner was promoted as Line Man on 243.
- 9 at City Division, Rohtak.
On 1731997, the petitioner was further promoted on the post of Assistant Fore-Man and was transferred to Sohna Division in District Gurgaon.
He retired on the post of Assistant Fore- Man after attaining the age of superannuation.
As per the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana and the amendment made in Rule 3.17A of Civil Services Rules (Volume-2), the work-charge service was to be counted towards pensionary benefits.
However, these instructions were never brought to the knowledge of the petitioner by the respondents.
The petitioner being an illiterate person and having been posted in the field, it was the duty of the respondent-Corporation to get the instructions noted from the petitioner.
He worked for 37 years, 2 months and 19 days with the respondents.
He was allotted Employees Provident Fund No. 3158/155.
However, he was not allotted any GPF account number even after regularisation of his services.
The petitioner represented to the XEN, Sohna Division vide letter dated 2052002 and also sent a reminder dated 1522003.
Thereafter, even legal notice (Annexure P-2) was served on the respondents.
Since no action was taken on his representation and the legal notice, the petitioner filed CWP No. 15786 of 2003, which was disposed of by this Court vide order dated 9102003 directing the respondents to take a decision on the representation within a period of 4 months from the date a certified copy of the order was supplied to them.
In pursuance thereof, the respondents have passed order dated 2012004 (Annexure P-3) rejecting petitioner's representation on the ground that he did not opt for switching over to the GPF Scheme after his services were regularised.
Therefore, the employer continued depositing its contribution in the contributory provident fund during his entire regular service.
On retirement of the petitioner, he was paid gratuity for the period during which he worked as a regular employee, but he was not entitled to pensionary benefits.
3.
The petitioner has further pleaded that respondents have granted pension to some of the employees after giving the benefit of work-charge service after obtaining their options and refund of employer's contribution made towards provident fund.
As per order dated 2712004 (Annexure P-4), one Rachhpal, Mali was ordered to be given the pensionary benefits after counting the period of work-charge service and depositing the employer's share of contribution towards EPF along with interest by the said employee.
4.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, it is averred that the petitioner cannot take the plea of ignorance about the circular dated 681993 (Annexure P1) to claim pensionary benefits at this stage, especially when he continued to be a member of EPF and never exercised his option as per the aforesaid circular Annexure P-1.
However, the factum of grant of benefit in question to the other similarly situated employees is not disputed.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
6.
The sole question that arises for consideration is as to whether the petitioner was duly intimated about the instructions issued by the respondent Corporation vide Memo dated 681993 (Annexure P-1) or he failed to exercise the option for availing pensionary scheme and did not deposit the employer's share of contribution towards EPF along with interest besides not fulfilling the other requisite conditions stipulated therein.
7.
It has been categorically pleaded by the petitioner that being an illiterate person and working in the field he did not have any knowledge about the instructions dated 681993 (Annexure P-1).
Nothing has been brought on record by the respondents that the aforesaid instructions were got noted from the petitioner by any official/officer of the respondent- Corporation.
As per para-4 of the instructions dated 681993 (Annexure P-1), the instructions had to be got noted from all the employees and receipt of the letter had to be acknowledged, but no such acknowledgement has been placed on the record.
Learned counsel for the petitioner brought to our notice that the issue involved in the present writ petition has been specifically dealt with by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Lilu Ram v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 2476 of 1997, decided on 9101997.
A copy of the said judgment has been annexed with the writ petition as Annexure A-1.
On perusal of the judgment in Lilu Ram's case (supra), we are satisfied that the petitioner's case is squarely covered by that judgment.
8.
In view of the above, the impugned order dated 2012004 (Annexure P-3) is hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to exercise his option in accordance with Memo dated 681993 (Annexure P-1) within a period of one month of receipt of a certified copy of this order and give him the consequential benefits within two months thereafter subject to his fulfilling the conditions of eligibility stipulated in the aforesaid Memo (Annexure P-1).
Order accordingly.