Satish Kumar Mittal, J - The State of Punjab and others have filed the instant Regular Second Appeal against the judgment dated 2831985 passed by the Additional District Judge, Bhatinda, vide which he has reversed the judgment and decree dated 881984 passed by the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Bhatinda, vide which suit of the plaintiff, respondent herein, for declaration was dismissed.
2.
On 2961963, the respondent-plaintiff was appointed as Sub Inspector, Cooperative Societies in Patiala Division.
He joined his duty at Dhuri on 1691963.
On 471968 he applied for casual leave for one day and thereafter, he did not join his duty.
Subsequently on 1681968, he submitted his resignation to Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Patiala, which was to be accepted after the expiry of one month ie on 17.9.1968.
Thereafter, the respondent-plaintiff did not come to the office to attend his duty.
He alleged that his aforesaid resignation was not accepted and on 12.1.1972, he made an application for withdrawal of the aforesaid resignation, on which no decision was taken.
After the expiry of more than nine years of the said application, he filed the instant suit on 4.10.1982 seeking declaration that he is in continuous service of the appellants-defendants as Sub Inspector, Cooperative Societies and is entitled for all emoluments pay and usual allowances admissible under the Rules from 1.7.1968 upto the date of filing of the suit.
3.
The appellants-defendants contested the aforesaid suit on various grounds.
It was pleaded that the respondent-plaintiff resigned from his post on 1681968 and that the suit filed by him is barred by limitation.
He served the department upto 471968 and thereafter, he never attended his duty.
He was issued several letters by the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, but those letters were received undelivered with the remarks of the postal department that he was avoiding to receive the letters.
It was pleaded that the respondent-plaintiff was not entitled for any relief in the instant suit.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction prayed for ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is barred by limitation ?
OPD  3.
Whether the suit is liable to be dismissed for want of valid notice ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is premature ?
OPD  5.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD 6.
Whether this Court has no territorial jurisdiction ?
OPD  7.
Whether the plaintiff is estopped from filing the present suit due to his acts and conduct ?
OPD  8.
Relief.
5.
The learned trial court, vide its judgment dated 881984, dismissed the suit of the respondent-plaintiff.
On issues No. 1 and 7, it was held that the respondent-plaintiff submitted his resignation on 1781968, in which it was mentioned that the same should be accepted with effect from 17.9.1968.
After submitting his resignation, he did not resume his duties upto that date and after the expiry of one month period/notice, the resignation submitted by the respondent-plaintiff was deemed to have been accepted.
Therefore, he could not be allowed to resume his duties after lapse of 16 years.
On issue No. 2, it was held that the suit was barred by limitation.
6.
Feeling dissatisfied against the aforesaid judgment and decree, the respondent-plaintiff filed appeal, which was allowed by the learned first appellate court vide its judgment and decree dated 2831985.
It has been held that the resignation submitted by the respondent-plaintiff on 1781968 was not accepted by the appellants-defendants.
It was further held that the resignation could not become operative automatically after the expiry of one month period, as held by the learned trial court.
In this regard, it was observed that under clause 4 of the appointment letter Ex.D1, the employee was having an option either to give one month notice or to deposit one month salary, in case he wants to resign from the service.
However, in the instant case, the respondent-plaintiff gave one month notice.
There was no clause in the appointment letter that the resignation would become automatically operative on the expiry of one month from its submission.
Therefore, it was held that the resignation submitted by the respondent-plaintiff was not accepted by the department and before it could be accepted, the respondent- plaintiff withdrew his said resignation vide his letter dated 12.1.1972 (Ex.P1).
It was further held that name of the respondent-plaintiff was found mentioned in the seniority list issued by the department on 1011980, therefore, he was deemed to be in service on 1011980.
It was also held that the resignation of temporary employee does not become operative automatically unless the same is accepted by the competent authority and in the instant case, undisputedly the resignation was not accepted at all.
Regarding the issue of limitation, the learned first appellate court observed that though the application for withdrawal of the resignation was submitted in the year 1972, but the suit was instituted on 2741983 within a period of three years from 13101980, when notice Ex.P1 was served upon the appellants-defendants under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code').
On the basis of the aforesaid findings, the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial court was set aside and suit of the respondent-plaintiff was decreed.
Against, the said judgment and decree, the appellants-defendants have filed the instant Regular Second Appeal.
7.
I have heard the arguments of learned counsel for both the parties and have perused the record of the case.
8.
The findings recorded by the learned first appellate court are totally perverse and against the documentary as well as oral evidence available on the record.
Normally, the findings of fact recorded by the Courts below are not to be interfered in the Regular Second Appeal.
After amendment of Section 100 of the Code in the year 1976, the interference in the judgment and decree passed by the Courts below can be made in the Regular Second Appeal on the substantial question of law.
But in one circumstance where the judgment and decree passed by the Courts below is based upon the perverse finding of facts, which are against the facts on record and based upon assumptions and conjectures, this Court has the jurisdiction to deal with the issue and set aside such finding of facts even in Regular Second Appeal.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kulwant Kaur v. Gurdial Singh Mann, 2001(2) R.C.R.
(Civil) 277 : AIR 2001 SC 1273, while explaining the scope of jurisdiction of the High Court, while hearing Regular Second Appeal under Section 100 of the Code, has held as under :  "Admittedly, Section 100 has introduced a definite restriction on to the exercise of jurisdiction in a second appeal so far as the High Court is concerned.
Needless to record that the Code of Civil Procedure Amendment Act, 1976 introduced such an embargo for such definite objectives and since we are not required to further probe on that score, we are not detailing out, but the fact remains that while it is true that in a second appeal a finding of fact even if erroneous will generally not be disturbed but where it is found that the finding stands vitiated on wrong test and on the basis of assumptions and conjectures and resultantly there is an element of perversity involved therein, the High Court in our view will be within its jurisdiction to deal with the issue.
This is, however, only in the event such a fact is brought to light by the High Court explicitly and the judgment should also be categorical as to the issue of perversity vis-a-vis the concept of justice.
Needless to say, however, that perversity itself is a substantial question worth adjudication what is required is a categorical finding on the part of the High Court as to perversity."
In the light of the aforesaid legal position, I have examined the impugned judgment and decree passed by the learned first appellate court.
9.
Admittedly, the respondent-plaintiff did not assume his duty after 471968.
He submitted his written resignation on 1781968, in which it was specifically mentioned that the same should be effective with effect from 17.9.1968.
It is also not disputed that after submitting his resignation on 1781968, the respondent-plaintiff never assumed his duty till the institution of the suit on 1721981, which was returned due to some defects and was again instituted on 2741983.
It is true that in the year 1972, the respondent-plaintiff made an application for withdrawal of his resignation dated 1781968, but by that time it was too late.
Once it was specifically mentioned in the resignation that the same should be accepted with effect from 17.9.1968 and by that time, the same was not withdrawn, it became automatically operative after 17.9.1968, particularly when for three and half years after submitting the said resignation, the respondent-plaintiff did not make any effort to join the duty.
Merely because name of the respondent- plaintiff was shown in the seniority list in the year 1980, it cannot be presumed that he was in service of the appellants.
In my opinion, the learned first appellate court has wrongly reversed the findings of learned trial court on issues No. 1 and 7 without any justification and reasons.
The findings recorded by learned first appellate court on these issues are totally perverse and based on the wrong assumptions.
10.
Secondly, the learned first appellate court has committed grave illegality while reversing the finding of the learned trial court with regard to the issue of limitation.
In the instant case, the cause of action could have arisen on 17.9.1968 when the resignation was not alleged to have been accepted, or on 12.1.1972 when the resignation was not allowed to be withdrawn and the respondent-plaintiff was not allowed to join duty, but in no circumstance it can be said that the cause of action arose to the respondent- plaintiff on 13101980, when he served notice (Ex. P1) under Section 80 of the Code upon the appellants-defendants.
The suit filed by the respondent- plaintiff was hopelessly time barred and the learned first appellate court has illegally reversed the said finding and decreed the suit of the respondent- plaintiff.
Keeping in view the conduct of the respondent-plaintiff, his claim in the suit totally unjust and unreasonable and the same could not have been accepted.
For the reasons recorded above, I allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and decree dated 2831985 passed by the Additional District Judge, Bhatinda and dismiss the suit of the respondent-plaintiff.
Appeal allowed.