PS Patwalia, J. (Oral) - Petitioner Harish Kumar has filed this writ petition challenging the order dated 26.11.1987 vide which he was discharged from service during the period of probation.
The facts leading to the filing of this writ petition are as hereunder:-  2.
Petitioner was appointed as a temporary Reception Officer in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha for a period of 89 days vide letter dated 371985.
He was again appointed for another period of 89 days vide appointment letter dated 2791985.
The petitioner claims that thereafter the respondents conducted a regular process of selection for making appointment to the post held by the petitioner.
The petitioner also applied.
He was ultimately selected and appointed on regular basis vide appointment letter dated 111986.
As per the conditions in the offer of appointment, the petitioner was to remain on probation for a period of two years.
3.
The petitioner submits that when he was discharging his duties as a Reception Officer, a complaint was made by one Shri Gurdial Singh Saini, MLA.
to the effect that he was not properly attended to by the Hostel Staff.
The petitioner states that the complaint was actually against one Shri Ghansham Dass, Superintendent and not against him.
Inspite of this, petitioner's explanation was called for.
The petitioner duly submitted his reply explaining that he was not at fault.
However, a warning was issued to him on 9111987.
4.
It is thereafter that the petitioner received a memorandum dated 26.11.1987 vide which his services were dispensed with during the period of probation.
5.
The petitioner has therefore approached this Court challenging the order dated 26.11.1987.
The petitioner states that his discharge is stigmatic as it is on the basis of the complaint by Shri Gurdial Singh Saini, MLA..
He could not have been discharged from the service without holding an enquiry and giving him opportunity to show cause.
He further states that he has been discriminated inasmuch as no action has been taken against Shri Ghansham Dass against whom the complaint was primarily filed.
The petitioner further states that in fact he has been discharged so as to create a vacancy to adjust one Shri Prem Singh Saini who belongs to the constituency of the Speaker.
6.
The respondents have filed a reply contesting the writ petition.
It is the stand of the respondents that the petitioner was discharged from service not on the basis of the complaint filed by Shri Gurdial Singh Saini, MLA., in fact he was discharged as the Speaker formed an opinion on an assessment of the petitioner's service record that he did not perform the duties satisfactorily.
The facts in this regard have been stated in para 12 of the reply which reads as under:-  "12.
In reply to para 12 of the Writ Petition, it is respectfully submitted that the petitioner has tried to mislead the Hon'ble Court by making false statement that the work of the petitioner was found to be very good as reported in his two Annual Confidential Reports.
It is denied that the petitioner's work was very good.
The petitioner was appointed temporary Reception Officer on regular basis with effect from 1186 on a probation of two years and the Annual Confidential Report from 1186 to 31386 i.e. for the period of three moths was simply `good' and after that due to his failure to report for duty when the session of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha was held on 21686 he was administered a stern warning to be careful in future under the orders of the then Hon'ble Speaker vide memo dated 25th July, 1986.
In view of the above, he was given chance to improve his working during the period of probation and the ACR upto 31387 was treated as good but after that period he again did not show any interest in the office work.
As already pointed out on the complaint of Shri Gurdial Singh Saini, MLA., he was warned to be careful in future under the orders of the then Hon'ble Speaker vide Memo.
dated 9th Nov, 1987 and it was also made clear that in case of repetition of such lapse strict disciplinary action will be taken against the defaulters.
It is also pertinent to submit here that on 24th November, 1987, the petitioner left the office without taking any leave from the authorities and it was reported by his Branch Officer that he was not taking interest in his official duties.
The Branch Incharge/Supdt., Hostel also made verbal complaints about his working and behaviour many a times.
In view of the relevant facts, the then Hon'ble Speaker formed the opinion about the working of the petitioner that he is not performing his duties satisfactorily.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were dispensed with under the provisions of Rule 10(2)(a) of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service Rules, 1981 being a probationer.
It was a case of simpliciter termination in terms of the appointment letter of the petitioner.
As this termination does not carry any stigma and is not a penalty or punishment, therefore, no cause show notice was required.
The order is perfect, legal and in accordance with service rules."
It is therefore the stand of the respondents that the petitioner was discharged on a bona fide assessment of his work during the period of probation and the order is legal.
7.
Apart from this, it has been pleaded as a preliminary objection that the post held by the petitioner was filled in on 831988 by appointing one Shri Pritam Singh as a Reception Officer.
The said Pritam Singh has been confirmed on 851990.
In case the petitioner is to succeed in the petition then the services of Shri Pritam Singh would have to be dispensed with.
He is, therefore, a necessary party and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of non joinder of necessary parties.
8.
I have heard Mr. Arun Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Suresh Monga, Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana on behalf of the respondents and perused the paper-book.
9.
On a consideration of the matter and particularly after going through the facts as stated in para 12 of the reply, I am of the opinion that in the facts of this case, petitioner's services were dispensed with during the period of probation on an assessment of his work and conduct.
It has been pointed out that he failed to report for duty when the Session of Vidhan Sabha was held on 21.6.1986 for which he was administered a stern warning on 2571986.
Even on the complaint of Shri Gurdial Singh Saini, MLA.
he was again warned to be careful in future on 9111987.
Still further it has been stated that on 24111987, the petitioner left the office without taking leave from the authorities.
It is also stated that the Branch Incharge had made verbal complaints about his work and behaviour many a times and also stated that he was not taking interest in his official duties.
All these facts, in my opinion, are sufficient for the appointing authority to form a bona fide opinion that the petitioner should not be allowed to continue in service beyond the period of probation.
It is important to note that no allegations of mala fide have been levelled against any one and no one even has been made party respondent.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the Speaker who was the competent authority formed an opinion to discharge the petitioner during the period of probation on relevant material.
The order of discharge, therefore, cannot be faulted.
10.
In so far as the contention of the petitioner that he was victimised to accommodate Prem Singh Saini is concerned, the same has been refuted in the written statement.
It has also been stated that one Shri Pritam Singh has in fact been appointed against the post held by the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, the allegations were totally incorrect and in fact made recklessly without bothering to ascertain the correct factual position.
11.
Additionally as mentioned hereinabove respondents have stated in the reply that one Shri Pritam Singh was appointed against the post vacated by the petitioner in March, 1988.
He has since been confirmed in May, 1990.
In case the petitioner is to succeed in this writ petition, the said Pritam Singh would be directly affected as he would have to vacate the post to accommodate the petitioner.
Inspite of the stand taken in the reply which was filed in March, 1994, the petitioner has taken no steps to implead the said Pritam Singh as a party respondent.
I am of the opinion that Pritam Singh who would be directly affected in case the petitioner was to succeed in this writ petition was a necessary party and therefore this petition has also to fail for non-joinder of necessary party.
12.
For the reasons aforementioned, I find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed.
In the circumstances of this case there shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.