MMS Bedi, J - With the consent of the parties, the case has been taken up for final decision at the motion stage on the basis of the record produced by the respondents.
2.
Pursuant to advertisement dated 28.2.2005 (Annexure P-1) in the press for recruitment rally by respondent No. 3, Branch Recruiting Officer (Army), Charkhidadri, the petitioner participated in the recruitment rally in his capacity as a son of an Ex-serviceman by producing his Matriculation certificate (Annexure P-2), discharge book of his father, letter from Army Medical Corps Records, Lucknow intimating publication of birth of the petitioner in the service record of his father (Annexure P-2) and affidavit of his father dated 12122003 (Annexure P-4).
Father's name of the petitioner is mentioned as Sanwar Mal Sharma in affidavit Annexure P-4 whereas in the matriculation certificate, his father's name is mentioned as Sawar Mal Sharma.
The petitioner participated in the screening test on 3032005 and had also passed the medical test.
On 24.5.2005 when he approached respondent No. 3 for collecting his admit card for the Common Entrance Exam, which was to be held on 2952005, he was informed that the affidavit of his father earlier submitted by him had been misplaced and that there was a variation in his father's name in his Matriculation certificate (Swar Mal Sharma) and in the discharge book (Sanwar Mal Sharma), therefore, he was directed to submit an affidavit in that regard.
The petitioner could not arrange the affidavit on the same day i.e. 24.5.2005 but he submitted affidavit dated 2552005 (Annexure P-5) to the effect that his father's name in Matriculation certificate is Sawar Mal Sharma whereas in the Army records it is Sanwar Mal Sharma and that both the names are of one person.
Necessary entries were made in the record of respondent No. 2 and he was assured to be considered as a son of an Ex-serviceman.
On 2952005, the petitioner appeared in the Common Entrance Exam and made a mark on merit but subsequently on enquiry it was revealed that benefit of being the son of Ex. Serviceman (SOEX benefit) had not been granted to him.
3.
Vide impugned order dated 272005 (Annexure P-6) the petitioner was informed that he had not been granted the benefit of son of Ex-serviceman.
The operative part of the impugned order reads thus :-  "You were not granted benefit of son of Ex-serviceman (SOEX) because of variations in the name of your father in your matriculation certificate and your father's discharge book.
You were advised by BRO Charkhidadri to submit affidavit immediately on a stamp paper of Rs. 10/- duly signed by Executive Magistrate Class-I.
You, however, failed to submit the same in time.
You are claiming to have submitted the same on 25 May, 2005, after a lapse of approximately one month and twenty five days, has no relevance, as it was too late because the documents for exam on 29 May, 2005 were completed and closed at least a week before.
The onus of not submitting the required affidavit, lies on you."
4.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the above said impugned order (Annexure P-6) on the ground that he has been deprived of the advantage of the bonus marks by denying him an opportunity to be considered as a son of Ex. Serviceman.
Had he been considered in the said capacity, he would have made a mark in the selection and could have secured marks more than the candidates selected in that category.
5.
Notice of motion was issued.
The writ petition has been opposed by taking up the preliminary objection that the petitioner could not be recruited in the category of son of Ex. Serviceman regarding which screening had been conducted on 3132005, as such he could not be permitted to take advantage of his own wrong at a belated stage.
The petitioner appeared as a General Category candidate on 3032005 but he could not come in the merit list of the selected candidates.
It is also asserted that subsequently the claim of the petitioner in the capacity as a son of Ex-serviceman was also rejected for the reason that there was a variation in the name of his father as mentioned in his Matriculation certificate and as indicated in the discharge book of his father.
It is admitted that affidavit Annexure P-5 had been received but the written statement is silent about the alleged date of its receipt.
6.
The petitioner has filed replication reiterating the averments made in the written petition and pleading therein that the screening of the candidates belonging to the sons of Ex-serviceman category was scheduled on 3132005 but the screening had been done on 3032005 itself.
His application was scrutinized under the said category and was declared successful and for this reason he did not appear in the screening test held on 3132005.
The only reason mentioned in Annexure P-6 is the variation in the father's name in the Matriculation certificate and the discharge book.
In the replication, the petitioner has quoted the example of a candidate Parveen Kumar, who was screened as a son of an Ex-serviceman on 3032005 and had been granted the benefit of the said category.
He was declared successful in the said category in the selection process.
The petitioner has been penalised for none of his faults and has been denied an opportunity to be considered and appointed in the capacity as a son of Ex-serviceman.
7.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the original record.
It is a fact that the petitioner is the son of an Ex- serviceman.
He, while applying had attached the discharge book of his father and a letter from the Army Medical Corps Records intimating the publication of his birth in the service record (Annexure P-3) and affidavit of his father dated 12122003 (Annexure P-4).
The sole ground as reflected from the impugned order (Annexure P-6), for denying him an opportunity to be treated as a son of an Ex-serviceman, is the variation in the father's name in his Matriculation certificate and the service record.
We are satisfied that affidavit (Annexure P-5) clarifying that Sawar Mal Sharma and Sanwar Mal Sharma are the names of one person, who is the father of the petitioner as was submitted in the affidavit dated 2552004.
8.
The respondents have put forth some additional grounds to establish the validity of their action in refusing to accept the petitioner as a son of an Ex-serviceman in their written statement but we are of the considered view that the validity of the impugned order (Annexure P-6) has to be judged on the basis of the reasons given therein and the same cannot be supplemented by additional reasons as mentioned in the written statement to justify an illegal action.
In this context a reference to the observations of the Supreme Court in Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC 851 following Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gurdhandas Bhanji, AIR 1952 SC 16 can be taken note of, which is as follows :-  "When a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out."
9.
We have scrutinized the impugned order (Annexure P-6) for its validity on the basis of the reasoning given and are not satisfied with the ground taken therein for rejecting the candidature of the petitioner as a son of an Ex- serviceman solely on the ground of ill created variance.
10.
In view of the Matriculation certificate and the publication of birth of the petitioner as per the sheet roll of his father coupled with the additional affidavit (Annexure P-5) submitted on 2552005 by the petitioner, there was no ground for the respondents to deny consideration to the petitioner as a son of an Ex-serviceman especially when additional affidavit (Annexure P-5) was furnished prior to 2952005, the date for the Common Entrance Exam.
11.
For determining whether any prejudice has been caused to the petitioner by not considering him in the category of son of Ex-serviceman, the original record of the selection has been summoned.
It is apparent from the record that a son of an Ex-serviceman gets a bonus of 20% of the total marks obtained by a candidate in Physical Fitness Test (PFT) and Common Entrance Exam (CEE) as per formula (PFT Marks + CEE Marks) x 20% = Bonus Marks.
A letter dated 2282006 submitted on behalf of Deputy Director General Recruiting has been taken on record as `Mark A' reflecting that though no vacancy was ever reserved for a son of Ex-serviceman (SOEX) but the above said formula to work out 20% marks for a son of an Ex-serviceman had to be applied.
Summary of Screening Board Proceedings of Branch Recruiting Officer, Charkhidadri prepared by Examination Board and Evaluation Board reflected that out of 11 candidates appeared, only 9 passed in the Physical Fitness Test (PFT) and Common Entrance Exam (CEE), and on the basis of comparative merit 2 candidates have been recruited.
The cut off marks are 152 meaning thereby that a candidate who has been selected from the open category had obtained 152 marks.
The other candidate selected from amongst the candidates of sons of Ex-servicemen had obtained 162 marks.
The comparative result of the selected candidates vis-a-vis the petitioner has been scrutinized to find out if any prejudice has been caused to the petitioner by declining him to be considered as a son of Ex-serviceman.
The merit calculated as per record chart is as follows :-  S. No.  Name  Physical Test  CEE  Category  Bonus  Total 4.
Parveen Kumar  48+40=88  41  SOX  27  162 10.
Kamlesh Kumar  60+33=93  59  -  -  152 5.
Petitioner Naveen Kumar  48+40=88  41  -  -  129 Note.
- The bonus qua Parveen Kumar seems to have been wrongly calculated as 27 on the record insisted of 258) 12.
Had the petitioner been considered as a son of an Ex-serviceman on the basis of the bonus criteria adopted for working out 20% bonus marks, his score would have been (88+41) x 20% = 258).
Adding the bonus marks to the marks obtained i.e. 129, the petitioner would have obtained 1548 marks (129+258), which are certainly more than the last candidate, who has been selected.
On the basis of the above said calculation, we are of the firm opinion that the petitioner has been declared unsuccessful by wrongly rejecting his candidature in the capacity as a son of an Ex-serviceman.
On our repeated enquiry, learned counsel for the respondents informed that there is no vacancy available to adjust the petitioner.
As the selected candidates have not been impleaded as parties for want of knowledge on the part of the petitioner regarding their merit, it is not a case to quash the entire selection but we deem it appropriate to allow the writ petition by setting aside the impugned order (Annexure P-6) and directing the respondents to adjust the petitioner against any available vacancy or to create a supernumerary post.
Ordered accordingly.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.