MM Kumar.
J (Oral) - The prayer made by the petitioner in the instant petition is to issue a direction to the respondents to consider his case for promotion as a Project Manager from the date his junior has been promoted with all consequential benefits.
It is admitted position that the petitioner has been promoted on the post of Project Manager on November 21, 2005 (P-12) whereas the so-called junior is alleged to have been promoted on February 27, 1996 (P-9).
The petitioner has not challenged the promotion of his so-called junior in the year 1996 and was content with filing repeated representations.
The only ground convass before us with regard to explanating delay is that the petitioner was not intimated that Mr. RS Narwal was promoted on February 27, 1996 (P-9).
The other alternative prayer made by the petitioner is that legal notice served by him on the respondents on February 6, 2006, (P-13) may be got decided from the respondents and a mandamus in that regard be issued.
2.
Having heard the learned counsel at some length, we have reached the conclusion that the prayer made by the petitioner deserves to be rejected on the ground of delay and laches The cause of action, if any, has arisen in favour of the petitioner in February 1996 and he could have easily agitated his right before this Court or any other forum in accordance with law within a period of three years.
According to well settled principles, even a civil suit for the aforementioned relief would not be competent as has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of MP v. Bhai Lal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006 and SS Rathore v. State of MP, AIR 1990 SC 10.
The argument that the petitioner has not been intimated about the promotion of Mr. RS Narwal has not impressed us because it is unbelievable that a person who considered himself senior to another would not come to know of his promotion within a reasonable time.
The other prayer with regard to issuance of a direction for deciding the legal notice could also not be accepted for the same reason because no enforceable right has arisen in favour of the petitioner.
The right, if any, has become an imperfect right which cannot be enforced by issuance of a writ of Mandamus, therefore, we regret our inability to issue any such direction.
3.
In view of the above, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.