JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Learned counsel for the respondents could not dispute how the controversy in the instant case is distinguishable from the determination rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Dev Dutt, ASI v. State of Punjab and others, (CWP No. 11908 of 1994 decided on 771995), wherein this Court observed as under :-  "2.
Military service has been defined to be service rendered by a person during emergency.
Emergency in the country was imposed on 26101962 and was lifted on 10.01.1968.
Petitioner, thus, will be entitled to a total period of 4 years 4 months and 7 days as the period spent on military service during emergency from the date of his joining till the lifting of the emergency in the country.
3.
That request made by the petitioner was not acceded to by the respondents on the ground that there was a gap of more than three years between the date of his discharge from the military service and his joining the Police Telecommunication, Punjab.
For this reliance was placed on sub-rule (3) Rule 4 of the 1965 Rules, which reads as under :-  "(3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Government shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government".
4.
Clearly, the respondents have misread and misinterpreted the aforesaid rule.
This rule only provides that the period between the date of discharge from the military service and the date of appointment to any service or post would count for pension provided the same does not exceed one year.
It further provides that if the period exceeds one year, then it may be allowed to be counted for the purposes of pension in exceptional circumstances under the orders of the Government but the same shall not exceed more than three years.
Petitioner, in the present case, is not claiming pension for the period between his discharge from military service till his appointment in the Police Telecommunication, Punjab.
Petitioner is only claiming the relief for the period which he had spent in military during the period when emergency remained in force in the country.
Under this Rule, the period for which the petitioner had served in military during the emergency cannot be excluded.
Respondents have clearly misinterpreted the rule and illegally withheld the benefits of the period spent by the petitioner in the military service during the emergency for the purposes of grant of increments, seniority and pension.
5.
For the reasons stated above, we accept the writ petition and quash the impugned order Annexure P7 and direct the respondents to consider the period spent by the petitioner in the military service during emergency for the purpose of increments, seniority and pension and to any other benefit to which the petitioner may be found entitled to for that period, under the circumstances".
In view of the above, the instant writ petition is allowed in the same terms as Dev Dutt's case (supra).
The petitioner will be entitled to computation of pension by taking into consideration the service rendered by him in the Army during the period of proclamation of emergency i.e. from 2621966 to 10.1.1968.
The respondents are accordingly directed to recalculate the pensionary benefits payable to the petitioner within one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The petitioner shall be paid all arrears in terms of the aforesaid calculation within a further period of one month.
Petition allowed.