Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J - The present writ petition is directed against the order dated 1st November, 2002 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal Principal Bench New Delhi in OA No. 72/2002.
By the said order the Tribunal dismissed the original application filed by the petitioner, wherein challenge was made by the petitioner to the transfer order dated 7th December, 2001 and also to the relieving order dated 8th December, 2001.
By the aforesaid two orders, the petitioner herein was transferred along with his post from National Museum to Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum as its Officer-in-charge consequent to which he was released by order dated 8th December, 2001.
The said two orders were challenged on the ground that the same were passed in violation of the statutory rules with mala fide intention.
2.
In order to appreciate the contentions raised before us, certain background facts leading to the filing of the petition are required to be mentioned.
The petitioner joined the National Museum as Keeper (Publication) on 12th December, 1989 on selection through UPSC.
He was appointed to the post of Assistant Director (Exhibition Cell) in the said Museum on 1st January, 1996 on ad hoc basis.
Subsequently he was appointed to the post of Assistant Director (Exhibition Cell) by transfer on deputation by letter dated 2nd December, 1998.
He was appointed to the said post on regular basis on absorption with effect from 29th May, 2001 by Notification issued on 14th June, 2001.
3.
The petitioner was transferred from the National Museum to the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum, New Delhi as Officer-in-charge with immediate effect vide office memorandum dated 7th December, 2001.
By the aforesaid order, the post the petitioner was holding at the relevant time was also transferred to the said Museum to accommodate the petitioner in the post of Officer-in-charge by the said order.
Mr. Parmod Ganapathy, Officer-in-charge (Deputy Keeper), Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum was transferred to National Museum by the very same order dated 7th December, 2001.
The petitioner was relieved along with his post by office order dated 8th December, 2001 directing him to report for duty as Officer-in-charge at Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum.
4.
The petitioner, however, did not report for duty at the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum pursuant to the aforesaid order and instead filed an Original Application on 7th January, 2002 before the Tribunal challenging the said orders on the ground that the transfer of the petitioner along with his post from National Museum to Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum is illegal and violative of the terms and conditions of his service.
It was also submitted that there was mala fide and, therefore, the order of transfer should be quashed.
The respondents on the other hand submitted before the Tribunal that the aforesaid orders of transfer were made in the exigencies of service.
It was stated in the counter affidavit filed that National Museum is a subordinate office under the Ministry of Culture, Government of India and Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum is under the administrative control of the National Museum.
The expenditure of Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum is met from the budget provisions of National Museum only and it has no separate budget provisions and there is no separate Director General for Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum.
It is also stated that Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum is a part and parcel of the National Museum but only housed in different premises within Delhi.
It was further stated that it is the primary responsibility of the National Museum to look after the administration of the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum and that as there was no senior officer/person posted in the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum, which is outside the National Museum, it was decided to post a senior Officer-in-charge at Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum consequent to which the petitioner was posted as Officer-in-charge of Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum and his post as Assistant Director (Exhibition Cell) was also shifted to the said Museum for administrative convenience and in public interest and, therefore, it may not be said to be transfer from one post to another but merely a transfer from one unit to another unit in the same organization and on the same post.
It was also stated that the petitioner has an All India transfer liability.
5.
The Tribunal after considering the above submissions and perusing the relevant records held that the documents placed on record by the petitioner do not contain or furnish any strict proof of mala fide against the respondents.
Consequent to the aforesaid finding it was held that the petitioner had failed to support his plea regarding mala fides with supporting strict proof and therefore the said ground is unsustainable under the law.
It was also held in paragraph 15 of the Tribunal's order that the aforesaid order is also not in violation of the fundamental rights or any other statutory provisions.
In the light of the aforesaid conclusions it was held that the first ground taken by the petitioner that the order of transfer is in violation of the statutory rules is devoid of any merit.
6.
The said orders passed by the learned Tribunal are under challenge in this writ petition.
Similar issues as raised before the Tribunal were also raised before us.
Counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently submitted that the orders of transfer are contrary to the notification issued by the Ministry of Finance of 25th October, 1977 a copy of which is placed at page 849 of the paper book.
It is also submitted by him that the post which the petitioner was holding in the National Museum is distinctly different from the post to which he has been transferred and both the posts have different status and, therefore, the order of transfer is bad in law.
It was also submitted by him that the petitioner cannot be posted outside his order (cadre ?)
i.e. Assistant Director (Exhibition Cell), National Museum and that the post to which he has been transferred is outside his cadre.
7.
The statements made in the counter affidavit filed before the Tribunal have been minutely analyzed and scrutinized.
It is established that both the units i.e. the National Museum and the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum are under the administrative of the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.
It is also crystal clear from statements made therein that the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum is part and parcel of the National Museum and, therefore, the petitioner could be transferred to Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum along with his post.
Mere fact that it is located in different premises does not make it a separate or different department.
The statements that the Dr. Zakir Hussain Memorial Museum is under the administrative control of the National Museum and that it is a part and parcel of the National Museum could not be.
disputed by the petitioner.
The petitioner would not suffer any civil consequences because of the aforesaid order of transfer.
Petitioner is merely shifted/posted from one unit to another unit of the same organization in the same stating (status ?)
along with the post.
It is clearly established that there is no change of cadre or responsibilities or reduction in his pay and allowances.
None of the provisions namely, FR-14B or FR-15 could be said to have been violated in the present case.
In our considered opinion the said fundamental rules are not applicable to the present case.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner has also submitted that there is mala fide apparent on the face of the records of the case.
We, however, agree with the findings recorded by the learned Tribunal that no mala fide could be proved by the petitioner in the present case.
The petitioner belongs to general Central Services and, therefore, he has an All India Service liability.
It is only a transfer within the same organization from one unit to another unit and posting of a senior officer as in charge of the said museum.
It cannot be, therefore, said that the aforesaid impugned order of transfer is not in the public interest and that the said order is vitiated by mala fide.
In order to prove mala fide strong factual foundation is to be laid in the pleadings.
No such foundation is laid in the present case.
No mala fide could be proved on the basis of insinuative and vague foundation as held in the decision of the Supreme Court in Rejendra Roy v. Union of India, 1993(2) S.C.T.
65 : 1993(1) SCC 148.
It is also not proved that the same is in violation of statutory rules.
Reference could be made to the decisions of the Supreme Court wherein it is again and again reiterated that an order of transfer which is made in public interest and for administrative reasons should not be interfered with unless it is proved that there is any violation of statutory rules or it is mala fide; Shilpi Bose v. State of Bihar, (1991) Suppl.
(2) SCC 659 and NK Singh v. Union of India, 1995(1) SCT 269 : (1994) 6 SCC 98.
9.
We, therefore, find no ground to interfere with the well-reasoned conclusions arrived at by the Tribunal on appreciation of records.
The writ petition has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.
Interim order stands vacated.
Petition dismissed.