Harjit Singh Bedi, ACJ (Oral) - The writ petitioner/appellant while working as Senior Technical Officer Class-II in the Directorate of Industries, Punjab, was promoted as Senior Technical Officer, Class-I vide order dated 1451991 on purely provisional basis for a period of six months or till the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission whichever is earlier (Copy Annexure P-1).
This provisional period was extended from time to time and finally from 1211993 to 1171993.
Vide order dated 30101993 (Annexure P-5), the petitioner was suspended and vide order dated 31121993 (Annexure P-6), was not given further extension beyond 1171993.
The petitioner alleges that the orders Annexures P-5 & P-6, were uncalled for and needed to be set aside as they had been made as a measure of punishment.
2.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondent-State took the stand that petitioner had been promoted only on provisional basis subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission and as the said approval had not been received, the orders Annexures P-5 & P-6 had been issued.
3.
The learned Single Judge held that as petitioner had been promoted only on ad hoc basis, his plea that his provisional promotion had not been extended beyond 1171993 as a measure of punishment, could not be accepted.
The writ petition, was, therefore, dismissed leading to this appeal.
4.
Mr. KL Arora, the learned counsel for the appellant has reiterated the arguments advanced before the learned Single Judge.
He has pointed out that appellant had been promoted on six months' basis and his period of service had been extended from time to time, but finally vide order dated 31121993 (Annexure P-6), the period had not been extended on account of his misconduct and as such the order could not be sustained.
He has also referred to the affidavit filed on 2292004 by Shri NK Wadhawan, Additional Secretary to Government Punjab in compliance with the order of this Court dated 2272004 and has submitted that the appellant had been promoted against a promotional quota post within its permissible limits and that the officers who had been promoted along with the appellant had been regularized on the promotional posts on the directions of the Punjab Public Service Commission leaving the appellant on the lower post.
5.
Mr. AS Grewal, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab has, however, supported the view taken by the learned Single Judge and reiterated the stand that the promotion of the appellant was only provisional and that too for a limited period subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission, and as such the reversion could not be taken as a punishment.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
We endorse the opinion that an employee who has been promoted on a provisional/temporary basis, has no right to the post.
The facts of the present case, however, reveal that the situation is altogether different.
The appellant had initially been promoted from a Class II to Class I post on 1451991 vide order Annexure P-1 on provisional basis for a period of six months or till the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission whichever was earlier after he had completed 8 years service.
The order of promotion was also made subject to the decision of some matters with regard to reservations pending in Court.
Vide order Annexure P-2 dated 1551992, the appellant as well as Sukdev Singh and Sadhu Singh were granted a further extension in service to await the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Vide order Annexure P-3 dated 2781992, the promotions of these persons were further extended on the same terms.
Vide order dated 2871993 (Annexure P-4), the promotion of the appellant was yet further extended from 1211993 to 1171993 but vide order Annexure P-6 dated 31121993, the provisional promotion was not extended beyond 1171993.
7.
It will be seen from aforesaid Annexures that though the promotion was provisional yet it was within the promotional quota and it was only subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
From the affidavit filed by Shri NK Wadhawan, it is clear that services of Sukhdev Singh and RR Chugh woo too had been promoted on provisional basis along with the appellant had been regularized after the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
It is, therefore, obvious to us that appellant had been in effect reverted on account of alleged misconduct as he would otherwise have also been regularized in service along with the others.
8.
In this situation, the observations of the learned Single Judge that the appellant was not entitled to the promotional post, or that the reversion was not a measure of punishment, has to be examined.
The affidavit of Shri NK Wadhwan, is significant in this respect.
It appears that members of the Industrialists Association, Ludhiana had made a complaint against the appellant to the Director Industries and an enquiry had been held on which the order Annexure P-6 had been passed.
We have also perused the original file of the proceedings relating to the issuance of the letter Annexure P-6.
A comprehensive note dated 11101993 recorded by the Director Industries gives the facts of the case and the alleged misbehaviour of the appellant, and it is finally observed as under :-  "I have carefully gone through the entire file and I find that the silence of the employees of the IDC (Engg), Ludhiana, about Shri Sher Singh beating up Shri Harminder Singh is indicative of the fact that he quarrelled with the industrialist who went to meet him in connection with some work and mis- behaved with him.
In this connection, statements of Sarvshri Satpal Sharma, LR Goel and Tarlochan Singh may be seen at pages 22 to 26/Cor.
Work in the IDC is supposed to be done on commercial lines and the officers are required to extend utmost courtesy to the industrialists who patronize it for their work.
In view of this incident, there is no likelihood of Ludhiana Industry entrusting any work to this center.
Having regard to the highly unbecoming conduct of Shri Sher Singh, there is no case for giving extension in his ad hoc promotion and he may be forthwith reverted as STO Class-II and posted as such in the IDC (Engg), Batala.
Thereafter, Addl.
Director (Admn.)
may be asked to hold detailed inquiry in this matter".
9.
This note was approved by the Chief Minister on 19.11.1993.
As already mentioned above an inquiry had been initiated against the appellant on account of his misbehaviour with the industrialists of Ludhiana and he was also charge-sheeted in that account.
There is yet another significant aspect.
After the appellant had been reverted to the Class-II post, the Government decided that it was no longer appropriate to proceed with the inquiry any further and an order dated 921995 Annexure P-13 was passed which we reproduce hereunder :-  "Shri Sher Singh, Senior Technical Officer was charge-sheeted vide Punjab Government letter No. 10/45/93-1-IB/2480 dated 541994 under Rule 8 of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970 for misbehaving with an Industrialist of Ludhiana.
Shri Sher Singh sent his reply to the charge-sheet on 24.6.1994.
While refusing to accept the allegations contained in the charge-sheet, he wrote that he did not misbehave with any Industrialist.
Reply submitted by the Officer was perused alongwith the comments of the Director, Industries Punjab.
Since, Shri Sher Singh, Senior Technical Officer, Ludhiana has already been given a big punishment for misbehaving with an Industrialist, by not extending the period of his ad hoc promotion to the post of Senior Technical Officer (Grade-I) beyond 1271993, as such, awarding him any further punishment to the officer in this case was not considered proper and viable.
The Governor of Punjab is, therefore, pleased to drop the Charge- sheet issued to Shri Sher Singh, Senior Technical Officer vide Punjab Government letter No. 10/45/93-1-IB/2480 dated 541994 under Rule 8 of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970".
10.
A reading of the aforesaid order along with Annexure P-6 clearly shows that the appellant had in effect been reverted from a Class-I post to a Class-II on account of misbehaviour and that the charge-sheet was dropped by the Governor of Punjab on the premise that he had suffered enough punishment.
11.
Shri KL Arora has informed us that appellant has since retired and that too on a Class-II post.
We, accordingly, allow the appeal, set aside the order of the learned Single Judge and quash order Annexure P-6 and direct that case relating to revised pensionary benefits/if any, be prepared within six months from today and all dues be paid within four months thereafter.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.