Dr. Mukundakam Sharma.
J - These writ petitions are directed against the order dated 23rd October, 2003 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal allowing the Original Application filed by the respondent holding that the disagreement note of the disciplinary authority is not a tentative decision but a final decision taken on the charges against the respondent and, therefore, the said disagreement note is illegal and invalid.
The Tribunal consequently quashed the said disagreement note as also the penalty imposed on the respondent thereby quashing the entire proceeding.
2.
Being aggrieved by the said order, these writ petitions are filed by the petitioners contending, inter alia, that a bare look at the disagreement note recorded by the disciplinary authority and communicated to the respondent vide Office Memorandum dated 17th August, 2001 would establish that the same was only tentative in nature and was not a final decision taken in the disciplinary proceeding.
Since the issues in all the writ petitions are similar, we dispose of all these writ petitions by this common judgment and order.
3.
Counsel for the respondent has brought to our notice various facts to show that the entire departmental proceeding taken by the petitioners were mala fide and that under no circumstance it could be said that any of the charges drawn up against the respondent was proved in the disciplinary proceeding.
It is also submitted by the counsel for the respondent that the disagreement note recorded by the disciplinary authority is a final opinion expressed in respect of the charges and, therefore, the opportunity which is granted to show cause was only an eyewash and, therefore, the same was rightly set aside and quashed by the Tribunal.
It is also submitted that the aforesaid disagreement note is not recorded by the actual disciplinary authority but was recorded by the Deputy Secretary (Vigilance), who has also communicated the same.
4.
We have considered the aforesaid contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioners as also the counsel for the respondent and we proceed to dispose of these writ petitions giving our reasons for the same.
5.
The petitioners drew up a disciplinary proceeding against the respondent by issuing a charge memorandum which contained 13 charges drawn up against the respondent.
After completion of the inquiry proceeding the inquiry officer submitted his report absolving the respondent from all the 13 charges.
The aforesaid inquiry report was placed before the disciplinary authority.
An order is placed on record which is dated 17th/24th August, 2001 wherefrom it is clearly established that the inquiry report submitted by the inquiry officer was examined by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
The Council is the disciplinary authority of the petitioners and, therefore, one of the submissions that the said disagreement note was not considered and decided by the disciplinary authority is found to be without any merit.
It is also communicated in the said communication dated 17th/24th August, 2001 that the Council upon going through the inquiry report had proposed to differ with the findings of the inquiry officer in respect of three charges, namely, Charge No. IV, Charge No. V and Charge No. VII.
6.
We may for the sake of convenience extract the relevant part of the same from the aforesaid communication dated 17th/24th August, 2001, as the entire pleas raised by the parties revolve around the interpretation of the said document.
It reads as under :  "OFFICE MEMORANDUM Sub : Disciplinary proceedings instituted against Dr. PN Bhat, former Director, IVRI, Izatnagar.
The undersigned is directed to refer to the subject cited above and to enclose herewith a copy of the report of the Inquiry Officer.
The inquiry report has been examined in the Council and it is proposed to differ with the findings of the Inquiry Officer in respect of the following articles of charge for reasons indicated alongside : ARTICLE OF CHARGE IV : Inquiry Officer has held the charge as not proved on the ground that the charged officer has repaid the excess amount.
It would, however, be seen that an amount of Rs. 1227/- claimed in excess was received by charged officer in January, 1990 and June, 1990 while the charged officer refunded the money only in January, 1991 and November, 1991 i.e. only after the excess claim had been investigated into and a memo was issued to the charged officer on 2761990.
Thus, the charge that charged officer preferred a false claim is proved.
ARTICLE OF CHARGE V : Inquiry Officer has held the charge that procedures were not followed in the purchase of Fermenter along with accessories at a cost of Rs. 15 lakhs as not proved because it was certified by the company that it was a proprietary item and no tenders were required to be called.
It would, however, be seen that in the initial note itself, it has been mentioned that IVRI had purchased a Fermenter from M/s. Bioengg.
AG, Switzerland which was yet to be installed.
The requisition for the Fermenter from the identified firm Le.
M/s LH Fermenter Ltd, England was signed by Dr. (Mrs.) Bhat (w/o Dr. PN Bhat) and Shri Rasool.
No mention was made about the fact that the requirement was a proprietary item while the charge was being processed.
The certificate from the firm is undated and appears to have been added as an after-thought.
Thus the charge framed against Dr. Bhat is partly proved.
ARTICLE OF CHARGE VII : Inquiry Officer has held the charge that no tenders were called for the purchase of Image Analysis systems at a cost of Rs. 18 lakhs from a West German firm in 1985 as not proved on the ground that the equipment was of proprietary nature and the purchase procedures were followed.
It would be seen from records that, in the requisition for immediate purchase, there was no justification as to why there was such an urgency.
There is no indication of any distress subsequently even though the equipment could be installed in December, 1986 ie after a gap of two years.
DGS & D was also bypassed on the pretext of emergency.
Thus, the charge that purchase procedures were not followed is proved.
If Dr. PN Bhat wishes to make any representation or submission on the findings of the Inquiry Officer and disagreement of the Council on some of the findings of the Inquiry Officer he may do so in writing to the disciplinary authority within 15 (fifteen) days of receipt of this Memorandum.
The disciplinary authority will take a suitable decision after considering the inquiry report and submission of the charged officer."
7.
We have carefully perused the said disagreement note and on scrutinizing thereof, we are of the considered opinion that disagreement note that has been prepared and finalized by the disciplinary authority was of tentative nature which is apparent from the expression used in the language of the aforesaid office memorandum.
It is clearly stated that after examination of the inquiry report the Council has "proposed" to differ with the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
The said expression clearly makes it clear that the aforesaid difference and disagreement is only tentative in nature and not a final decision.
The same is also corroborated by the last paragraph of the said communication wherein it is clearly stated that the disciplinary authority would take a suitable decision after considering the inquiry report and submission of the charged officer.
Therefore, whatever was recorded in the said disagreement note was apparently tentative in nature and not a final decision taken.
The disciplinary authority proposed to take a final decision after scrutiny of the inquiry report and the reply, if any, received from the respondent.
8.
In that view of the matter, the submission of the counsel for the respondent that the said disagreement note was a final decision and not a tentative opinion cannot be accepted.
The Tribunal also fell into an error in considering the said opinion as a final opinion and not as a tentative opinion.
The decision, which is referred to by the learned Tribunal in its decision, namely, Yoginath D Bagade v. State of Maharashtra & Anr, reported in 1999(4) S.C.T.
403 : 1999 VIII AD (SC) 201, in our considered opinion is distinguishable on facts.
A reading of the said decision would make it clear that in the said case not only the disciplinary authority, in the disagreement note, took a final decision in respect of disciplinary proceeding but also decided about the penalty which was to be imposed on the charged employee and decided to impose upon him the penalty of dismissal.
In that context the aforesaid observations were recorded by the Supreme Court, which in our opinion have no application to the facts and circumstances of this case.
In that view of the matter we are of the considered opinion that the decision which is rendered by the Tribunal cannot be sustained and is against the settled principles of law and, therefore, the same is set aside and quashed.
9.
It is, however, made clear that this order is only on the issue of disagreement note and no other issue is considered and decided in the present judgment and order passed by us today.
All other pleas which were raised by the respondent in the Original Application survive for consideration before the Tribunal.
We accordingly set aside and quash the impugned judgment and order of the the Tribunal and remit the matter to the Tribunal making it clear that all other pleas which were raised by the respondent in the Original Application and before the Tribunal shall be considered and decided in accordance with law as expeditiously as possible preferably within a period of two months from today.
10.
The petitions stand disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.
11.
The parties shall appear before the learned Tribunal on 14th December, 2005 for further orders.
It is also made clear that none of the observations made herein shall be construed by the Tribunal as any opinion or views expressed by this court on the merit of all other pleas which survive for consideration before the Tribunal.
Petition disposed of.