Ashutosh Mohunta, J - Amarjit Singh and Dushyant Singh, who were initially appointed as Tracers in the Punjab Tubewell Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh (for short `the Corporation'), have filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of writ of certiorari seeking quashment of the order 2041987 whereby they are being reverted from the post of Draftsman to that of Tracer.
2.
The undisputed facts of the present case are that both the petitioners were appointed as Tracer in the Corporation vide order dated 22.12.1977.
They were promoted to the post of draftsman on ad hoc basis vide letter dated 22121979 (Annexure P-4).
Both of them were reverted to the posts of Tracer on 171980.
They were again promoted provisionally as Draftsman along with nine others, who were junior to them vide order dated 2231983 (Annexure P-5), with a condition that all of them would have to pass the Departmental Examination within two years, failing which they were to be reverted.
All the candidates, who were promoted provisionally, failed to qualify the departmental examination within the stipulated period of two years.
However, all of them continued working as Draftsmen till 2041987, when the petitioners were allegedly going to be reverted to their original posts of Tracers.
The petitioners have challenged the action of the respondents on the ground of equality taking the plea that the nine persons, who are junior to them and also could not qualify the conditional departmental examination are being retained on the post of Draftsmen on the plea that they are Diploma Holders.
3.
Notice of motion was issued.
The respondents contested the petition on the ground that as the petitioners had failed to qualify the conditional Departmental Examination, therefore, they were validly proposed to be reverted to the post of Tracer, whereas the other nine persons were ITI Diploma Holders had been exempted from passing the Departmental Examination.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the case file meticulously.
5.
The relevant Clause 28 of Annexure `B' of Service Bye-Laws, 1977, which deals with promotion from Tracer to Draftsman, is reproduced hereunder for ready reference :-  "By promotion from Tracers possessing ITI Diploma in Draftsmanship and two years experience in the Corporation.
For non-Diploma Holders 4 years experience.
Passing of departmental examination will be necessary for promotion from Tracer to Draftsman in both cases."
Initially, as per afore-quoted Clause 28, the passing of Departmental Examination was made necessary for both the Diploma Holders as well as Non- Diploma Holders, except for the difference that for the Diploma Holders, the experience of two years as Tracer was required, whereas for Non-Diploma Holders, four years' experience was the essential qualification for getting promotion to the post of Draftsman.
However, an amendment has been made in Clause 28 of Annexure `B'.
The latest amended clause 28 is to the following effect :-  "For promotion : a. Tracers having diploma in Draftsmanship from recognised Institute.
2 years service as Tracer in the Corporation.
b. Tracers without Diploma in Draftsmanship : i.
4 years service as Tracer.
ii.
Passing of Departmental Examination subject to the condition that :- the non-diploma holder draftsman promoted as on 2231983 on provisional basis who were allowed the pay scale of the Draftsman will not be covered by the amended rules for promotion from the post of Tracer to Draftsman, if there is no legal hitch in doing so."
A perusal of the afore-quoted amended clause 28 of Annexure `B' would show that if the Diploma Holders have been exempted from passing Departmental Examination for getting promotion to the post of Draftsman, the exemption clause has also been added therein in the case of non-diploma holder draftsman, who were promoted as on 2231983.
Undisputedly, the petitioners were promoted to the post of Draftsman on 2231983 vide Annexure P-5.
Thus, in case the respondents have taken the plea that the other nine Draftsmen are Diploma Holders and the condition of passing of the Departmental Examination does no more apply to them, even then they cannot revert the petitioners (who are non-diploma holders) as a special provision for their exemption from passing the Departmental Examination has been made in the afore-quoted amended clause 28.
6.
Even otherwise, the petitioners have been performing their duties against the posts of Draftsmen satisfactorily as they had been allowed to hold the promoted posts from 1983 to 1987, which is a considerable period for assessing the performance of an employee.
In Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, 1992(8) Services Law Reporter 784, it has been held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court as under :-  ".......The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of the initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerably length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
In our view three years' experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the respondent, in the circumstances would be sufficient for confirmation......" In view of the afore-quoted dictum of their Lordships of the Supreme Court, the respondents now cannot be allowed to take the plea that as the petitioners were non-diploma holders and failed to qualify the departmental examination, therefore, they are being reverted to the post of Tracer.
Consequently, I allow the writ petition.
The respondents are estopped from reverting the petitioners from the post of Draftsman to that of Tracer on the ground of non-fulfilment of requisite qualification by them at this belated stage.
Petition allowed.