MM Aggarwal, J - According to the petitioner, he had been working as part time sweeper in P.W.D.
Rest House Rai since 1986.
Before his appointment, his grand-mother and his father had been performing those duties.
He submitted an application for regularisation of his services which was recommended by Executive Engineer, Provincial Division No. l, Sonepat; that respondent State had issued instructions for regularisation of service of those employees who had completed five years' service on 3131993.
Thereafter instructions were issued on 1831996 and the services of work charged/casual/daily rated employees who had completed three years' service on 3131996, were also to be regularised.
Even when the case of the petitioner was recommended, still he was not made regular.
He filed the writ petition.
His termination was stayed.
That writ petition was disposed of with the direction to the government to pass appropriate order.
Thereafter, his request for regularisation was declined by respondents.
Therefore, present writ petition was filed for direction to the respondents to regularise his services.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State, it was pleaded that the services of the petitioner had been rightly dispensed with vide order dated 451999 passed by respondent No3; that petitioner being a part time employee and not being recruited through employment exchange had no right to the post or his regularisation.
3.
Annexure P-1 is recommendation of the Executive Engineer, Provincial Division No. 1, Sonepat dated 291996 that there was need for full time sweeper in the PWD Rest House and that services of Kartar Singh, Sweeper, who was working since 1986, as part time sweeper, should be regularised; Annexure P-2 dated 18th March, 1996 are instructions of the government whereby work charged/casual/daily rated employees who had completed three years service on 3111996, were to be regularised; Annexure P-3 is letter dated 29.5.1998 from Sub Divisional Engineer (Maintenance) Sub Division PWD B&R Sonepat that regular sweeper had been transferred against the part time post of sweeper in PWD Rest House Rai who was likely to join in near future and therefore, services of Kartar Singh as part time sweeper are no longer required on the arrival of the regular sweeper.
This court in writ petition No. 9991 of 1998 filed by the petitioner while issuing notice of motion for 10.9.1998 had directed vide order 371998 (Annexure P-4) that services of the petitioner be not terminated.
Annexure P-5 is order, in Writ Petition No. 9125 of 1997 with which writ petition filed by present petitioner was attached, to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation in terms of the government policy instructions.
Annexure P-6 is order of the government whereby petitioner's case was considered and rejected on the ground that appointment of the petitioner was just contractual for a particular fixed period being a part time sweeper and that he was not work charged/daily workman and therefore his services could not be regularised.
4.
As per record produced, petitioner continued working upto April 1999 and then his services were terminated.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 2783 of 1995 (Gurdev Kaur v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 13.9.2005.
In that case, petitioner was working as Dai on part time wages fixed by the Deputy Commissioner and it had been held that petitioner was entitled to regular employment.
In the present case, petitioner had been working as part time sweeper since 1986.
There was need for full time sweeper and even a full time sweeper was posted in the PWD Rest House where the present petitioner was employed.
It is not the case of the respondents that no post was available for him.
Moreover, no qualification may be necessary for a sweeper except that he should do the job satisfactorily.
Merely because he was not originally appointed through the employment exchange would not be a ground to deny him the right of regularisation of his service especially when his case had been recommended and there was need for full time sweeper in the PWD Rest House where he was working.
6.
Under these circumstances, this writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that petitioner shall be taken in regular service within a period of one month from today.
7.
Since petitioner had not performed any duty from the date of his termination till this date, it is directed that he shall be entitled to pay and allowances only after one month from today.
Petition allowed.