KS.
Garewal, J - Ravinder Kaur, petitioner, herein was interviewed by the selection committee in the office of the District Education Officer, Ambala on December 3, 1996 and was selected as JBT Teacher but she was not appointed.
The petitioner claimed that the reason she was not appointed was because her qualification of JBT had been obtained from Punjab Education Department which has been derecognised in the State of Haryana.
However, subsequently the petitioner did secure appointment with effect from July 26, 1989.
2.
In the petition it has been pleaded that the petitioner passed her matriculation examination from Punjab School Education Board on December 30, 1977, Bachelor of Arts from Panjab University on June 27, 1981 and Junior Basic Teacher Certificate (JBT) from Punjab Education Department in the Session 1978-80 and certificate was issued on August 27, 1980.
Petitioner passed Giani Examination with Hindi as an additional subject from Punjabi University, Patiala on December 15, 1978.
3.
According to the petitioner the reason she was not given appointment on the initial stage after her selection on December 3, 1986 was the fact that her JBT Certificate had been awarded by the Punjab Education Department which had been derecognized by the Director of School Educating Haryana.
However, the derecognition had been effected vide orders dated April 29, 1981 to mean that it would be effective only from April 29, 1981 (Annexure P-5).
This derecognition had been further clarified vide order dated August 21, 1981 and would not apply to those candidates who had passed JBT Examination from Punjab from that date.
This communication is Annexure P-6.
In the present case the petitioner had obtained her Junior Basic Teacher Certificate on the basis of the examination held by the Punjab Education Department in May, 1980.
This certificate is Annexure P-3.
Consequently the derecognition of JBT Certificate from Punjab Education Department would not apply to her case since she had obtained the qualification long before it was derecognised.
4.
The Supreme Court of India in Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2027 had categorically held that it would be unjust to students who join a recognized institution which gets derecognized before they obtain their certificates.
The derecognition of the course should apply to only those students who join the course after derecognition.
This means that the effect of derecognition cannot be retrospective in operation.
This principle was followed in Madhu Bala Sethi v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) RSJ 613 (Pb.
& Hry.)
and Anil Kumar Gupta v. Punjabi University, Patiala, 1991(3) RSJ 505.
5.
This petition was admitted on October 5, 1988 but till date the State has not filed any written statement.
Therefore, the Court is entitled to presume that the averments made in the writ petition stand admitted and resultantly this petition deserves to be allowed.
The petitioner had been wrongly denied appointment on the basis of untenable ground.
The petitioner's appointment shall relate back to the date when teachers junior to had been appointed on the basis of the interview conducted on December 3, 1986.
Petitioner shall be entitled to benefits including fixation of salary and seniority from the date juniors in her batch were appointed.
This petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition allowed.