Viney Mittal, J - The petitioners were working as Clerks in RSD College, Ferozepur City, which undisputedly is a private recognized affiliated college in the State of Punjab.
Vide communication dated January 7, 1981 the State Government of Punjab issued instructions to the Director, Public Instruction (College), Punjab to grant pay parity to the non-teaching staff of private affiliated Colleges alongwith their counter-parts working with Government Colleges with effect from September 1, 1978.
Subsequently, on April 17, 1984, the State Government issued a circular, whereby it was decided that a Clerk who had worked for a period of three years in that capacity and had a satisfactory record, would be entitled to be placed in the senior scale.
The only stipulation contained in the aforesaid circular was that official should have completed three years service in the lower scale of Clerk/steno-typist; that he should have completed the probationary period satisfactorily and that other conditions for placement in the senior scale would have been satisfied.
A copy of the aforesaid circular has been appended as Annexure P.3 with the present petition.
Subsequently, on April 24, 1984 the State Government granted sanction to the change of designation and revision of grades of Clerks working in the category of non-teaching staff of affiliated private colleges with effect from April 1, 1984.
50% of the posts as per the aforesaid communication were to be designated as senior scale clerks.
The aforesaid communication was modified on March 22, 1985 (Annexure P.4).
The benefit of the designation of senior scales to the 50% of the Clerks was to be effective with effect from September 1, 1978.
2.
The petitioners were eligible as per the aforesaid stipulations contained in the various circulars.
They had completed three years service as Clerks in an affiliated private college and had worked satisfactorily.
Accordingly, the petitioners were placed in the senior scales with effect from September 1, 1978.
However, later on vide another communication dated April 4, 1986, the Director Public Instruction (College) directed all the Principals of the Non-Government Aided Colleges that the aforesaid senior scale within the quota of 50% of the Clerks, was to be granted only to such clerks who had been appointed prior to September 1, 1968 (meaning thereby who had completed 10 years service as on September 1, 1978).
It was further directed that such persons who had not completed 10 years of service on September 1, 1978 were not entitled to get the senior scales till the sanction was granted by the State Government in this regard.
On the basis of the aforesaid directions, the petitioners were found not entitled to the aforesaid senior scales.
Accordingly, the benefit granted to the petitioners was sought to be withdrawn and they were directed to surrender/refund the money already paid to them on account of senior scales having been granted to them.
The aforesaid order dated June 4, 1986 has been appended as Annexure P 6 with the present petition.
3.
The petitioners have impugned the aforesaid order (Annexure P.6).
They have relied upon a subsequent circular dated December 7, 1987 whereby the State Government has again directed that all the remaining eligible Clerks and steno-typists (whose number may be determined by the Director of Public Instruction, College) were also entitled to be granted the benefit of senior scales.
Thus, the petitioners have challenged Annexure P 6 on two counts.
Firstly, it has been averred that the petitioners were entitled to the grant of senior scales as per the various circulars operative at the time of the grant of senior scales to them, namely, Annexures P. 1 to P.4.
On that basis, the petitioners have maintained that the benefit of the aforesaid senior scales having been granted by the authorities on the strength of the earlier circulars, the same could not have been withdrawn since there was no misrepresentation by the petitioners while claiming the aforesaid benefit nor there was any fraud committed by them.
This contention of the petitioner is based upon the judgment of the Apex Court in Sahib Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1994(5) SLR 753.
The second contention on the basis of which order Annexure P 6 has been challenged is that subsequent to the order Annexure P 5, whereby the condition of 10 years of satisfactory service was stipulated., the State Government had itself issued a circular dated December 7, 1987, whereby the remaining eligible clerks had also been granted the benefit for the grant of senior scales.
On that basis, the petitioners have claimed that, in any case, because of the issuance of the subsequent circular dated December 7, 1987 the entitlement of the petitioners had become crystallized and, therefore, the recovery sought to be effected from them was totally without any basis.
4.
Although the claim of the petitioners has been contested by the respondents by filing a written statement but the facts, as noticed in the above paragraphs, have not been disputed.
The applicability of the various instructions dated April 17, 1984, April 24, 1984 April 22, 1985 and April 4, 1986 have not been disputed by the respondents.
5.
It is also not the stand of the respondents that the relief had been claimed by the petitioners by practising any fraud upon the authorities or by making any false averments with regard to their status.
6.
The Apex court in the case of Sahib Ram's case (supra) held as follows :-  "Admittedly, the appellant does not posses the required educational qualifications.
Under the circumstances the appellant would not be entitled to the relaxation.
The Principal erred in granting him the relaxation.
Since the date of relaxation the appellant had been paid his salary on revised scale.
However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances the amount paid till date may not be record from the appellant.
Even otherwise, as per the condition stipulator in the circular Annexure P.7 the petitioners have become eligible to the grant of senior scales with effect from September 1, 1978.
On that basis also, the action of the respondent effecting recovery from the petitioners is totally without any justification.
Looking from any of the aforesaid angles, the claim of the petitioners in making a grievance against the order of recovery is wholly justified and legally sustainable.
Accordingly, the present petition is allowed.
Annexure P.6 is quashed and it is directed that the respondents would not be entitled to effect any recovery from the petitioners in pursuance to the order Annexure P.6.
Petition allowed.