MM Aggarwal, J - According to the petitioner Bani Singh, he was working as Driver in Haryana Roadways since 1990.
He was sent on duty to Jammu & Kashmir during general election in the year 1996.
He stayed there for two months.
Due to harsh climatic condition, the petitioner fell ill and his eyes were badly effected.
On return to his service, he had asked for leave on health grounds.
Instead of medical leave, he was sent for medical examination and was declared unfit to drive heavy vehicle.
He was retired from service vide order dated 621997.
He filed departmental appeal but he was not heard.
Therefore, this writ petition.
2.
From order Annexure P-2 dated 621997 whereby the petitioner had been retired from service, it would come out that the petitioner had become unfit for the post of Driver and no suitable alternative job equal to the post of Driver and any other lower post was available to accommodate him.
He was retired in view of the instructions issued by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, Chandigarh.
It was further directed that compensation be worked out and paid.
Annexure P-5 is the letter of the Transport Commissioner dated 931998 issued to the petitioner vide which representation/appeal of the petitioner had been rejected after due consideration since he was found medically unfit for the post of Driver and compensation had been paid to him.
3.
The facts pleaded by the petitioner and as borne out from Annexures P-2 and P-5 were not denied by the respondents.
Section 47(1) of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 provides as under :-  "47.
Non-discrimination in Government employrnents:  (1) No establishment shall dispense with, or reduce in rank, an employee who acquires a disability during his service;  Provided that, if an employee, after acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he was holding, could be shifted to some other post with the same pay scale and service benefits:-  Provided further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he may be kept on a supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains the age of superannuation, whichever is earlier.
While passing the order Annexure P-2 retiring the petitioner, the respondents had relied upon Division Bench judgment of this Court passed in C.W.P.
No. 12446 of 1992 dated 9121992 and then instructions of the Government which are prior to the passing of the Act of 1995.
The petitioner had been retired on 621997 after the passing of this Act.
He was to be dealt with as per the provisions of Section 47(1) and its provisos.
If no suitable post was available for him and it was not possible to adjust him against any post, then he was to be kept on supernumerary post until the suitable post is available or he attains the suprannuation which ever is earlier.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had relied on a judgment of the Supreme Court titled Kunal Singh Versus Union of India & another, 2003 (2) RSJ 199 (SC) which applies to the facts of the present case with full force.
5.
As per service record and admitted position, the date of birth of the petitioner is April, 1950.
He was to attain the age of superannuation in April, 2008.
If he could not be adjusted against any post then he was to be kept on a supernumerary post until some suitable post is available or he had attained the age of superannuation whichever is earlier.
6.
Under these circumstances, this writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be entitled to remain on supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains the age of superannuation i.e. April, 2008.
The compensation, if any paid shall be adjusted against the amount, if any due to the petitioner as arrears etc.
Petition allowed.