Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - The petitioner above-named (hereinafter referred to as the management) by this application has impugned award passed by the Central Industrial Tribunal being the second respondent dated 28th February 1997 in reference case No. 41 of 1981, in connection with the disputes raised by the Food Corporation of India Workers' Union (hereinafter in short 3rd respondent).
The learned Tribunal decided the issue in favour of the third respondent in connection with the dispute referred to it under Section 10(1) (d) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) which is set out hereunder.
2.
Whether action of the management of Food Corporation of India, Calcutta in not making exgratia payment in lieu of bonus on attendance allowance to their workmen employed in 20 depots in Calcutta Complex on the plea that the same does not form part of salary or wage as defined in the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, is justified?
If not, to what relief are the concerned workmen entitled?
3.
The learned Tribunal while deciding aforesaid case examined witness of both the sides and allowed the documentary evidence to be adduced.
Upon examining and interpreting the documentary evidence and analyzing, appreciating oral evidence adduced by both the parties, the learned Tribunal came to fact findings that the attendance allowance paid by the management to the members of the 3rd respondent (union) is part of the wages, so, while paying exgratia in lieu of bonus the attendance allowance should be added, which had hitherto been refused by the management to the workers.
The learned Tribunal while coming to this finding had applied the definition of wages as mentioned in the said Act, however, ignored the definition of `wages' mentioned in the payment of Bonus Act.
The reference as above has background of the following short fact, admittedly.
4.
The member workers of 3rd respondent were originally employed by the contractor to serve as labour for handling and storing of food grains at the diverse depots of first writ petitioner in and around city of Calcutta.
Obviously, their payment of wages were made through contractors.
On collective bargaining both the management and the 3rd respondent settled their dispute in relation to employment on various terms, which amongst others are as follows :-  (i) The then existing workers employed by the contractor would be depratmentalized, their contract system would be done away with.
(ii) Each and every worker shall be ensured with works for 21 days in a month and shall be paid full wages for 25 days in a month out of which four days shall be excluded as weekly holiday.
During rest of the four days there was no guarantee of providing works, however, in the event any worker attends depots and present himself for rendering work and if the work is not available then 50 per cent of the wages shall be paid as and by way of attendance allowance, provided further that in the event work is given then full wages shall be paid.
The aforesaid methodology of settlement was evolved from the settlement arrived at between Dock Labour Board Workers and Dock Labour Board Management.
The management decided to pay exgratia at the rate of 833 per cent of the wages in lieu of bonus.
The aforesaid settlement was arrived at some times in 1971 and till 1980 there was no dispute.
The management used to pay exgratia to these workmen at the rat of 833 per cent on the wages paid for 21 days as above.
According to management the attendance allowance is not part of the wages but 3rd respondent refused to accept this interpretation of the management.
So that disputes arose and above reference was made to the learned Tribunal for its decision.
5.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned Senior Advocate while supporting this writ petition contends that the findings of the learned Tribunal is perverse as it has misread and misinterpreted the terms of the settlement with regard to the payment of attendance allowance.
He has been wrong patently while applying the definition of `wages' under the said Act in this case.
His contention is that the learned Tribunal failed to appreciate the real intention of the terms of settlement.
If the terms of settlement is read meaningfully and objectively, it will appear attendance allowance is provided as compensation for not providing any work for the four days in a month and this can be compared with the term `compensation' for lay off.
The definition of `lay off in Section 2(KKK) given in the said Act does not admit of wages, this payment thus cannot be termed to be wages.
Therefore, question of payment of either bonus or exgratia whatever may be terms, does and cannot arise if the aforesaid definition is read with Section 2(rr) of the said Act.
6.
His next contention is that in an identical case the learned Arbitrator has held that `attendance allowance' is not part of the wages to include the same for computation and payment of bonus or exgratia.
7.
Mr. Partha Sarathi Sengupta, learned Senior Counsel while supporting the award and appearing for the 3rd respondent contends that the impugned award is well-reasoned one and based upon analysis of evidence and reasonable interpretation of the law.
It is not a case of without evidence or patent misreading of evidence.
This Court in exercise of power of judicial review should not interfere with the decision of a quasi-judicial authority unless patently absurd finding unconnected with evidence is found.
If it appears, in a given case, two reasonable views are possible and reasonable and the learned Tribunal adopts one of such possible views bona fide, the Writ Court in exercise of its power under Article 226 will not substitute its own decision.
8.
Admitted case is that, Bonus Act does not apply.
The question is whether on the facts and circumstances of this case attendance allowance can be treated as part of the wages to meet demand of exgratia payment or not.
9.
Having heard respective contention and having read carefully the impugned award I think Mr. Sengupta is right in his contention that the award is based on a reasonable analysis of evidence and interpretation of the document exhibited.
Even then at the instance of Mr. Bhattacharjee I have read thoroughly the evidence adduced by both the parties.
I do not find the reasoning of the learned Tribunal is based on no evidence or based on patently absurd misreading of any document nor it suffers from misapplication of any law.
The learned Tribunal is perfectly within his jurisdiction to import definition `wages' mentioned in the said Act, which is one of such cognate labour legislations.
10.
Mr. Bhattacharjee's submission in this regard is not acceptable to me as it appears to me the term `attendance allowance' is used in the sense that in the event attendance is given and no work is provided than 50 per cent of the wages is ensured.
Attendance allowance unlike another case referred to in the award is not provided by way of compensation for incurring expenses for travelling to and fro the place of employment.
The terms `attendance allowance' as fairly conceded by Mr. Bhattacharjee appears to be that in the event work is provided the worker concerned shall be paid frill wages, otherwise 50 per cent of wages.
From the analysis of evidence the learned Tribunal found, I should say correctly, that the management admitted the aforesaid attendance allowance had been taken into consideration for deduction of provident fund as well.
Therefore, for all practical purposes this allowance is accepted to be the wages.
11.
The payment and receipt of exgratia is not emanating from any law but from a decision taken by the management by its own at the rate of 833 per cent on the wages.
In absence of specification in the decision of management term `wages' includes a portion thereof also.
12.
Accordingly, I hold that the Tribunal is justified and further correct in its findings that exgratia has to be paid taking `attendance allowance' into account.
13.
Accordingly I do not find any merit in the contentions of Mr. Bhattacharjee.
The writ petition is thus disposed of.
However, without any order as to costs whatsoever.
Order accordingly.