Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - The petitioner in this matter was a Head Master of a school named Triveni Thermal Dr. BC Roy Vidyalaya (hereinafter referred to as the said School).
He was appointed by the State Electricity Board, respondent No. 6 herein.
He was engaged by a letter of offer dated 2nd July 1968, on various terms and conditions, one of which is relevant for the present petition and is as follows:  "Notwithstanding what is stated above, his appointment under the Board will be subject to the provisions of the West Bengal State Electricity Board Employees Service Regulations."
2.
He accepted such offer of appointment and acted as a Head Master in the said School.
During his course of employment, he came to this Court for payment of salary at par with the teaching staff of the schools aided by the Government of West Bengal.
His Lordship Mr. Justice Mohitosh Mazumdar (as His Lordship then was) allowed such prayer of parity of pay and further directed amongst other, the terms and conditions covering the GDA scheme shall be applicable to the writ petitioners from the date and hour he came under the scheme, that is from 01011989.
The aforesaid judgment and order was not appealed against.
3.
It is admitted position that the retirement age of all the employees of the Board is 58 years.
Accordingly, the respondent No. 6 duly gave notice of retirement to the petitioner by annexure I.
Now the petitioner on the strength of the aforesaid direction of His Lordship Mr. Justice Mazumdar is challenging the aforesaid letter of retirement, contending that he is not liable to be retired on completion of 58 years of age, rather 60 years will be his retiring age, as the ROPA Rules 1990 stipulates the retirement age of teaching staff as being 60 years.
His further contention is that, he is entitled to all the retirement and terminal benefits treating the aforesaid age of retirement as 60 years.
4.
The learned Lawyers PK Tarafdar and Mr. Debashish Purakait, appearing for the petitioner contend that neither the Government nor the Board can deny the petitioners right of having equal treatment in the matter of retirement and other terminal benefits.
The judgment and order of Justice Mazumdar has been accepted and acted upon, therefore, the petitioner should be given all facilities available under the GDA scheme.
5.
Mr. Bhaskar Mitra, learned Advocate appearing for the WBSEB, respondent No. 6 contends that the this school is not given any financial aid or assistance, nor the same is administered and controlled by the Managing Committee required to be formed and done under the School Code.
The Board has only recognized the schools.
The petitioner's service condition is governed by the terms and conditions of the service as it is applicable in case of other employees under the Board.
He contends further that the order and judgment of Justice Mazumdar has only benefited the petitioner with payment of salary at par with the teachers of other schools aided and financed by the Government of West Bengal, under the School Code.
He has accepted the terms and conditions governing the service of other employees of the Board.
Therefore, his date of retirement age is 58 years and it is binding upon him.
The ROPA Rules of 1990 is wholly inapplicable.
6.
He informs during pendency of the writ petition, the management and control of Bandal Thermal Power Station was taken over by another body namely West Bengal Power Development Corporation Ltd by and under a Notification dated 28th June 2001, so the aforesaid corporate body has been added as a party respondent.
7.
Mr. Monibhusan Sarkar, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the added respondent contends that the terms and conditions relating to retirement age and other terminal benefit will be applicable only in case of the Schools that receives financial aid from the Government.
He has drawn my attention to the Notification of Government of West Bengal, Education Department dated 31st April 1981, wherefrom it appears that the aforesaid GDA scheme will be applicable in case of Government aided school.
8.
Having heard the respective contentions of the learned Counsels for the parties the issue involved in this matter is as to whether the petitioner is governed by the terms and conditions of service as per the Government GDA scheme or by the rules and regulations of the West Bengal State Electricity Board.
It is an admitted position, the petitioner was employed by the Board and he has unequivocally accepted the terms and conditions as laid down by the Board as applicable in case of other employees as I have already observed.
These terms and conditions were never challenged by the petitioner, either in the present writ petition or previously.
The effect of the judgment and order of Justice Mazumdar is in my view as rightly contended by Mr. Bhaskar Mitra, is applicable for parity of salary with the teachers of other schools aided by the Government.
The rules, and regulation and the GDA scheme are applicable as rightly submitted by Mr. Sarkar, to the schools that receive Government aid in any form.
Therefore, I hold that the terms and conditions of service, as laid down by the Government of West Bengal will not be applicable in case of the petitioner.
The petitioner should strictly be governed by the terms and conditions as stipulated by the Board as the same was not varied and/or altered in any manner whatsoever.
9.
Moreover, even assuming the GDA is applicable, I find the petitioner has not fulfilled the conditions as required to be done to avail of the benefit of retirement age of 60 years as per ROPA Rules 1990 by exercising option.
This situation and question did not and do not arise simply because his service condition was not governed by the Government of West Bengal stipulation and direction.
10.
As such, I am unable to accept the contention of the learned Lawyer for the petitioner that the petitioner is governed by the ROPA rules.
11.
Accordingly, I hold that this petition has no merit and the notice of retirement age has been duly passed.
No relief is granted to the petitioner, however, in the event the petitioner has not been paid any retirement benefit then the same shall be paid by the Power Development Corporation, namely respondent No. 6, since by and under the aforesaid notification under which added respondent took over management and control of the respondent No. 6 whereby it is provided as follows :  "All suits, cases, or arbitration proceedings pending in any Court and any Arbitrator relating to the Generating Stations (BTPS & STPS) against the Board shall with effect from the date of this notification, be deemed to have been instituted against the generating company (WBFDCL) and the Generating Company (WBPDCL) shall be substituted in place of the Board."
12.
In view of the aforesaid provision the West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited shall take all liability for making payment accordingly to the petitioner.
Thus the writ petition is disposed of without awarding any costs whatsoever.
Petition dismissed.