Jasbir Singh, J - In this writ petition, it is prayer of the petitioner that respondents be directed to grant him disability pension from the date, he was discharged from service.
He has also claimed grant of other admissible benefits, as per law.
2.
It is case of the petitioner that he had joined the Indian Air Force on 28121983.
Before joining his duty, he was put to medical examination, in which he was found fit and no disease/disability, whatsoever, was detected by the Medical Board.
Thereafter, he had participated in various training courses which he successfully passed and was awarded certificates, Annexure P/1 to P/7.
He was discharged from Air Force on 28101990, having been found medically unfit.
3.
It was opined by the Medical Board that he was suffering from disease schizophrenia and on account of that he was not capable of discharging his duties.
His case for grant of disability pension was taken up and papers were forwarded by Air Force Record Office, New Delhi to Deputy CDA (AF) (Pension Cell), New Delhi on 3.11.1992.
However, Air Force authorities instead of granting him disability pension, ordered release of gratuity vide letter dated 1781993.
4.
The petitioner again approached the authorities through Zila Sainik Board, Karnal for grant of disability pension.
Vide letter dated 20.10.1993, authorities informed the Zila Sainik Board Karnal that case of disability pension of the petitioner had already been finalised and decision in that regard was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated 2461993.
Thereafter, correspondence continued between Zila Sainik Board and the authorities concerned but without any result.
Vide letter dated 17111994, Air Force authorities informed the wife of the petitioner that claim towards disability pension of the petitioner had already been rejected.
Even thereafter, petitioner and his wife continued to make representations, claiming disability pension.
However, failed to get any response from Air Force authorities.
Ultimately, legal notice was sent on 682003.
Even then nothing was done by the respondents.
Hence, this writ petition.
5.
Upon notice, respondents filed written statement, wherein claim of the petitioner has been controverted by stating that petitioner was boarded out from service, having been found medically unfit, as he was suffering from schizophrenia and disability was assessed as 20% for two years.
It has further been stated that Medical Board had given its further opinion that the disease was neither attributable to nor aggravated by conditions of service.
By accepting opinion of the Medical Board, no disability pension was sanctioned in favour of the petitioner.
It has further been stated that since amount of invalid gratuity and Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity had already been paid, no claim remained to be satisfied.
It was prayed' that accordingly, writ petition, having no substance, be dismissed.
6.
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner had joined service with the Indian Air Force on 28121983.
Before joining his duties, he was put to medical examination and was found fit to join service.
Specific averments made by the petitioner that no note was put at that time in his medical report by the Board that the petitioner was suffering from any disease, has not specifically been denied by the respondents.
It has only been stated in para 2 that at the time of induction in service, petitioner was put to a general medical test in which disease like schizophrenia could not have been detected.
However, in the written statement, it has no where been stated that at the time of discharge of the petitioner, Medical Board had mentioned in its report that the disease, with which petitioner was suffering, was of such nature that it could not have been detected at the time of petitioner's entry in service.
7.
A similar situation came up before a Division Bench of this Court in A.J.S.
Chaudhary v. Union of India and others, 1999(1) RSJ 778 (Pb.
& Hry.
), wherein after discussing facts of that case and various Judgements on the subject, it was observed as under :-  "19.
The ratio of the decisions, referred to herein above, fully support the argument of Shri Randhawa that the rejection of petitioner's claim for disability pension is legally unsustainable because at the time of his acceptance for military service, no note was recorded that he was suffering from Schizophrenia and the opinion recorded by the Medical Board at the time of his discharged from service does not contain a note that the disease was such could not be detected at the time of petitioner's entry in the service."
8.
This Court is of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner is squarely covered by the ratio of judgment in AJS Chaudhary's case (supra).
Accordingly this writ petition is allowed and decision of the respondents, rejecting the claim of the petitioner for disability pension, is quashed and he is declared entitled to get disability pension in accordance with Rule 173 read with Appendix-II of the Army Regulations.
9.
However, keeping in view facts and circumstances of this case, right of the petitioner to claim arrears is confined to 38 months prior to filing of the present writ petition.
10.
Respondents are directed to calculate disability pension from the date of his discharge till its payment.
If the payment is made within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order, petitioner shall not be entitled to -any interest, however, if the authorities failed to make payment within the stipulated period, petitioner shall be entitled to claim simple interest @7% per annum on the arrears of disability pension.
Petition allowed.