Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By this writ application (C.O.
6388 of 1994), the petitioner has challenged an order of transfer dated 23rd May, 1994 passed by the Chief Executive Officer, Hooghly District Central Co-operative Bank Ltd (hereinafter referred to as the said Bank).
By this impugned order, the petitioner along with other employees was transferred to Chinsurah Branch in the capacity of Senior Supervisor from the Head Office.
The fact of the case on which the challenge is founded, is shortly put as follows :  The petitioner at all material time is an employee of the said Bank and presently posted as Loan Section In-charge, which is equivalent to the Branch Manager.
He also claims to be the General Secretary to the Hooghly District Central Co-operative Bank Staff Association since 1987 and also a Vice-president of All Bengal Co-operative Federation (ABCF in short).
He was initially appointed as an Office Assistant in Grade-II in 1975.
The said Grade was re-numbered as Grade V and VI in 1982.
The petitioner was transferred to various departments in 1979, 1980, 1984 and in 1986.
In 1986, he was posted at the Loan Section in the Head Office as an Office Assistant under the Branch Manager who was in-charge of Loan Section.
The petitioner had obtained special training in the workshop in co-operative statistics.
Consequent upon transfer of the then Branch Manager, Loan Section, at Head Office, the petitioner was given the charge of Loan Section, as such, he was appointed as In-charge of the Section to officiate.
Thus, he claims to have been promoted to Grade IV from Grade V vide by the said order dated 20th December 1988.
Since then, he had been discharging his duties as an In-charge, Loan Section, till 23rd May 1994.
His position at the transferred place is inferior to that of the post of Loan Section, In-charge and, therefore, he has been demoted and/or his rank has been reduced without any reason or giving any opportunity of being heard.
He claims further that having had continuously worked for six years in the post of Loan Section, he had reasonably expected to be confirmed in the said post and acquired the status of permanent holder of the post, permanent in nature.
His further case is that he being the Office Bearer of the said Association is not liable to be transferred from the Head Office to any Branch Office.
The impugned transfer order is meant to victimize the petitioner to curb his activities as protected workman in violation of Section 33(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, read with the award passed by the Tribunal on the question of transferability of protected workers.
2.
Mr. Sitaram Bhattacharya, learned Advocate, appearing in support of the writ petition submits that the impugned order of transfer is illegal and unconstitutional in view of the fact that the same is in effect an order of punishment and this order has been passed without following the established procedure of law.
No show-cause notice was served nor any enquiry was held against the petitioner to pass this impugned order.
3.
He highlights this point that for long six years he has been officiating as a Branch Manager of the Loan Section and because of such prolonged officiation, the petitioner has acquired the right to be absorbed in the said post under the relevant co-operative rules.
The post to which the petitioner has been transferred is inferior to that of the posts he had been officiating.
Even his client was not paid the equivalent salary as was required to be done under the rules for such officiation.
The petitioner has reasonable and legitimate expectation to be absorbed in the said post of Branch Manager in Loan Section.
By passing the impugned order, his right accrued in course of time, has been taken away by this impugned order.
In support of his submission, he has relied on decisions of the Supreme Court reported in as follows :  (1) AIR 1984 SC 1854 (2) AIR 1962 SC 1704  (3) AIR 1958 SC 36  (4) AIR 196 SC 1197.
He has relied on a large number of decisions on the question of maintainability of the writ petition.
This Court thinks it fit not to record or consider the above decisions as this question has not been taken or agitated by the learned Counsel for the respondent.
4.
Mr. Bhattacharya admits in his submission that the service of the petitioner is transferable and no ground or challenge has been taken other than those mentioned above.
The fundamental point which is to be considered in this case is whether the claim of the petitioner as an officiating Branch Manager in Loan Section is lawful and/or justified or not.
If so, then certainly the effect of the impugned order would be a punitive one.
Admittedly, the impugned order has been passed without any opportunity of being heard.
5.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya, learned Senior Advocate, submits that the claim of the petitioner of officiating Branch Manager in the Loan Section at Head Office is absolutely unfounded.
He was never asked to officiate rather he was asked to receive the charge of the said Section from one Sri Dhira Ranjan Das who was transferred from the Loan Section and was posted as Branch Manager Khamargachi Branch, for administrative exigencies by reason of death of the incumbent.
He has shown me the relevant order for making over charges to the writ petitioner being dated 5th December 1988, annexed to the affidavit-in-opposition as being Annexure-B  6.
He submits further that he merely received the charge and never officiated as Branch Manager in the Loan Section because the post of Branch Manager is much superior to the post then held by the writ petitioner.
At that time, the writ petitioner had been holding the post of Senior Assistant, Grade-III and the Branch Manager is identified as Grade II.
Now petitioner has been transferred to the post carrying same grade of pay scale, but different description, as such, there has been no question of reduction in rank.
Consequently, there is no question of any punishment being inflicted.
As per his claim of being posted at the Headquarter for holding the post of office bearer of trade union is concerned, there is no rule nor any agreement for placing any Officer Bearer at his chosen place.
7.
The order of transfer has been passed on the administrative exigency and there is no intention on the part of the employer to victimize the writ petitioner.
8.
Having heard respective contentions and examined the documents and materials carefully, I do not find any document or material to accept the case of the petitioner that he was asked to officiate as a Branch Manager in the Loan Section in place of Sri Dhira Ranjan Das.
The order under which his claim is made, is quoted hereunder :  "Hooghly District Central Cooperative Bank Ltd Chinsurah.
ORDER Shri Dhira Ranjan Das at present posted at Head Office as Branch Manager, Loan Section is, in the interest of the service of the Bank, transferred and posted as Branch Manager, Khamargachi Branch Vice Sitaram Das, expired.
This order shall take immediate effect.
Chief Executive Officer  Ref.
No. 1050(17)/87  Dt.5-12-1988.
CC : Shri Bhira Ranjan Das, Branch Manager, attached to Loan Section for information.
He is requested to make over his charge to Shri Anoj Roy, Office Assistant and proceed to join at his new place of posting immediately.
CC : Deputy Manager/Field Executive Officers/Development Officer/Branch Manager-Loan Section/Accounts Section, Head Office/Branch Manager (all) CC : Shri RK Mukherjee, officiating Accountant-Kamargachi Branch for information and necessary action.
CC : Personal File of Shri D.R.
Das.
CC : Shri Anoj Roy Office Assistant, attached to Loan Section for information and necessary action.
Chief Executive Officer."
It will appear from the aforesaid order on careful reading thereof, that the writ petitioner was merely asked to take charge from Sri Dhira Ranjan Das who was transferred, but by this order, he was not asked to officiate.
Rather it will appear he was described as Office Assistant not as an officiating Branch Manager.
It will appear further from, the above order that one Sri.
RK Mukherjee was described as Officiating Accountant, Khamargachi Branch, from whom said Dhira Ranjan Das was to take charge.
As rightly contended by Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya that on the date of taking over charge, his designation was not changed and he remained Office Assistant.
I am of the view unless an employee is asked to officiate in a substantive post, he cannot claim the benefits and facilities arising there from nor he can claim any right of absorption or regularization assuming it is permissible under law.
From the material, I do not find that the writ petitioner has continuously acted as a Branch Manager and/or incharge of the Loan Section.
9.
Nothing has been produced except his self-styled declaration as being in-charge of the Loan Section while taking charges from said Sri Dhira Ranjan Das in terms of the order dated 5th December 1988.
The petitioner's unilateral recording of acting in-charge of the Loan Section is not enough to place the petitioner differently from what he had in December, 1988.
10.
On 5th December 1988, the petitioner was holding the post of Office Assistant falling within Grade IV and thereafter post to which the petitioner has been transferred.
In view of the findings as above, I am unable to accept the contention of Mr. Sitaram Bhattacharya that the petitioner had acquired the right to be absorbed in the post of Branch Manager and/or Loan Section.
Consequently, there has been no reduction in rank with the impugned order of transfer.
The decisions cited by Mr. Sitaram Bhattacharjee as above are of no help and the same could have been relevant, had the petitioner been in the post of Officiating Branch Manager, the same would have been applicable.
There has been no dispute that the service of the petitioner is transferable.
The petitioner has been working at the same place for a long time therefore, respondent authorities shall consider the question of retransfer at an appropriate place if possible at the Head Office.
11.
The claim of Mr. Sitararn Bhattacharjee that the order is aimed at to victimize the petitioner does not hold good because there is no rules and regulation which enables the petitioner to claim privilege as office bearer, to remain in the same place where he is carrying out trade union activities.
Moreover, the petitioner is not a workman to claim the rights and privileges provided under the Industrial Disputes act, 1947, as going by his own case.
He must be belonging to the Supervisory capacity.
There is no application of the Industrial Disputes Act, in case of the supervisory staff.
12.
Thus, there will be no order except for consideration of transfer as above, on this application and the same accordingly dismissed.
13.
In view of disposal of this matter by this order, I do not think any order is called for to be passed on the other applications.
Hence the same are dismissed.
Petition dismissed.