PK Misra, J - The present writ petition has been filed by the Union of India, represented by the Chief Personnel Officer, Southern Railway, Park Town, Chennai-600 003 and the Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway, Madurai, against the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal dated 1012001 in OA No. 807 of 1999, giving direction to the present petitioners to offer suitable employment to the present respondents 2 and 3.
2.
The facts giving rise to the present writ petition are required to be noticed in some detail.
The present Respondents 2 and 3 were selected for training as Apprentices under the Apprentices Act, 1961 and under letter dated 2341991, they were directed to undergo Shed Floor Training in the open line establishment workshops for a period of 3 years.
In the said letter, it has been stipulated that even on completion of training period, there was no guarantee for employment.
The respondents 2 and 3 had received some stipend during the said period and they were directed to undergo training as Fitter Trade Apprentices in Carriage and Wagon Department.
The respondents 2 and 3, on completion of their Shed Floor Training in open line for 2 years, were directed to undergo Shop Floor Training from 20101993 for one year in Golden Rock Workshop at Tiruchirapalli.
However, the workshop personnel re-directed the respondents 2 and 3 to Madurai Division, stating that they were required to undergo minimum period of 2 years training in Golden Rock workshop to cover the required 120 Related Instruction Classes.
Thereafter, the training period of the respondents 2 and 3 was extended with stipend.
At that stage, the respondents 2 and 3 filed OA No. 547 of 1994 , challenging the order dated 23121993, extending their training period and prayed that they should be absorbed as Fitter against 25% Direct Recruitment Quota.
The said OA, was disposed of by the Tribunal by order dated 811997.
The relevant portion of the order passed by the Tribunal is to the following effect:-  " 3.
As regards the first relief namely the prayer for holding the letter of 231293 by which the Apprentice Training period has been extended should be quashed, we note that this order has already worked itself out.
Hence any consideration of this relief is not called for at this stage.
4.
As regards the second relief, we note that the issue regarding the Apprentices not being permitted to take the examination has been raised only at the stage of filing the rejoinder.
The applicants, admittedly, have been subjected to the period of Apprenticeship along with imparting of training relating to RI Normally they should have been extended the facilities for appearing in the examination the passing of which would have enabled them to declare as Apprentices as per the Act.
The respondents have not explained as to why this has not happened.
5.
In the above circumstances, we deem it fit and proper to direct the respondents to extended all facilities to the applicants to take the examination as required under the Apprentices Act.
This shall be done at the next available opportunity when such examination will be held by the concerned authorities.
Any further relief regarding absorption may be considered by the respondents after the Apprentices qualify in the relevant test to be held by the competent authorities and as per law laid down by the Supreme Court in this regard.
For the purpose of absorption, their seniority among the Act Apprentices as per Act shall be reckoned deeming the date of completion of training as 17111994.
3.
It is to be noted that the Regional Director, Regional Directorate Apprentices Training, who is the authority under the Apprentices Act, was not a party in the aforesaid OA After the order was passed, certain correspondences between the present writ petitioners and the present Respondent No. 4, The Regional Directorate of Apprentices Training, went on.
It was discovered that, since contract of Respondents 2 and 3 as envisaged under Section 4 of the Apprentices Act has not been registered, the fourth respondent did not permit the respondents 2 and 3 to appear for the examination in order to obtain the Apprenticeship Certificate and ultimately, the respondents 2 and 3 were also served with communication to the said effect.
The respondents 2 and 3 were again forced to file OA No. 807 of 1999 before the Tribunal claiming for the following relief :-  ".
. . For the aforesaid reasons, this Hon'ble Tribunal may be pleased to pass an order: (i) directing the first and second respondents to appoint the applicants as Fitters in the 25% quota under Para 159 of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual meant for Act Apprentices or for serving employees with due seniority as directed by this Hon'ble Tribunal in OA No. 547 of 1994. or in the alternative (ii) direct the respondents to register the applicants' contracts under the Apprentices Act, 1961 with effect from 23491 and allow them to complete the training and qualify as Act Apprentices with due seniority as directed by this Hon'ble Tribunal in OA No. 547 of 1994 and (iii) Grant all consequential benefits to the applicants, award costs and render justice.
4.
Before the Tribunal, a counter was filed on behalf of the present writ petitioners wherein it was contended that even though the petitioners extended all possible help in order to enable the respondents 2 and 3 to complete the training and to appear for the examination, due to the fact that contract had not been registered, the present respondent No. 4, namely, the Regional Directorate Apprentices Training, was not in a position to do the needful.
5.
A counter affidavit was also filed on behalf of the present Respondent No. 4 (Respondent No. 3 before the Tribunal) indicating that in the absence of contract being registered, the training period could not have been completed nor the trainees could be allowed to appear at the examination.
6.
Before the Tribunal, the learned counsel appearing for the present petitioners had submitted that they would have no objection in granting the alternative prayer made in the Original Application by the applicants (present Respondents 2 and 3).
7.
The Tribunal, on consideration of the materials on record, came to hold that  ".
. . the applicants (present Respondents 2 and 3) were selected for training as Apprentices under the Apprentices Act, 1961 in Central Workshop, Southern Railway and allotted to Madurai Division for training, as per the terms of Workshop Personnel Officer/GOC, Ponmalai, letter dated 2341991.
They were directed to undergo the Shed Floor Training in the Open Line Establishment in Madurai Division and Shop Floor Training at Golden Rock Workshop for a period of three years.
They were given periodical training at Basic Training Centre, Madurai during the month of May, 1992.
On completion of the Shed Floor Training in Open Line for two years, the applicants were directed to go to Golden Rock Workshop to undergo Shop Floor Training from 20.10.199 3 for one year.
This was done since the applicants have to complete 120 related Instruction Classes (RI) for statutory obligation or 40 RI classes for a period of one year training.
The applicants therefore were directed to attend two years training in Golden Rock Workshop to cover the required 120 RI classes at the rate of 60 R I. classes per year.
The same could not be done, since the applicants were directed to undergo training from Madurai Division to Golden Rock Workshop from 20101993.
Therefore, the Chief Personnel Officer, Madras, by his letter dated 16121993, advised to extend their training period with full stipend creating an opportunity to make up the shortfall, the prescribed minimum period of RI classes and as such, the training period was extended by one year, by letter dated 23121993.
These applicants challenged the letter dated 23121993 in the above cited OA.
After the disposal of the earlier OA No. 547 of 1994, correspondences continued and the authority under the Apprentices Act informed the applicants that their names had not been registered.
The circumstances also show that there was failure on the part of the Railways in not taking necessary action and these applicants, from 1991 onwards, have been asked to move from pillar to post.
The Tribunal further observed :  "20.
When we put a question to the learned counsel for the Railways, the learned counsel submitted that he has no objection in granting the alternative relief asked for in the OA i.e., to direct the respondents to register the applicants' contracts under the Apprentices Act, 1961 with effect from 2341991 and allow them to complete the training and qualify as Act Apprentices with due seniority as directed by this Tribunal in OA No. 547 of 1994.
It is true that the applicants are asked for such a relief.
But if the Tribunal is granting this relief that will not be in accordance with law.
We have already extracted the relevant portion of Section 4.
Only after a contract, the apprentice training can be go on.
If it is so, then we must direct the respondents to enter into a contract now and ask the applicants to undergo a training for another three years.
That means from 1991 to 2000, the entire time is wasted.
The chances of employment of the applicants will also be affected.
We also cannot compel the third respondent to register the names of the applicants with effect from 2 34 .1991, which will be against law.
That means, the alternative relief cannot be granted by this Tribunal on the basis of the concession given by the learned counsel for the Railways.
The Tribunal further observed that it cannot also give a declaration that the applicants were deemed to have completed the training under the Apprentices Act.
After coming to the aforesaid conclusion, the Tribunal observed :  "25.
We have already stated that because of the negligence by the Railways, the applicants have not entered into a contract for apprentices nor their names could be registered with the respondent.
But at the same time they have represented that they are apprentices under the Act and utilised their training against law for the last few years.
In fact, in such cases the Railways are bound to pay exemplary damages to the applicants.
But we cannot grant the same in this case.
At the same time, we feel that it is a fit case wherein the respondents 1 and 2 are directed to offer suitable employment to the applicants and they also directed to take steps to move the Government if they feel that they have no power to appoint them in the 25% quota as provided under Rule 159 of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual.
It is for the applicants to accept the employment or not.
On the basis of the aforesaid conclusion, the OA, was allowed, with a further direction to give costs of Rs. 2,500/- each.
8.
Learned counsel appearing for the Railways has submitted that, even conceding for the sake of argument that there was some amount of negligence or carelessness on the part of the Railways in not getting the contract registered under Section 4 of the Apprentices Act, the direction given by the Tribunal for giving employment is not contemplated and the Tribunal could have accepted the alternative relief claimed by the applicants.
9.
Learned counsel has further submitted that even if the applicants would have completed their training in normal course by the end of November, 1994 and thereafter, would have passed the test to be held by the present respondent No. 4, as per the provision contained in the Apprentices Act or under the contract, there is no guarantee that such persons would be employed as a matter of course and they have to be considered for the employment in accordance with paragraph 159 of the Railway Establishment Manual along with other candidates available from open market and the only privilege to such apprentices is that they would be given some preferences.
10.
It was stated before the Tribunal that those who had completed training before 1989 are yet to be fully absorbed.
Even though in course of hearing, the learned counsel for the Railways was not in a position to indicate the exact position as on the date of hearing, he has submitted that 1991 trainees were yet to be absorbed.
It is therefore contended by him that if the present respondents 2 and 3 would have completed their training, they could not have been absorbed as a matter of course and they cannot be in a better position merely because they were able to complete their training, even due to negligence on the part of the Railways.
He has suggested that the alternative prayer claimed by the applicants should have been allowed and the present petitioners are prepared to consider on successful completion of such training as if such training was completed in November, 1994 as has been directed by the Tribunal on earlier occasion.
He has further submitted that on earlier occasion also, there was a prayer for absorption without completion of the training, but the Tribunal had rightly observed that such a direction cannot be issued and merely because subsequently, the pren.
12.
During the course of argument it was pointed out to Mr. Mukherjee that it appeared the writ petition was not verified in accordance with the Rules though necessary stamps have been affixed.
Mr. Mukherjee submitted that the same can be verified even now which is permissible under section 153 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Mr. Das Adhikary contended the writ petition should be dismissed for not being verified in accordance with the Rules relating to the applications under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
13.
I do not intend to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of technicality as requisite stamps had been affixed and registry had put in its endorsements.
14.
Now, turning to the merits of the case the C.M.C.
had issued the memo dated 1522000 as it came to learn from a memo dated 27.12.99 issued by the Thika Controller that the premises fell within the purview of the Thika Tenancy Act, 1981 and reported to be thika - tenanted and the land vested with the State of West Bengal.
The C.M.C.
was requested to refrain from carrying out mutation and/or sanctioning building plan with respect to the premises in favour of any private party until the office of the Controller was heard.
The memo dated 29.12.97 ended with a request to the C.M.C.
Authorities to report early about the action taken by the C.M.C.
Moreover, from the memo dated 27.12.99 it appeared that it was brought to the notice by an advocate that the C.M.C.
had mutated the said properties in the favour of a private party in March, 1999.
Indeed it appears from the annexure at page 72 that the mutation was carried out on 30399.
Further title suit relating to the instant premises was pending in which the C.M.C.
was a party.
The C.M.C.
had to act in such circumstances.
It was in this backdrop the C.M.C.
had issued the memo dated 1522000 calling the petitioners to attend a hearing with all relevant papers in respect of mutation granted in favour of the petitioners.
Memo dated 1522000 is a show cause calling upon the petitioners to attend the hearing for verification of the records in respect of the mutation granted.
15.
The purpose of such memo is to afford an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
Once cause is shown, it is open to the .authorities to consider the matter and thereafter, decision shall be taken.
Interference at this stage shall be premature.
The petitioner should have attended the hearing and satisfied the C.M.C.
authorities.
The judgments cited by Mr. Mukherjee are not relevant in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The unreported judgment in W P No. 1851 of 2002 is distinguishable in the facts and circumstances of the case.
In the said unreported judgment the premises concerned was 42, Raja Santosh Road and one "Smt. Manjushri Nath appeared before the Assistant Controller (South) and could not produce any document in support of her claim of thika tenancy."
Further, while allowing the petition in part the Court declined to effect mutation automatically.
The concerned officer was directed to examine the conveyances of petitioners and if it was found that clear title going by the conveyance was established then mutation should be effected.
16.
In view of the above the writ petition is not maintainable as it is premature.
17.
Therefore, the writ petition is dismissed.
Interim order is vacated.
18.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Later: 19.
If urgent xerox certified copy of this judgment and order is applied for the same shall be furnished within seven days from the date of making such application.