Satish Kumar Mittal, J - In this writ petition, petitioner Puran Chand Azad, Ex Member Legislative Council, Erstwhile Punjab, has questioned the validity of the amendment made in Section 7-A of the Principal Act called as the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pension of Members) Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the Act of 1975) by enacting the amended Act, called as the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pension of Members) Act, 1998 being ultra vires, illegal, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, wherein the petitioner has not been equated at par with those members of the Legislative Assembly Council who have remained members upto 5 years, as was being done earlier.
2.
The petitioner was elected as a member of the Punjab Legislative Council (Upper House) in the year 1952 for a period of six years.
As per the provisions of the Constitution of India, one third of the total strength of the upper House was to retire after every two years.
Being the first Legislative Council of the State, decision regarding retirement of one third of the total strength was taken by draw of lots, and name of the petitioner came in the first draw of lots.
Consequently, he had to retire from the membership of the Legislative Council only after serving two years.
3.
In the year 1975, the State of Haryana enacted the Act of 1975 with intent to provide certain benefits to the members of the Legislative Assembly.
However, no provision was made for pension of the members of the Legislative Assembly or the Council.
In the year 1977, by an amendment, the word `allowances' in the Act of 1975 was substituted by the word `allowances and pension', and after Section 7, Section 7-A was inserted, which reads as under :-  "7-A.
Pension - (1) With effect from the commencement of the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 1977, there shall be paid a pension of three hundred rupees per mensem to every person who has served for a period of five years, whether continuous or not, as a member : Provided that where any person has served as a member for a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional pension of fifty rupees per mensem for every year in excess of five, so, however, that in no case the pension payable to such person shall exceed five hundred rupees per mensem."
4.
In the aforesaid provision, the members of the Legislative Assembly or the Council were classified in two categories i.e. (i) those who served for a period upto five years.
They were granted pension of rupees 300/- per mensem and (ii) those who served for a period exceeding five years.
They were granted Rs. 300/- per mensem plus additional pension of fifty rupees per mensem for each additional year with maximum of five hundred rupees per mensem.
5.
It is clear that in the aforesaid Section, no provision was made for granting pension to those members of the Legislative Assembly or Council, who remained member for a period less than five years.
Thereafter, several representations were made by those who remained members of the Legislative Assembly or Council for a period less than five years.
After considering those representations, the State Government took a decision to further amend Section 7-A of the Act of 1975.
Consequently, the Haryana Legislative Assembly (Allowances and Pension of Members) Amendment Act, 1978 was passed, by which for the words `for a period of five years, whether continuous or not, as a member', the words `for any period upto five years as a member' were substituted.
By this amendment, sub-section (4) was also inserted after sub- section (3), which provides as under :-  (4) In this section a members means a person who, after the commencement of the Constitution of India (a) has been a member of - (i) The Haryana Legislative Assembly; or  (ii) The Punjab Legislative Assembly; or (iii) The Punjab Legislative Council; or (iv) the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union; or (v) partly as a member of the one and partly as a member of the other representing any of the territories of the State of Haryana as formed by Section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, and who is ordinarily resident of the said territories; 6.
The petitioner having remained member of the Punjab Legislative Council for a period of two years, was granted pension at the rate of Rs. 300/- per mensem for the first time in view of the aforesaid amended provision.
In this amended provision, again the members of the Legislative Assembly or Council were classified in two categories.
7.
Subsequently, in the year 1985, the Act of 1975 was further amended, by which the pension of the members, who served for a period upto five years was enhanced from Rs. 300/- to Rs. 500/- per mensem with effect from 1841985.
Further, in the year 1991, another amendment was made, by which pension of Rs. 500/- per mensem was increased to Rs. 1250/- with effect from 2341991.
Every person, who has served as a member, was held to be entitled for a pension of Rs. 1250/- per mensem, provided that where any person has served as a member for a period of more than five years, he shall also be paid the additional pension of Rs. 100/- per mensem for every additional year.
Then in the year 1997, the Act of 1975 was again amended and the amount of pension was enhanced from Rs. 1250/- to Rs. 1400/- per mensem.
The additional pension for every additional year after five years was also enhanced from Rs. 100/- to Rs. 200/- per mensem.
8.
Till the year 1998, the petitioner was getting the revised pension i.e. at the rate of Rs. 1400/- per mensem because he remained member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly for a period of two years ie upto five years.
9.
In the year 1998, the Act of 1975 was again amended and by this amendment, Section 7 was amended and the members of the Legislative Council and Assembly were classified in three categories i.e. (i) the members who served upto a period of two years, were granted pension of Rs. 1400/- per mensem; (ii) the members who served for a period exceeding two years but not exceeding five years, were granted pension of Rs. 2500/- per mensem; and (iii) the members who served for a period exceeding five years, were granted additional pension of Rs. 500/- per mensem for every additional year.
10.
The petitioner has challenged the aforesaid amendment being illegal, arbitrary, discriminatory, ultra vires and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11.
Pursuant to the notice issued, respondents No. 1 and 2 have filed separate replies.
Respondent No. 1-State of Haryana, in its written statement has submitted that pension of the petitioner has not been reduced and he cannot be equated with those members who have completed their tenure of five years.
It has been further submitted that no vested and legal right of the petitioner has been infringed upon.
Respondent No. 2, in its separate written statement, has submitted that the petitioner is being given pension according to the provision of the Act of 1975.
12.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that classification of the members of the Legislative Council or Assembly in three classes by the amendment of the year 1998 is wholly arbitrary and contrary to the object sought to be achieved.
From the very beginning, when the benefit of pension was added in the year 1977, by amending the Act of 1977, the petitioner was treated at par with those members who had served for a period upto five years.
He submitted that term of a member of the Legislative Council was six years, but because of the draw lots drawn for the purpose of retiring one third members of the first Punjab Legislative Council, the petitioner had completed only two years of membership and had to retire to make place for the other members.
Therefore, he cannot be treated as a different class than those Legislative members, who have served for a period upto five/six years.
He further submitted that creation of sub-class in a class is not permissible as it is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
He submitted that by putting the petitioner in a class of members, who have served for a period upto two years, he has been treated discriminatory with those persons who remained members of the Legislative Assembly or Council for a period upto five/six years and he has been granted less pension.
Counsel for the petitioner, while referring to a decision of this Court in Babu Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(4) SCT 670 (P&H) : 2000(5) Services Law Reporter 353, submitted that there should be equal pay for equal work.
13.
After hearing counsel for the petitioner and going through the contents of the petition as well as the written statements, filed by both the respondents, I do not find any substance in the instant writ petition.
Article 14 of the Constitution of India provides that State shall not deny to any person equality before law and equal protection of laws within the territory of India.
Equal protection means the right to equal treatment in similar circumstances.
This principle of equal protection would extend not only when an individual is discriminated in the matter of exercising his right or in the matter of imposing liabilities upon him, but also in the matter of granting privileges to him.
Article 14 only prohibits the class legislation but it does not prohibit the reasonable classification within the class for a purpose to be achieved.
In order to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group; and (ii) that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute.
It is well established that the legislation is competent to make sub-classification within the class, but the said classification must also stand to the test of reasonableness.
It is also settled that a classification may be reasonable even though a single individual is treated as a class by himself, if there are some special circumstances or reasons applicable to him alone and not applicable to others.
In the case in hand, the legislation with an object to provide pension to the members enacted Section 7-A of the Act of 1975 for the first time in the year 1978 and every member who has served for a period of five years as a member of the Legislative Council or Assembly was provided a pension.
The members were classified in two categories for the purpose of granting pension.
The amount of pension was fixed according to the period of tenure.
The object was to grant pension to a member of a particular amount who served for a particular period.
The second class was of those members who served for a period of more than five years and they were granted additional pension per mensem for every year to a maximum limit.
Subsequently, the various amendments were made and the amount of pension was increased.
Prior to 1998, every member, who had served for period upto five years was granted pension of Rs. 1400/- per mensem.
The petitioner was getting pension at this rate, as he has served for a period of two years ie less than five years.
By the amendment of 1998, the class of members who have served for a period upto five year has been further divided in two sub- classes i.e. the members who have served for a period upto two years and the members who have served for a period exceeding two years but not exceeding five years.
The first class has been granted pension of Rs. 1400/- per mensem and second class Rs. 2500/- per mensem and the other class i.e. the members who have served for a period of more than five years were granted additional amount at the rate of Rs. 500/- per mensem for every additional year.
14.
From the aforesaid classification, it is clear that the classification made by the legislation in three classes is a clear classification without any ambiguity.
The members have been defined in three classes with object to grant pension to them according to the period of their tenure.
As far as pension of the petitioner which he was getting prior to 1998 is concerned, it has not been reduced, as the members who have served for a period upto two years have been given pension at the rate of Rs. 1400/- per mensem.
The classification appears to have been made with an object to provide pension according to the period of tenure or a member of the Legislative Council or Assembly.
No discrimination has been made between the members who have served for a period upto two years.
There is no provision under the Act of 1975 that member of the first Legislative Council, who retired after two years in a draw lot, though was elected for six years, will be treated differently or will be treated as member for full term of six years.
In absence of any such provision, tenure of a member whether he has to retire in draw of lots or whether he remained member for a period upto two years due to his resignation or due to the short period of an Assembly, has been treated equally.
The classification made by the amendment in the year 1998 in three categories is very clear.
The same has been found on intelligible differential which clearly distinguishes the persons that are grouped together.
There is no ambiguity.
Clearly, a classification has been made between members of the Legislative Council or Assembly in three categories with an object to grant pension to the members according to the period of their tenure, meaning thereby that the classification has been made with a clear object sought to be achieved by the legislation.
Therefore, I do not find any illegality or arbitrariness in the said classification.
The decision of this Court in Babu Ram's case (supra) is not applicable at all to the facts and circumstances of the instant case.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.