MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8274, 15658, 15950, 19243 of 2002, 16460 and 17690 of 2003 as the common questions of law and facts are involved.
In these petitions, the petitioners seek issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to issue them appointment letters as they were already selected by the Subordinate Selection Board, Punjab, Chandigarh (for brevity, `the Board').
2.
The facts in brief are that the petitioners applied for the post of Multipurpose Health Worker in pursuance to advertisement No. 1/2001 for filling up 400 vacancies.
The Board conducted the interview from 2642001 to 22.5.2001 and result was prepared on 27.12.2001 but due to imposition of Election Code in the State of Punjab in the wake of ensuing Punjab Vidhan Sabha Elections, the result was not declared as is evident from the notice issued by the Board.
Finally, the Board declared the result on 2522002.
3.
In the reply filed by respondents 1 and 2, the facts as narrated above have not been denied but it has been submitted that the Punjab Government issued instructions on 1102001 that the appointment to Centrally sponsored schemes should be made on contract basis and not on regular basis.
As such, the requisition sent to the Board vide letters dated 781998 and 2412001 for filling up 400 posts of Multipurpose Health Workers (Male) and Block Extension Educators respectively has been withdrawn.
It has further been averred that vide letter dated 532002 addressed to all the Heads of Departments of Punjab State, the State Government has decided that no appointment shall be made on the recommendations of Subordinate Services Selection Board.
It has also been averred that vide letter dated 2392002 the State Government showed its inability to accord the approval for filling up the aforementioned vacancies.
4.
In the separate reply filed by the Board, it has been averred that the Board is recruiting agency of Class-III posts of State Government.
After making selection, recommendations are sent to the concerned Department for issuing appointment letters to the selected candidates and the appointment letters are required to be issued by the appointing authority.
5.
Mr. DR Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has stated that the controversy involved in the present petitions is squarely covered by the decisions rendered by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 19788 of 2002, tilted Amarjit Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 1812005 and Civil Writ Petition No. 12985 of 2003, titled Harjeet Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another, decided on 1852004.
Therefore, learned counsel has prayed that the instant petitions be allowed in terms of these decisions.
6.
Learned State counsel has not able to successfully dispute that the proposition of law and facts involved in the instant petitions is similar to the one which have been allowed, namely Civil Writ Petition No. 19788 of 2002, titled Amarjit Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 1812005 and Civil Writ Petition No. 12985 of 2003, titled Harjeet Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another, decided on 1852004.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel and perusing the record, I am of the considered view that the controversy involved in the instant petitions is squarely covered by the decisions rendered by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 19788 of 2002, titled Amarjit Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 1812005 and Civil Writ Petition No. 12985 of 2003, titled Harjeet Singh and others v. State of Punjab and another, decided on 1852004.
The Division Bench in the case of Amarjit Singh (supra) while dealing with the issue of imposition of ban on appointments in the wake of promulgation of Code of Conduct has concluded that no fault can be found with the selected candidates who have succeeded before the Board.
During the course of discussion, the Division Bench made a reference to the view taken by another Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 10315 of 2002, titled as Parveen Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 18.8.2003.
The views of the Division Bench in Parveen Kumar's case (supra) deserve to be quoted extenso :-  "The primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that they were required by the Subordinate Services Selection Board to assume their duties in different departments of the State Government, in response to which they submitted the requisite papers with the respective departments.
The papers were submitted by the petitioners well before the imposition of the Model Code of Conduct on 1612002.
The aforesaid factual position is not disputed by learned counsel for the respondents.
He, however, states that the scrutiny of papers of the petitioners could not be completed before 1612002 and it is, therefore, that the petitioners could not be allowed to assume their duties in the Departments to which they were deputed.
It is, further, contended that the petitioners have no right whatsoever to assume their duties at the present juncture in view of the ban on recruitments imposed in a meeting of the Cabinet Sub-Committee held on 2442002, wherein it was resolved to impose a complete ban on recruitments to the posts lying vacant and/or likely to fall vacant.
All such available vacant posts according to the decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee were deemed to have been abolished forthwith, likewise all the vacancies, which arise on account of the retirement or any other reason after the decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee would likewise be deemed to be abolished as and when they arose.
Despite the attractive submissions at the hands of the learned counsel for the respondents his contentions do not impress us.
It is also not a matter of dispute that in the process of selection in which the petitioners participated, a number of candidates who have been placed at a position below the petitioner in the merit list have since been appointed against the posts of Clerks in various Departments of the State Government.
It is not open to the State Government to pick and choose at the time of making appointments.
The petitioners in furtherance of their success in the process of selection had submitted their papers for assuming duties in the various Departments (to which they were deputed by the Subordinate Services Selection Board) well before the imposition of ban on 1612002.
For no fault of theirs, the screening process would not be completed by the respective departments.
For those placed in the merit list below the petitioners the process was completed, whereupon they were substantively appointed.
The petitioners have obviously been unfairly ignored.
The deprivation of the petitioners is clearly unsustainable in law in view of the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, which ensures equally before the law.
The ban imposed on the policy decision taken by the Cabinet Sub Committee on 2442002 (as is apparent from Annexure R-3), will also be inapplicable in the facts and circumstances of this case.
The appointment of the petitioners must relate back to a date earlier to 1612002 when their cases were forwarded to various Departments of the State Governments for appointment when persons lower in the merit list vis-a-vis the petitioners were substantively appointed.
In view of the conclusions drawn above, neither the Model Code of Conduct, which was enforced w.e.f.
1612002 will apply to the petitioners, nor the decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee dated 2442002.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to issue formal appointment orders to the petitioners and allow them appropriate posting orders within 4 weeks from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the order.
The appointment of the petitioners will relate back to the date when persons junior to them were appointed against the posts of Clerks.
The petitioners, however, would not entitled to back wages under the principle of `No Work No Pay'."
Similar view has been taken by the other Division Bench in Harjeet Singh's case (supra).
8. in view of the above, I do not find any reason either in law or in equity to deny appointment to the petitioners on regular basis and/or payment of emoluments in the running pay scales.
Consequently, these writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to offer appointment to the petitioners on regular basis on the same terms and conditions as has been done in the case of Amarjit Singh (supra) and Harjeet Singh (supra).
The needful shall be done within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.