Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The appellant was appointed as a Clerk-cum- Cashier with the respondent-Bank in the year 1975.
In the year 1976 the Bank invited applications from eligible candidates for promotion to the post of Probationary Officers.
The appellant and several others applied for the aforesaid posts.
As per the settlement between the respondent-Bank and its employees signed on 22101975, 50% of the posts from the Clerical to the Officer cadre were to be filled in by seniority, 25% by internal competition from within the clerical cadre and 25% by open competition.
In the ensuing selection held in 1978, 54 posts were filled in through the category of internal competition and only 39 from the third category, i.e., open contest.
The petitioner, who was placed at Sr. No. 41 on the waiting list for the third category, accordingly raised a dispute before the Industrial Tribunal and the Tribunal in its award, Annexure P-4, dated 741986 held that there was no justification as to why only 39 appointments had been made from the third category, whereas 54 appointments had been made from the second category and accordingly issued a direction that the next available vacancy in the cadre of officer grade-II be offered to the appellant.
The appellant thereafter moved an application for clarification before the tribunal, once again pointing out that he ought to have been granted the benefit of promotion with effect from 1978, but this was rejected by the tribunal vide order dated 451988, Annexure P-7 to the petition.
It is in these circumstances that the writ petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 8026 of 1989, out of which the present appeal arises.
2.
The learned Single Judge held that though the broad facts were not disputed, but as the appellant/writ petitioner herein had not made a serious and direct challenge to the award of the Industrial Tribunal, no relief, beyond the one granted by the tribunal, could be granted to him in the writ petition.
The Court also observed that it was the undisputed position that one vacancy of the Probationary Officer, as per award Annexure P-4, had occurred on 8.8.1986 and the said vacancy had been offered to the appellant, i.e., the petitioner in the writ petition and he had also accepted the same.
It is against this order of the learned Single Judge that the present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed with the solitary prayer that in view of the findings of the Industrial Tribunal as also the learned Single Judge, the appellant was entitled to promotion to the officer cadre with effect from 1978 instead of 1986.
3.
Mr. JK Sibal, the learned Senior Advocate for the appellant has argued that in view of the findings of fact recorded and that the respondent-Bank had not challenged the award of the Labour Court with regard to the entitlement of the appellant, it was appropriate that the appellant should be given the benefit from the year 1978, when others like him had been promoted.
4.
Mr. Amarjit Singh, the learned counsel for the respondents has, however, argued that as no clear challenge had been made by the appellant to the award, Annexure P-4, or the clarification, Annexure P-7 and even in the writ petition no prayer had been made that the award be quashed to that extent, no interference was called for in the present appeal.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
6.
The Tribunal in its award, Annexure P-4, has given a categoric finding in the following terms ;-  "That directly confronts the tribunal with the merits of the case where the management appears to be on a slippery ground because on their own showing they had offered only 39 appointments to the successful candidates placed like the petitioner even though 54 persons were appointed under category 4(2)(b).
On behalf of the management it was argued that because the petitioner was placed at serial No. 41, therefore, he could not be offered the appointment by the time the list was scrapped under the orders of the Central Govt. constitution of the Banking Service Recruitment Board w.e.f.
111979.
It appears that for some reasons of their own the management skipped over the inconvenient evidence of W/W2 Sunil Kumar Chopra who was also one of their employee like the petitioner and had successfully completed (competed ?)
in the examination to be placed at serial No. 21 but never offered any appointment despite his persistent entreaties as would evident from his unrebutted sworn testimony and office correspondence consisting of the letters Ex. W-2 to W-29.
One, therefore, cannot escape the inference that there was some mistake somewhere either inadvertent or deliberate in deviating from the Merit-list and ignoring the petitioner's claim.
Hence for the reasons recorded above, on over-ruling the management's view point, I return my award in favour of the petitioner/workman with a direction to them to offer him the next available vacancy in the cadre of officer grade-II."
7.
We are of the opinion that in the light of the fact that these findings have not been challenged by the respondent-Bank, the entitlement of the appellant has been proved beyond doubt.
We find that the Tribunal has given absolutely no reason as to why in these circumstances the next available vacancy in the cadre of officer was to be given to the appellant instead from his due date.
We also observe from the judgment of the learned Single Judge that this is the solitary ground, on which the judgment in the writ petition had proceeded.
8.
In this background, Mr. Amarjit Singh's second argument now needs to be examined.
Paragraphs 16, 18(f) and 20(b) of the prayer clause of the writ petition are in the following terms :-  "16.
That the stand of the Respondent Bank was that in the year 1978-79, they had filled up 39 vacancies and the petitioner being placed at No. 41, could not be appointed.
This is factually incorrect.
The existing vacancies were much more than 39 and the Respondent-Bank had filled only 29 vacancies and not 39 as claimed by them.
Thus, even in the year 1978-79, 10 vacancies were thus existing and the petitioner was entitled to be appointed against one of the existing vacancy.
18(f).
That the Award, Annexure P-4, insofar as it directs that the petitioner be offered appointment against the next available vacancy in the cadre of Officer II is unjust.
The petitioner had been wrongfully denied the appointment.
The stand of the petitioner has been found as correct by the Industrial Tribunal.
The petitioner was entitled to be appointed with effect from the date other candidates on the same Merit-list were appointed.
20(b) Issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other writ, order or direction appropriate in the circumstances of the case directing the respondent-Bank to promote the petitioner w.e.f.
1978 as Probationary Officer with all consequential relief."
9.
A cumulative reading of the aforesaid paragraphs would reveal that the solitary challenge of the appellant before the learned Single Judge was to the effect that he had been wrongly left out of promotion w.e.f.
1978 and accordingly he was entitled to relief on that basis.
The mere fact that the words "the award be set-aside to that extent" have not been specifically used, would not detract from the fact that the prayer had in fact been made.
As already mentioned above, the Tribunal has given a categoric finding that the appellant had been wrongly left out at the time of the selection in the year 1978.
This finding has not been challenged by the Bank in any proceedings.
We are thus of the opinion that the appeal deserves to succeed.
Mr. Sibal states that the appellant would forego his claim to back wages claimable on account of this judgment, but would pursue all other benefits that will fall due to him including re-fixation of pay etc.  We, accordingly, allow the appeal and issue a direction that the appellant shall get the benefit of his seniority and all consequential benefits w.e.f.
1978, except those given up by Mr. Sibal.
Appeal allowed.