Rajive Bhalla, J - In this writ petition, filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners pray for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant benefit of past service, rendered by the petitioners in the Beas Construction Board at Talwara (hereinafter referred to as `the Beas Board'), with all consequential reliefs.
2.
In the year 1974-75, the petitioners were working as Clerks, on ad hoc basis, in the Beas Board when the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Selection Board') advertised posts of Clerks/Typists.
The petitioners applied for the aforesaid posts, through the Beas Board.
The Beas Board forwarded their applications to the Selection Board.
One such application, filed by Vijay Singh (petitioner No. 3) for the post of Punjabi Typist, was forwarded by the Beas Board to the Selection Board, vide letter dated December 9, 1974, (Annexure P-1), with the note that in case he was selected for the post applied for, he would have to resign from the post held by him in the Beas Board.
3.
The petitioners were selected for the post of Clerks/Typists by the Selection Board for appointment in the Public Works Department, Public Health (RWS) Circle, Punjab.
They resigned the posts held by them in the Beas Board and were relieved by the Beas Board enabling them to join their new assignments.
4.
As a large number of similarly situated employees had joined service, from the Beas Board, with various Departments of the State of Punjab, the State of Punjab, with the object of granting benefit of past service towards pay fixation, issued letter dated October 1, 1980 (Annexure P-3).
The letter (Annexure P-3) refers to an order passed by the Governor of Punjab relaxing the provisions of Rule 4.4(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I.
5.
Despite the aforementioned decision, the benefit of past service towards pay fixation was denied to the petitioner.
A representation filed by the petitioners, praying for the grant of benefit of past service, was rejected vide order dated October 1, 1981 (Annexure P-6).
6.
The sole ground upon which, this benefit was denied, as is apparent from the order dated October 1, 1981 (Annexure P-6), was that though they had resigned from the Beas Board, no order had been passed relieving them from their posts in the Beas Board, enabling them to join the respondent- department.
7.
Counsel for the petitioners contends that all other similarly situated employees of the Beas Board, who had joined various departments in the State of Punjab, the names of two of whom, along with their designation and pay fixed, have been mentioned in Annexure P-4, have been granted the benefit of past service.
It is further contended that the objection raised by the respondents that the petitioners had not been relieved from their earlier appointments, with requisite permission to join the fresh appointments, apart from being irrational, is also incorrect.
The petitioners, upon selection, were offered jobs in the respondent-department.
They submitted applications requesting acceptance of their letters of resignation so as to join the new posts offered to them.
The letters of resignation were accepted and the petitioners allowed to join their new posts, after being duly relieved from their earlier assignments.
The record, in the possession of the respondents, would bear out these contentions.
It is further contended that vide order Annexure P-6 the petitioners were denied the benefit of past service, towards fixation of pay, on the ground that no order had been passed reliving them of their service with the Beas Board with permission to join the respondent- department.
However, in para 4 of the written statement, a new stand has been put forth, namely, that there was no evidence that the petitioners had resigned from the Board, so as to join the respondent-department and not for some other reason.
8.
It is further argued that the petitioners submitted their resignations for the purpose of joining their new posts, as would be borne out from the record.
In case of any discrepancy in the order, accepting resignation, the petitioners cannot be held responsible.
The orders, if any, relieving the petitioners had to be passed by the Beas Board and were, indeed, passed for otherwise the respondents would not have permitted the petitioners to join the service, as no employee can hold two posts at the same time.
The objection has been raised by the respondents without application of mind and without perusing the record.
9.
Counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, contends that before joining the new service, so as to be entitled to receive the benefit of past service, the petitioners were required to produce letters showing that they had resigned from the Beas Board with proper permission to join the new department and had not resigned on some other ground.
In the absence of such a permission, the benefit of past service could not be granted to the petitions.
10.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
11.
It is not denied, by the respondents, that the petitioners, while working with the Beas Board, applied through the said Board for selection to the posts of Clerks/Typists.
The petitioners were duly selected, submitted their resignations to the Beas Board, which were accepted.
The petitioners were relieved from the Beas Board, and were appointed in the respondent-department and have been working as such.
The petitioners have been denied the benefit of past service on two grounds.
In the other (Annexure P-6), the reason set forth is that no permission was granted to join the new department, while relieving them.
In para 4 of the written statement, the stand is that there was no proof that resignations were submitted to join the present department and not for some other reason.
12.
I have perused the record, produced by the respondents.
Each petitioner, submitted a separate letter praying that his resignation be accepted as he had received an offer of appointment in the respondent-department.
The letter submitted by Sukhdev Singh (petitioner No. 1) is reproduced hereunder :-  "To The Director, Plant Design & Admn., Beas Dam, Talwara.
Sir, Respectfully, I beg to say that I have received an offer of appointment for the post of Typist (Punjabi) from SE Circle Public Health, Amritsar, so I tender my resignation within 24 hours i.e. 1951977 F.N.
It is, therefore, requested that I may kindly be relieved on the same date so I could join my duty at Divisional Office, Gurdaspur.
Thanking you, Yours faithfully,  Sd/-  (1951977)  (Sukhdev Singh)  Clerk  Sansarpur W/Shop  Division, Beas Dam, Talwara T/Ship."
The said letter of resignation was accepted by the Director, Plant Design & Administration, Beas Dam, Talwara, vide office order dated June 2, 1977, and reads as under :-  OFFICE ORDER Resignation tendered by Sh. Sukhdev Singh Clerk employed on ad hoc basis whose particulars are given below is hereby accepted with effect from 1951977 FN.
1.
Name Sukhdev Singh Clerk (on ad hoc basis) 2.
Father's name Sh. Jaishi Ram 3.
Date of appointment as Clerk on (ad hoc) 8.9.1971 4.
Office to which attached Sansarpur Workshop Divn.
Talwara 5.
Date of resignation 1951977 F.N.
6.
Reason for resignation For a better job 7.
Appointing Authority Beas Selection Committee.
Sd/-  Director, Plant Design & Admn., Beas Dam, Talwara.
No. 4618-20/PF Dated 261977  Copy of above is forwarded to the Executive Engineer, Sansarpur Workshop Division for information and necessary action with reference to his letter No. 2241/PF dated 20.5.1977.
The resignation of the official is accepted subject to the condition that no Govt. dues are outstanding against him.
Sd/-  Executive Engineer/Admn.
for Director, Plant Design & Admn., Beas Dam, Talwara."
Identical letters of resignation were addressed by the other petitioners and identical orders passed thereon.
13.
A perusal of the letters of resignation submitted by the petitioners, reveals that the petitioners, in no uncertain terms, submitted their resignations as they had received offers for employment in the respondent- department.
The record, which has been produced before this Court by the respondents, bears out this fact.
The letters of resignation are clear and categoric.
The reason for resignations is explicitly spelt out as the offers for employment in the respondent-department.
The resignations were accepted, orders accepting resignations passed and, therefore, this Court is at a loss to comprehend as to what exactly was the objection to the grant of benefit of past service towards pay fixation.
It appears that the respondents dealt with the matter in a casual manner and failed to peruse the record, or apply their mind to the facts of the present case.
It is, thus, apparent that the petitioners resigned with the sole object of joining the respondent- department.
14.
The objection, that led to the passing of the order (Annexure P-6), denying the benefit of past service, is equally incomprehensible.
The letters of resignation, acceptance thereof and the fact of the petitioners joining the respondent-department, without any such objection being raised by the respondent-department, clearly implies that the petitioners were relieved from the Beas Board, so as to enable them to forthwith join the respondent- department.
The only condition imposed, while accepting the resignations, was that no government dues should be outstanding.
In case there was some ambiguity in the orders accepting the resignations, the petitioners could not be blamed.
The orders, accepting the resignations, were passed by an officer of the Beas Board.
Any technical error therein could not be used to deprive the petitioners of the benefit of past service.
Even otherwise, the respondents were always at liberty to seek a clarification from the Beas Board, which admittedly was never sought.
To deny the petitioners the benefit of past service on such a trivial ground, is in my opinion, indicative of a complete non-application of mind.
15.
In view of the facts narrated above, the letters of resignation, the orders passed thereon, the petitioners would be deemed to have been relieved from the Beas Board for the purpose of joining the respondent-department.
It is not the case of the respondent-department that the petitioners joined, without submitting letters of resignation or that letters of resignation were not accepted.
Furthermore, the record also reveals that the resignations were submitted for the purpose of joining the respondent-department.
16.
Consequently, the present petition is allowed, the petitioners are held entitled to the benefit of past service rendered by them in the Beas Board, for the purpose of fixation of their salaries from the date the said benefit became due to them in accordance with the amended rules.
The petitioners would also be entitled to all consequential benefits on account of the fresh fixation of salaries.
The said exercise, namely, the fixation of salaries, shall be concluded within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The arrears due to the petitioners on account of pay, shall be paid to them within a period of three months thereafter.
In case any of the petitioners has retired, his pension shall be refixed and arrears of pension released within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.