Jasbir Singh, J (Oral) - Petitioner was working with respondent No. 1 and he has retired from service on 30111997.
At that time one criminal case was going on against him and, as such, his leave encashment was disbursed subject to the outcome of that litigation.
He had also filed one indemnity bond, wherein it is so stated in clause 3, which reads as under :-  "3.
I shall refund to the Board the entire amount so received at that time and shall otherwise and keep the Board harmless and indemnified against and from all liabilities in respect of the aforesaid sum and all costs incurred in consequence of this claim thereto."
Ultimately, after his retirement, criminal case was decided against him and he was convicted and sentenced by the competent Court.
After his conviction, the competent authority passed order Annexure P-4 dated 1322003, wherein, in view of conviction of the petitioner, he was directed to deposit the amount of leave encashment received by him amounting to Rs. 1,32,780/-.
The petitioner went in appeal which was dismissed vide order Annexure P-6 dated 492003.
Hence this writ petition.
2.
It has been prayed in this writ petition that orders under challenge have been passed without any justification.
In order to press his argument, learned counsel has placed reliance on Rule 822 sub-rule (aa) of the Main Service Rules of the Punjab Electricity Board.
That rule reads as under :-  "(aa) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Regulation (a), the authority competent to grant leave may withhold whole or part of cash equivalent of earned leave in the case of Board employee who retires from service on superannuation while under suspension or while disciplinary or criminal proceedings are pending against him, if in the opinion of such authority, there is a possibility of some money becoming recoverable from him on conclusion of the proceedings against him and on conclusion of the proceedings, he will become eligible to the amount so withheld after adjustment of Board dues, if any."
3.
A perusal of provisions referred to above clearly indicates that the payment towards leave encashment amount can be stopped, in case, it is felt that there is likelihood of some amount becoming recoverable from the employee on account of pending departmental proceedings or criminal proceedings.
There is nothing provided in the rule that on the basis of mere conviction in a criminal case, leave encashment can also be recovered from a retired employee.
4.
When confronted with the aforesaid rule, Mr. Sidhu has failed to indicate as to on the basis of which provision amount of leave encashment has been ordered to be recovered from the petitioner.
This Court feels that first part of Annexure P-14 vide which the petitioner was directed to refund leave encashment amount drawn by him, was not justified and accordingly to that extent Annexure P-1 is quashed.
Respondents are directed not to recover leave encashment amount from the petitioner.
5.
Writ petition stands allowed.
Petition allowed.