KS Garewal, J - This judgment shall dispose of two connected writ petitions, C.W.P.
No. 2278 of 1987 filed by Suresh Kumar and others and C.W.P.
No. 944 of 1988 filed by Raja Ram and others.
2.
The petitioners are Laboratory Assistants, Junior Laboratory Assistants, Beldars, gardeners, peons and sweepers employed by Government College, Narnaul, District Mohindergarh.
The petitioners were appointed to their respective posts on various dated between April, 1975 in the case of Sugan Chand and Mara Ram Beldars petitioners No. 3 and 4 in C.W.P.
No. 944 of 1988 and October/November, 1985 in case of petitioners No. 4 to 8 in C.W.P.
No. 2278 of 1987.
3.
According to the petitioners all the vacancies against which they working were permanent vacancies and they were duly qualified to be appointed.
They had been sponsored by the Employment Exchange and were appointed on adhoc basis by the selection committee.
However, the college in order to save money by not having to pay salary to the petitioners during the vacation period from March to July, would every year terminate their services in March when the session was over and re-appoint them in July when the new session commenced.
Therefore, the petitioners were deprived of salaries for this period.
4.
The petitioners have relied upon Division Bench judgment of this Court in Hari Singh v. State of Haryana and another, C.W.P.
No. 19163 of 1997, decided on April 20, 1998, which was a similar case of a clerk working in Government National College, Sirsa.
In that case the Court had given the  "A direction is given to the respondent No. 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of service in terms of the order dated 31.3.1997 passed in CWP No. 16872 of 1996 without being influenced by the fact that the petitioner was being paid salary out of the amalgamated fund.
He shall pass appropriate order within a period of 2 months from the date of submission certified copy of this order.
If the petitioner satisfies the requirement of suitability, then his services shall be regularised from the date of availability of the post".
5.
In the written statement filed by Principal, Government College, Narnaul on behalf of all the respondents, it was stated that the some posts had been got sanctioned from the Department out of the amalgamated fund of the college.
This fund was collected from the students for utilization of their welfare.
The main duties of the Laboratory Assistants and Junior Laboratory Assistants was to assist science students in practicals.
From April 1 to July 31 there was no teaching work as the college remained closed due to annual examination and summer vacation.
Consequently there was no work for Laboratory Assistants and Junior Laboratory Assistants during this period.
The salary was paid to the petitioners out of the amalgamated fund where the amount was very meagre.
Services of only such members of staff were retained during the vacations whose services were actually required.
This was required to safeguard the fund collected from students and to ensure that the fund was utilized properly.
It was submitted that the writ petition be disposed of on the basis of the above contentions.
6.
At the outset learned for petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 2278 of 1987 submitted that Ramesh Kumar, petitioner No. 4 had left service, services of Krishan Kumar, petitioner No. 6 and Ganga Dutt, petitioner No. 8 had been regularised w.e.f.
August 1, 1988 and Mukh Ram petitioner No. 7 had died.
Therefore, the petition qua these petitioners had been rendered infructuous.
Ordered accordingly.
7.
Continuing the petitioners for a long stretch of time on adhoc basis without regularisation is grossly unfair to them.
Regular posts must have fallen vacant during this period and the petitioners certainly deserved to be considered for regularisation against those posts to enable them to get full salary for the entire period including the vacation period.
The posts that had become available are not known but would certainly be known to the college.
Therefore, a direction similar to the one given in Hari Singh's case (supra) and which has been quoted above deserves to be passed in this case as well.
8.
These petitions are allowed in terms of Hari Singh's case (supra).
It is directed that the respondents shall consider the cases of the petitioners for regularisation of their services without being influenced by the fact that the petitioners were paid salaries out of the amalgamated fund.
Appropriate orders shall be passed in the case of each petitioner within a period of 2 months from today.
If the petitioners satisfy the requirement of suitability, then their services shall be regularised from the date from which their posts became available.
These petitions are disposed of with the above direction.
Petitions allowed.