The petitioner has been working in the Department of Panchayati Raj since 3181964.
As at present, a sum of Rs. 1,60,000/- is lying in the credit of the petitioner in the provident fund account.
The petitioner is a very poor person and has been working only as a water-carrier.
His son's wedding has been fixed to be soleminized for 5/622005.
Being short of funds, he made an application to the respondents for release of Rs. 1,20,000/- out of his own contribution of provident fund.
He made the application for release of the fund on 19.1.2005.
However, the respondents have not cared to take a decision on the same.
2.
Notice of motion.
3.
Mr. SS Behl, Additional Advocate General, Punjab, on the direction of the Court, accepts notice.
4.
It is the pleaded case of the petitioner that Rs. 1,60,000/- are lying to the credit of the petitioner in the provident fund account.
5.
We have considered the submission made by the counsel for the parties.
6.
A provision is made for temporary advance from the funds under the Punjab Contributory Provident Fund Rules.
Rule 1413 deals with conditions on which the advances can be made.
The relevant part of the aforesaid rule is as under :-  "1413(i) A temporary advance may be granted to a subscriber from the amount standing to his credit in the Fund at the discretion of the authority specified in clause (2) subject to the following conditions :- (a) No advance shall be granted unless the sanctioning authority is satisfied that the applicant's pecuniary circumstances justify it and that it will be expended on the following object or objects and not otherwise : xxx xxx xxx xxx (iii) to pay obligatory expenses on a scale appropriate to the applicant's status which by customary usage the applicant has to incur in connection with marriage, funerals, or other ceremonies of persons actually dependent on him."
7.
A perusal of the aforesaid Rule clearly shows that the petitioner would be entitled to claim the temporary advance in connection with the marriage of his son.
We see no justification as to why the respondents have not sanctioned the amount on the basis of the application made by the petitioner on 19.1.2005.
In the aforesaid application, it is categorically stated by the petitioner that the marriage of his son is due to be solemnised on 5/622005.
Due to family circumstances, he does not have any amount to spend on the marriage.
He, therefore, is in dire need of money in the amount of Rs. 1,20,000/-.
Surprisingly, the aforesaid plea of the petitioner has fallen on deaf ears of the respondents.
The provisions contained under the Provident Fund Rules are beneficent in nature.
The authorities are expected to come to the aid of the poor employees, whenever sought.
They are not expected to sit on the applications without any rhyme or reason.
To say the least, the inaction of the respondents is not appreciated by the Court.
We would, however, refrain from making any adverse comments.
8.
The petition is allowed.
Respondents are directed to release the amount claimed by the petitioner out of the amount standing to the credit of the petitioner in accordance with rules.
Let the amount be released forthwith.
A copy of the order, duly attested by the Bench Secretary, be given to counsel for the parties for compliance.
Petition allowed.