Tapen Sen, J - Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the Respondents.
2.
The writ petitioner is a doctor who, after having completed his MBBS course in the year 1983, was selected under the Punjab Civil Medical Services-II by the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala on the basis of this merits in the year 1984.
He was then posted as a Medical Officer in the border district of Amritsar, where he completed 1 year and 11 months of service upto December, 1986.
3.
Prior to all this, the Under Secretary, Department of Health, Government of Punjab issued a memo addressed to the Director, Research and Medical Education, Government of Punjab in relation to transfer of PCMS-II vacant posts to the medical colleges in the State.
The minimum requirement for those desirous of doing MD/MS course was two years.
4.
From the pleadings made, it is evident that the Petitioner completed 1 year and 11 months of service upto December, 1986 as a Medical Officer, whereafter, on 31.12.1986 he was nominated by the Punjab Government for post graduate course of MD commencing with effect from January, 1987.
In other words, the Petitioner fell short by just one month in coming within the ambit of the eligibility criteria laid down vide Annexure P-2, i.e. the transfer of posts would be effected provided the concerned doctors had two years experience.
5.
By letter dated 1191987, the Petitioner made a request that he be given a no objection certificate so that his salary could be released as he was a government nominee.
This no objection was issued on 2131988 by Annexure P-4 and upon perusal of the contents therein, it is evident that the one month shortfall was waived on the condition that the Petitioner would have to execute a bond to the effect that he would serve the State Government for a period of five years and also the period by which his experience fell short of the minimum required experience.
This no objection is Annexure P-4 appended to the writ petition.
6.
For all practical purposes, therefore, the shortfall of about one month was duly waived by the Government of Punjab vide Annexure P-4.
7.
In the counter affidavit, a new stand has been taken and the stand is that the Petitioner had not completed the requisite rural service as per instructions but in Paragraph 5, the Respondents have stated thus :-  "By taking a lenient view, Punjab Govt. vide their letter No. 22/30-SHBII- 88/5734 dated 21388 (Annexure R-3) granted him leave of the kind due for the duration of the course subject to execution of necessary bond to serve the Punjab Govt. for 5 years, which he had accepted and he never filed any representation against the aforesaid orders."
(Emphasis added) 8.
Upon perusal of the statements made in the counter affidavit which have been quoted above, it is evident that the Government of Punjab took a lenient view and granted him leave of the kind due, subject to the execution of a bond.
They also admit in the counter affidavit that the Petitioner accepted the aforementioned condition and never filed any representation against the said order.
9.
Thus, upon being put to notice that the conditions was being waived and accepted subject to the condition that the Petitioner executes a bond etc., the Respondents could not thereafter have turned around and acted to his detriment.
In fact, there are no deliberate laches on the part of the Petitioner at all.
10.
For the premises aforesaid, this Court is of the opinion that the action on the part of the Respondents in not releasing the salary of the Petitioner for the concerned period, is devoid of any rationale.
This Court, therefore, exercising powers of judicial review and taking into consideration equitable considerations, hereby orders the concerned authorities to release the salary of the Petitioner for the said period.
However, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the prayer for interest, is refused.
The writ petition stands disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.