GS Singhvi, J - This is an appeal under Clause X of the Letters Patent for setting aside order dated 6.9.2001 passed by the learned Single Judge vide which he allowed C.W.P.
No. 3289 of 2001 filed by respondent-Mawasi Ram and quashed his compulsory retirement from service.
2.
The respondent was enrolled as Constable in the State of Punjab 21.2.1963.
On the creation of the State of Haryana w.e.f.
1111966, his services were allocated to the new State.
He passed Lower School Course on 30.9.1974 and was promoted as Head Constable on 20.10.1975.
He passed Intermediate School Course in 1984.
He was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on 21.9.1989 and then as Sub Inspector on 9.11.1997.
He was served with notice dated 30112000 issued by Superintendent of Police, Rewari proposing his retirement on the ground that he had earned adverse entries in the Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs.)
for the periods from 491994 to 3131995, 141998 to 1931998, 11.10.1999 to 3132000 and 142000 to 2592000.
After one month and twenty three days, the officer concerned passed order dated 2312001 retiring the respondent from service with effect from 7.3.2001 under Rule 532(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
3.
The respondent challenged the notice and the order of compulsory retirement in C.W.P.
No. 3289 of 2001 on several grounds including the following :-  (a) Superintendent of Police, Rewari was not competent to retire him from service by invoking the provisions of Rule 532(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
(b) The notice and the order of retirement are vitiated due to mala fides and arbitrary exercise of power.
4.
The appellants contested the writ petition.
In the written statement filed on their behalf, it was pleaded that the respondent was retired because he had earned adverse remarks in the A.C.Rs.
of three consecutive years.
According to them, the adverse remarks had been recorded by the concerned authorities on an objective assessment of the record of the respondent and decision to retire him was taken after due consideration of his entire service record.
They controverted the respondent's assertion that Superintendent of Police, Rewari was not competent to retire him from service.
5.
The learned Single Judge relied on the judgments of this Court in Karnail Singh v. State of Haryana, 1989(2) SLR 345; Hira Lal v. State of Haryana, 1999(3) SCT 237 (P&H) : 1999(1) RSJ 88 and Ram Lal v. State of Haryana, 1997(2) SCT 237 (P&H) : 1997(2) SLR 421 and held that Superintendent of Police, Rewari was not competent to order compulsory retirement of the respondent, who was holding the post of Sub Inspector and accordingly, quashed notice dated 30112000 and order dated 2312001.
6.
Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned Assistant Advocate General submitted that even though, notice dated 30112000 and order dated 2312001 issued by Superintendent of Police, Rewari show that the respondent was retired by invoking the provisions of Rule 532 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, the power to retire can be traced under Rule 121 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for short, `the 1934 Rules'), Volume-I read with Rule 918 of Volume-II those rules and no illegality was committed by the concerned officer in retiring him.
He then argued that the view taken by the learned Single Judge on the competence of Superintendent of Police, Rewari to retire the respondent should be declared as erroneous because he did not take into account the relevant rules.
Shri Dahiya further argued that the compulsory retirement of the respondent was justified because he had earned adverse remarks in his A.C.Rs.
7.
Shri Jaiveer Yadav supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that Deputy Inspector General of Police alone was competent to retire the respondent and the learned Single Judge did not commit any error by invalidating order dated 2312001 on the ground that Superintendent of Police, Rewari was not competent to pass that order.
He further argued that the respondent could not have been retired without giving him notice and opportunity of hearing.
8.
We have given serious though to the respective arguments.
Rule 121 of the Rules, Volume-II and Rule 918 of Volume-I of those rules on which reliance has been placed by the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, read as under :-  Rule 121 of Volume-II of the Rules 121.
Authorities empowered to make appointments.
- (1) Assistant Superintendents of Police are appointed by the Secretary of State for India, either in England or in India, according to the rules framed by him from time to time.
Deputy Superintendents of Police are appointed by the Provincial Government according to rules contained in Appendix 121.
The following table summarises the directions given by the Provincial Government under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 241 of the Government of India Act, 1935, in regard to the authorities competent to make appointments to the non-gazetted ranks.
Class of Government servants.
Authority to whom the power of appointment is delegated.
(For Pb.)
"Officers in-charge, Police Constables Training Centres" and Officer-in-charge of the Constables Advanced Training Centre.
The extent of the delegation.
Inspectors Deputy Inspectors-General of Police, Assistant Inspector General, Government Railway Police, Assistant Inspector-General, Provincial Additional Police (designated as Commandant, Provincial Additional Police), and the Assistant Inspector-General of Police (Traffic).
Full powers subject to rules governing the conditions of service as defined in Police Rules.
Sergeants, Sub-Inspectors and Assistant Sub-Inspectors.
Superintendent of Police and Deputy Superintendent (Administrative), Government Railway Police and Assistant Superintendent, Government Railway Police.
Head Constables and Constables.
Superintendent of Police and Deputy Superintendent, (Administrative), Government Railway Police, Assistant Superintendent, Government Railway Police, Deputy Superintendents incharge of Railway Police Sub-Divisions, Senior Assistant Superintendent of Police, Lahore and Officers in-charge, Recruits training Centres, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Punjab Armed Police, Lahaul and Spiti.
(2) All direct appointments to non-gazetted ranks above that of constable and all first appointments of civilian clerks shall be made by the appointing authority on consideration of the recommendations of a selection board.
Such Boards shall be constituted in accordance with the orders of the Inspector- General.
(3) The power to confirm the appointment of officers appointed on probation vests in the prescribed appointing authority.
(4) Inspectors shall be borne on a provincial roll and shall receive provincial constabulary numbers.
Sergeants shall be borne on a separate provincial roll and shall receive separate provincial constabulary numbers.
Sub-Inspectors and Assistant Sub-Inspectors shall be borne on range rolls and shall receive range constabulary numbers.
Head Constables and constables in each district shall be borne on district rolls and shall receive district constabulary numbers.
(5) In matters relating to general conditions of service such as pay, pension, leave, joining time and travelling allowance, the subordinate ranks of the Police force of the State of Punjab shall be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, for the time being in force, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions contained in these rules.
xx xx xx xx xx xx 918 (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, a retiring pension is granted to an officer - (a) who is permitted to retire from service after completing qualifying service for twenty-five years or such lesser period of as may, for any class of officer be prescribed; or (b) who is compulsorily retired under sub-rule (2) after completing twenty- five years qualifying service; or (c) who is retired by the appointing authority on or after he attains the age of 55 years, by giving him not less than three months notice; or (d) who retires on or after attaining the age of 55 years by giving not less than three months notice of his intention to retire to the appointing authority : Provided that where the notice is given before the age of fifty-five years so attained, it shall be given effect to from a date not earlier than the date on which the age of fifty-five years is attained.
Note :- Appointing authority retains an absolute right to retire any Government servant on or after he has attained the age of 55 years without assigning any reason.
A corresponding right is also available to such a Government servant to retire on or after he has attained the age of 55 years.
(2) The Inspector-General of Police may, with the previous approval of the State Government, compulsorily retire any Police Officer, other than an officer belonging to Indian Police Service or Haryana State Police Service who has completed twenty-five years' qualifying service, without giving any reasons.
An officer who is so compulsorily retired will not be entitled to claim any special compensation for his retirement.
Note :- The right to retire compulsorily shall not be exercised except when it is in the public interest to dispense with the further services of an officer, such as on account of inefficiency, dishonesty, corruption or infamous conduct.
Thus the rule is intended for use - (i) against an officer whose efficiency is impaired but against whom it is not desirable to make formal charges of inefficiency or who has ceased to be fully efficient i.e., when an officer's value is clearly incommensurate with the pay which he draws but not to such a degree as to warrant his retirement on a compassionate allowance.
It is not the intention to use the provisions of this rule as a financial weapon that is to say the provisions should be used in only the case of an officer who is concerned unfit for retention on personal as opposed to financial grounds.
(ii) in cases where reputation for corruption, dishonesty or infamous conduct is clearly established even though no specific instance is likely to be proved.
NOTE 2 :- The Officer shall be given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make against the proposed action and such representation shall be taken into consideration before his compulsory retirement is ordered.
In all cases of compulsory retirement of enrolled police officers, the Inspector-General of Police shall effect such retirement only with the previous approval of the State Government in accordance with the instructions, if any, issued by the Government on the subject from time to time.
NOTE 3 :- The officer whose duty it would be to fill the post if vacant, shall record his orders on the application to retire, which, if in vernacular, should be accompanied by a translation in English.
If the officer who applies for pension is permitted to retire, the application shall be forwarded with the pension papers."
9.
An analysis of the above reproduced rules does give an impression that Superintendent of Police has the power to appoint an official of the rank of Sub Inspector.
However, we do not consider it necessary to finally adjudicate on the issue of the competence of Superintendent of Police, Rewari to compulsorily retire the respondent because the order of the learned Single Judge can be sustained on the ground that the officer concerned did not comply with the mandate of Rule 918(2) of Volume-I of the Rules.
A reading of notice dated 30112000 and order dated 2312001 shows that the respondent was retired from service by invoking provisions of Rule 532 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
The gravamen of the decision taken by the competent authority was that the service record of the respondent did not warrant his continuance in service.
In this context, it is appropriate to mention that before ordering retirement of the respondent, Superintendent of Police, Rewari did not give notice to the respondent in terms of Note-II appearing below Rule 918(2) of the Rules which represents a statutory embodiment of the rules of natural justice.
In HC Prithi Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(3) SLR 385 and Raj Kumar Mehta v. The State of Haryana, 1997(3) SCT 474 (P&H) : 1997(1) SLR 651, two learned Single Judge of this Court held that the requirement of giving notice and consideration of the representation, if any, made by the police official concerned is mandatory.
We respectfully agree with this view and hold that the compulsory retirement of the respondent was vitiated due to violation of the rules of natural justice and arbitrary exercise of power.
10.
There is another reason for our disinclination to interfere with the order of the learned Single Judge.
The respondent had challenged his retirement not only on the ground that Superintendent of Police, Rewari was not competent to issue notice dated 30112000 and order dated 2312001, but also on the ground that the adverse remarks recorded in his A.C.Rs.
which constituted the foundation of the notice/order of retirement were tainted due to mala fide and arbitrariness.
The learned Single Judge did not consider this issue because he felt that the order of retirement was liable to be nullified only on the ground that the Superintendent of Police was not competent to exercise that power.
In this view of the matter, we may have remitted the matter to the learned Single Judge with the direction to re-consider the entire matter.
However, keeping in view the fact that in pursuance of the order passed by the learned Single Judge, the respondent was taken back in service and during the pendency of the appeal, he retired on attaining the age of superannuation, we feel that no useful purpose would be served by adopting that course.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.