GS Singhvi, J - These appeals are directed against order dated 21.8.1998 passed by the learned Single Judge whereby he dismissed Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2134 and 10606 of 1998 filed by the appellants for quashing the admission of respondents No. 6 to 9 against free seats in BDS course in DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar (for short, `the College') and for issuance of a mandamus to the concerned authority to treat them as admitted against free seats in the said College.
2.
The appellants and the private respondents appeared in the joint entrance examination conducted by Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak (for short, `the University') for admission to MBBS/BDS course in the following five institutions :  1.
Pt. BD Sharma Medical College, Rohtak; 2.
Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha; 3.
Dental College, Rohtak; 4.
D.A.V.
Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar; and 5.
BRS Institute of Medical Sciences, Kotbilla, Panchkula 3.
In the merit list declared by the University, appellants-Miss Parul Lohra and Surbhi Mittal were shown at Sr. Nos. 219 and 222 and respondent Nos. 6 to 9 were shown at Sr. Nos. 164, 165, 201 and 204 respectively.
In the first counselling held by the Admission Committee, which was headed by Director of Pt. BD Sharma Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak, candidates up to merit No. 211 were considered and respondent Nos. 6 to 8 were admitted in BDS course in the College against payment seats.
In the second counselling held on 2991997, the appellants were admitted in the College against payment seats.
In that counselling, respondent No. 6 was offered free seat in BRS Dental College, Kotbilla.
Respondent Nos. 7 and 8 were offered admission to MBBS course against free and payment seat respectively in Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha.
The appellants took admission in BDS course by depositing the prescribed fee, but respondents Nos. 6 to 8 did not avail admissions.
Third counselling was held on 5121997.
The candidature of the appellants was considered in that counselling and they were selected for admission against free seats in the College.
4.
The appellants through their parents contacted the Principal of the College for their admission against free seats, but the latter declined to abide by the selection made by the Admission Committee.
Their parents represented to the University for ensuring compliance of the selection made by the Admission Committee, but failed to evoke any response from the concerned authorities.
Instead, vide letter dated 921998, the Principal of the College refused to consider the candidature of the appellants for admission against free seats by citing their lower merit as the ground for doing so.
5.
The appellants challenged the action of the Principal of the College not to entertain their candidature for admission against free seats in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2134 and 10606 of 1998.
They relied on paragraph 5(II) of the prospectus issued by the University and pleaded that the Admission Committee had rightly refused to consider the candidature of respondent Nos. 6 to 9 in the third counselling because they failed to avail the admission made on the basis of second counselling.
6.
The stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was that the action of the Principal of the College to grant admission to respondent Nos. 6 to 8 against free seats was not in order.
In the written statement filed by the Registrar of the University, it was averred that respondent Nos. 6 to 8, who had not availed admissions in the institutions offered to them in the second counselling held on 2991997, were rightly not considered by the Admission Committee in the third counselling and the Principal of the College was not competent to suo motu shift their admission to free seats.
7.
In their separate written statements, respondent Nos. 5 and 6 to 8 controverted the claim of the appellants.
In the written statement filed by him, the Principal of the College pleaded that he did not commit any illegality by shifting the admissions of respondent Nos. 6 to 8 against free seats because they were higher in merit than the appellants.
Respondent Nos. 6 to 8 also pleaded that they cannot be made to suffer on account of the mistake committed by the Principal of the College who had failed to intimate the availability of free seats to the Admission Committee well before the commencement of the second counselling.
They further averred that they had filed Civil Writ Petition Nos. 19412 of 1996 and 123 and 192 of 1998 for directing the official respondents to admit them against free seats, but withdrew the same because after receipt of notice, the Principal of the College shifted their admissions against free seats.
They also alleged that the Admission Committee committed a serious illegality by not considering their candidature in the third counselling for admission against free seats simply because they had not availed admissions on the basis of selection made in the second counselling.
8.
The learned Single Judge referred to the provisions contained in paragraph 5(II) of the prospectus and held that Clause (4) thereof cannot be read as disentitling respondent Nos. 6 to 8 to seek admission against free seats simply because they had not availed admission made on the basis of second counselling.
He further held that action of the Principal of the College to suo motu transfer the admission of respondent Nos. 6 to 8 from payment seats to free seats was legally unsustainable but declined to interfere with the same on the ground that they were more meritorious than the appellants.
The learned Single Judge also rejected the appellants' plea that they were entitled to be admitted against free seats in BRS Institute of Medical Sciences, Kotbilla by observing that after having accepted admission against payment seats in the College, the appellants are not entitled to be admitted against free seats on the ground that candidates having lower merit were admitted against those seats.
9.
Sarv Shri PK Mutneja and RK Gupta, learned counsel for the appellants assailed the impugned order and argued that failure of the learned Single to consider their plea for admission against free seats on the basis of the recommendations made by the Admission Committee has resulted in grave miscarriage of justice.
Shri Mutneja emphasised that Principal of the College did not have the jurisdiction to suo motu shift the admissions of the private respondents from payment seats to free seats and in any case, he could not have ignored the selection made by the Admission Committee in the third counselling and denied admissions to the appellants against free seats.
Learned counsel then argued that the interpretation placed by the learned Single Judge on paragraph 5(II) of the prospectus is per se erroneous and contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court that the candidates, who do not avail admissions granted pursuant to the counselling made by the Admission Committee, are not entitled to be considered in the subsequent counselling.
They relied on the note appearing in the notification (Annexure P-2) issued by the Admission Committee for third counselling debarring the candidates who had not availed admissions made on the basis of second counselling and argued that the private respondents who were offered admission against free seats in Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha and BRS Institute of Medical Sciences, Kotbilla were rightly not considered by the Admission Committee in the third counselling.
In the end, learned counsel submitted that even though, the appellants and the private respondents have completed their course, the Court may direct the College to refund the fees deposited by the appellants for availing admission against the payment seats because their selection for admission against payment seats had not been withdrawn or annulled by the Admission Committee.
10.
Shri Hemant Bassi, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 4 and 5 supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that after having availed admission against the payment seats on the recommendations of the Admission Committee, the appellants were not entitled to be considered for admission against free seats and the Admission Committee gravely erred in directing their admission against free seats.
He further argued that the Principal of the College did not commit any jurisdictional error by shifting the admissions of the private respondents from payment seats to free seats because they were kore meritorious than the appellants.
11.
We have given serious though to the respective arguments.
In our opinion, it is not necessary to examine the correctness or otherwise of the view taken by the learned Single Judge on the interpretation of paragraph 5(II) of the prospectus issued by the University because it is an admitted position that the appellants as well as the private respondents have completed their course.
However, we are inclined to hold that the learned Single Judge committed a serious error by not considering the appellants' plea that in terms of the recommendations made by the Admission Committee, they had acquired a legal and vested right to be admitted against free seats.
The scheme of the prospectus issued by the University did not envisage admissions by the Principals or any other authority of the Colleges.
Rather, all the admissions were to be made as per the recommendations of the Admission Committee.
Therefore, the Principal of the College was not entitled to suo motu shift the admissions of respondent Nos. 6 to 8 from payment seats to free seats.
12.
We are further of the view that after having found that the action of the Principal of the College to shift the admission of respondent Nos. 6 to 8 from payment seats to free seats was unauthorised, the learned Single Judge should have directed the College authorities to implement the recommendations made by the Admission Committee and regularise the admission of the appellants against free seats and refund the amount deposited by them after deducting the fee payable for admission against those seats.
In the result, the appeals are allowed.
Respondents Nos. 4 to 5 are directed to refund the amount deposited by the appellants for availing admission against payment seats after deducting the fee payable by the candidates for admission against free seats.
The needful be done within four months from the date of receipt/submission of certified copy of this order.
Appeals allowed.