JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Petitioners claim promotion to the post of Clerk asserting that persons junior to them have been promoted by ignoring their claim.
It is alleged that the claim of the petitioners was ignored on account of the fact that they had not passed the typewriting test in Punjabi language and were, therefore, ignored for promotion.
2.
Attention of this Court has been invited to the Punjab Department of Rural Development and Panchayats (Class III) Rules 1988 (hereinafter referred to as `1988 Rules').
It is not a matter of dispute between the parties that the 1988 Rules regulate the conditions of service of the petitioners.
Rule 8 of the 1988 Rules delineates the method of appointment.
Qualifications required for appointment against the posts regulated by the 1988 Rules have been stipulated in Appendix B So far as the post of Clerk is concerned, Appendix B makes a reservation of 10% of the cadre posts of Clerks for appointment by way of promotion.
The remaining 90% of the cadre posts of Clerks are to be filled up by way of direct recruitment.
Column 5 of Appendix B of the 1988 Rules lays down the following parameters for promotion to the post of Clerk :-  "From amongst Class IV employees working in Directorate of Panchayats (Head Quarters staff other than intelligence unit Staff) Cadre who are Matriculates and who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of five years."
3.
Column 6 of Appendix B of the 1988 Rules lays down the following eligibility conditions for promotion to the post of Clerk :-  "Should be Matriculate or its equivalent and should have qualified the typewriting test in Punjabi language to be conducted by the Board at a speed of thirty words per minute."
4.
It is apparent from a comparative assessment of Columns 5 and 6 of Schedule B pertaining to posts of Clerk that it is not essential for a promotee to qualify the typewriting test in Punjabi language for promotion, whereas for direct recruitment a candidate selected for appointment as Clerk is required to qualify the typewriting test in Punjabi.
5.
In view of the above, we are satisfied that the petitioners could not have been denied consideration for promotion to the posts of Clerk merely on account of the fact, that they had not qualified the typewriting test in Punjabi, or on account of the fact that persons junior to them had qualified the typewriting test.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has also invited the attention of this Court to the Punjab Civil Services (General & Common Conditions) Rules, 1994, (hereinafter referred to as the `1994 Rules') which were notified on 23.6.1999, whereby the method of appointment and qualifications for posts including the posts of Clerk were redetermined.
The Competent Authority while promulgating the 1994 Rules under Article 309 of the Constitution of India has reiterated the requirement of qualifying the typewriting test in Punjabi with a minimum speed of 30 w.p.m.
within one year of the date of appointment by direct recruitment.
The requirement for qualifying the typewriting test in Punjabi has not been made for appointment by way of promotion.
It is, therefore, evident that till today no statutory rule requires persons similarly situated as the petitioners claiming promotion to the post of Clerk to qualify the typewriting test in Punjabi language as a pre-requisite for promotion to the post of Clerk.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents has, however, vehemently relied on the instructions dated 27101998 appended with the written statement as Annexure R-1/T.
Even a perusal of Annexure R-1/T suggests only a proposal at the hands of the authorities, in fact Clause (iii) of para 1 of the aforesaid instructions is relevant in this behalf and is being extracted hereunder :-  "The service rules of all the departments including those in which a provision for promotion of Class-IV employees to Class-III (Clerks) posts has already been made, should be amended in accordance with the aforesaid decisions."
8.
In view of the aforesaid, it was imperative for the authorities to have amended the statutory rules before insisting on anybody to qualify the typewriting test in Punjabi before promotion to the post of Clerk.
No such amendment has admittedly been made till date.
Even otherwise instructions cannot overrule statutory rules.
9.
In view of the statutory rules noticed above, we are satisfied that the claim of the petitioners should have been considered while persons junior to them were promoted to the post of Clerk.
Accordingly, we direct respondent No. 2 to consider the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Clerk within three months from today.
In case one or more petitioners or all of them are found suitable for promotion, they shall be promoted from the date persons junior to them were promoted.
They shall also be entitled to all consequential reliefs.
Allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petition allowed.