Viney Mittal, J (Oral) - The petitioner-On Parkash Sangwan (since dead), now represented by his legal representatives, has approached this Court through the present petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer made in the petition is for the issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to grant regular pay scales to the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner has averred that he was appointed as a Mechanic for Weigh Bridge and Platform Weighing Machine on January 21, 1978, on the fixed pay of Rs. 550/-.
The appointment order of the petitioner has been appended as Annexure P-1 with the present petition.
The petitioner was initially appointed on a probation period of two years, which is claimed to have been successfully completed.
In the year 1986, the consolidated salary of the petitioner was raised from Rs. 550/- to Rs. 900/- per month.
The aforesaid order enhancing the salary of the petitioner has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the present petition.
3.
The petitioner claims that Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (Hafed)-respondent had decided that its employees would be granted same pay and salary, which is admissible to their counterparts in the Haryana State Government service.
But inspite of the aforesaid fact, the petitioner was not being granted the regular pay scales admissible to him.
The petitioner has also claimed that a similarly situated person namely, one Equipment Repairer, whose qualifications, duties and responsibilities were the same as that of the petitioner, had been granted the regular scale of Rs. 525-900.
On that basis, the petitioner has also claimed that he was entitled to the similar treatment.
4.
In fact earlier the petitioner raised a dispute under Section 102/103 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984, before the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies.
The aforesaid arbitration reference was decided by the Additional Registrar (Marketing) Cooperative Societies, vide order dated November 5, 1985.
In the aforesaid order, directions were issued to the respondent-Hafed to consider the case of the petitioner for regular pay scales and while deciding the claim, also take into consideration his qualifications and service record.
A copy of the order dated November 5, 1985 has been appended as Annexure P-3 with the petition.
5.
The grievance made by the petitioner is that inspite of the aforesaid order passed by the Additional Registrar, necessary relief was not granted to him and as such he has approached this Court through the present petition.
6.
In fact, during the pendency of the present petition, the petitioner died.
His legal representatives have been brought on record.
7.
The written statement to the claim of the petitioner has been filed by the respondent.
The facts have not been disputed.
Infact, it has been admitted by the respondent-Hafed that it had sanctioned new pay scales to its employees on the pattern of Haryana Government.
The only averment, on the basis of which the claim of the petitioner has been contested, is that the petitioner was not granted the revised pay scales as no post of Weighing Scale Mechanic was included in the statement of the posts, scales of which were revised in accordance with the Fourth Pay Commission Report.
8.
No one has chosen to appear on behalf of the respondent.
I have heard Sh. RK Malik, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and with his assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
9.
In my considered view, the present petition deserves to succeed.
10.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was initially appointed in the year 1978 as a Mechanic.
However, he was granted a fixed salary of Rs. 550/- per month.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was initially appointed on probation and he successfully completed the aforesaid probationary period.
As a matter of fact, the salary of the petitioner was revised in the year 1986 but even at that time he was granted fixed salary.
There is no justification for keeping the petitioner on a fixed salary for such a long period.
It has already been noticed above that directions had been issued by the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, to respondent-Hafed to consider the claim of the petitioner and grant him his entitlement.
Another fact, which needs to be kept in view is that the averment made by the petitioner that employees of Hafed had been granted regular pay scales at par with Haryana State Government employees, has not been controverted by the respondent in the written statement.
11.
In view of the aforesaid fact the present petition is allowed and the respondent-Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (Hafed), is directed to grant regular pay scales to the petitioner as per his entitlement.
The necessary orders in this regard shall be passed within a period of two months from the date a certified copy of this order is received.
The legal representatives of the petitioner shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits including the payment which may have become due to the petitioner during the period he was serving with respondent-Federation.
Petition allowed.