Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions being CWP No. 2693 of 1987 and CWP No. 8626 of 1987, as both the writ petitions, arise out of a common order dated June 30, 1986 passed by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Barnala.
2.
The petitioners, namely, Upkar Singh, Sher Singh and Rachhpal Singh in CWP No. 2693 of 1987 were working as Octroi Clerks with Municipal Committee, Sunam.
An FIR No. 318 dated November 6, 1983 was registered against the aforesaid persons with regard to an incident dated November 2, 1983 whereby the aforesaid persons were alleged to have committee offences under Sections 332, 506, 353 read with Section 34 IPC.
It was alleged that the aforesaid persons had given beatings to one Amar Singh, Octroi Inspector with Municipal Committee, Sunam.
The petitioners were ordered to be suspended.
The suspension order was passed by the Executive Officer, Sunam.
An enquiry was ordered to be conducted against the aforesaid mis-conduct.
The aforesaid enquiry was also conducted by the Executive Officer of the Municipal Committee.
Subsequently, the petitioners were summoned before the Committee on April 25, 1984 and confronted with the report of the enquiry officer.
On the same day, a Resolution was passed on April 25, 1984 whereby services of the aforesaid persons were terminated.
3.
The said termination of their services was challenged by the petitioners by filing a statutory appeal before the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
Vide order dated May 4, 1984 the resolution was suspended by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
The aforesaid interim order was challenged by the municipal committee by taking up the matter before the Director, Local Bodies, Punjab.
Vide an order dated August 6, 1984, the Director, Local Bodies, Punjab set aside the aforesaid interim order dated May 4, 1984 passed by the Sub Divisional Officer.
4.
Be that as it may, the ultimate conclusion of the hearing in the proceedings before the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) was that the termination of the services of the petitioners was without jurisdiction, inasmuch as, the suspension order and the termination order had been passed by the Executive Officer, who had no jurisdiction to pass such orders.
Accordingly, the Resolution No. 255 dated April 25, 1984 passed by the Municipal Committee was set aside and the petitioners were ordered to be reinstated back in service.
It was ordered that the period of suspension would be treated leave of the kind due, with the result that they were not held entitled to claim back arrears for the period they had remained out of service.
5.
The aforesaid order dated June 30, 1986 passed by Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) has been challenged by the petitioners as well as municipal committee.
Whereas, the municipal committee, petitioner in CWP No. 8626 of 1987 has assailed the aforesaid order claiming that the reinstatement of the petitioners (the employees) was not justified, the petitioners in CWP No. 2693 of 1987 (employees) have claimed that they were entitled to the arrears of salary since their termination had been declared to be illegal.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
7.
At this stage, it may be relevant to notice here that vide judgment dated June 5, 1986, the petitioners have been acquitted by the criminal court in FIR No. 318 of November 6, 1983.
8.
The facts are not in dispute any further.
It is apparent that vide order dated June 30, 1986 the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) has given a categorical finding that the petitioners had been suspended by the Executive Officer.
9.
It may be relevant to notice here that the learned Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) has noticed that the enquiry into the incident, as was ordered by the Executive Officer on the similar allegations, had formed part of the criminal proceedings.
Since the petitioners have been acquitted of the criminal charges against them by the criminal court, therefore, it was also held that there was no justification to order termination by the municipal committee.
Another fact which has been taken note of by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) is that no show cause notice was ever issued by the municipal committee to the petitioners before terminating their services.
Accordingly, it was held that the termination of the services of the petitioners by the municipal committee was illegal.
In this view of the matter, once the termination of the services of the petitioners had been held to be illegal, it was obvious that the petitioners were also entitled to claim back-wages accrued to them for the period for which they had remained out of service on account of their termination.
10.
No good ground has been given by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) denying the aforesaid benefit to the petitioners.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioners are entitled to the back-wages for the period for which they had remained out of service on account of their termination which had subsequently been set aside by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, Civil Writ Petition No. 2693 of 1987 is allowed whereas Civil Writ Petition No. 8626 of 1987 is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.