JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Petitioner No. 1 Ram Kumar was inducted into the service of the Haryana Police Department as a Constable on 17.2.1979.
Likewise, Petitioner No. 2 Rajinder Singh was engaged as Constable on 2411981.
At the time of his entry into service, petitioner No. 1 was about 24 years old (his date of birth being 5.7.1955), whereas petitioner No. 2 was about 23 years old (his date of birth being 421958).
2.
Promotion from the rank of Constable is to the rank of Head Constable.
The process of promotion to the rank of Head Constable commences by entering the name of a Constable in list B-I, in terms of the mandate of Rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
A Constable whose name is entered in list B-I, is deputed to the Lower School Course.
On the successful completion of the Lower School Course a Constable becomes eligible for promotion to the rank of Head Constable.
3.
It is apparent from the aforesaid narration, that the process of promotion to the post of Head Constable commences with the inclusion of the name of a Constable in list B-I Selection of candidates for list B-I, is regulated by Rule 137 of the Rules.
Rule 137 of the Rules came to be amended through a notification dated 2991995.
Eligibility conditions stipulated for a Constable for being placed in list B-I under Rule 137 of the Rules (notified on 2991995) are being extracted hereunder :-  "(a) All constables irrespective of their educational qualifications shall be eligible for admission in list B-I, if they are under the age of 50 years and have completed 10 years of service on the Ist day of July of the year which immediately precedes the year, in which the selection is made."
4.
The aforesaid amendment to Rule 137 of the Rules also introduced an exhaustive criterion for determining the inter se merit of those eligible for consideration.
A perusal of the amended Rule also reveals that the process of placing Constables on list B-I under Rule 137 of the Rules, is to be undertaken in the month of January each year.
In sum and substance, therefore, the amendment recorded through notification dated 2991995 would apply for the first time in January, 1996.
Hithertofore, the selection process was to be based on the Rule 137 of the Rules, as it existed prior to the notification dated 2991995.
5.
It is also necessary to reproduce hereunder the exhaustive criterion devised Rule 137 of the Rules (notified on 2991995) on the basis of which inter-se merit of the selected candidates was to be prepared.
The same is extracted hereunder :-  "(b) The marks to be awarded for educational qualification will be as under : BA and above 5 marks Matric and above 3 marks Middle and above 2 marks (c) The marks to be awarded for training courses which have been passed on or before the Ist day of December, of the year which immediately precedes the year, in which the selection is made will be as under : For training courses upto one month duration : Half (1/2) marks For training courses of more than 1 month and upto 2 months duration : 1 mark For training more than 2 months and upto 4 months duration : 2 marks For training course of more than 4 months and upto 6 months duration : 3 marks For training courses of more than 6 months and upto 8 months duration : 4 marks For training courses of more than 8 months and upto 10 months duration : 5 marks For training courses of more than 10 months duration : 6 marks" 6.
The maximum marks awarded on the basis of training courses shall be limited to 12 and in no case will exceed the maximum limit.
Marks shall be awarded only for such training courses of which entries are made in character roll.
Further, the list of all such training courses for which marks shall be awarded while making selection for list B-I shall be circulated annually.
If a constable fails in a training course or leaves a training course intentionally and without sufficient reason in between, then he shall be awarded negative marks equal to the marks which he would have got in case he had completed the training course successfully.
7.
The marks to be awarded for commendations certificate will be as under :  Class I 3 marks Class II 2 marks Class III 1 mark The maximum marks for class I, class II and class III commendation certificates shall be 15 and in no case will exceed the maximum limit.
For the purpose of awarding marks for commendation certificates, only those certificates shall be considered which have been awarded before the Ist day of July of the year which immediately precedes the year, in which the selection is made.
(e) The marks for length of service will be awarded as under : (i) 0 to 10 years of service : 1 marks for each completed year of service.
(ii) upto 18 years of service : 10 marks +2 marks for each completed year of service after the completion of 10 years service.
(iii) More than 18 years of service : 26 marks +2 marks for each completed year of service after the completion of 18 years of service.
For the purpose of reckoning completed year of service, the date shall be the Ist day of July of the year which immediately precedes the year in which the selection is made.
All round Ist 5 marks All round 2nd 3 marks All round 3rd 2 marks All round 4th to 10th 1 mark Further all the constables who secure Ist, 2nd and 3rd positions in All India Police Sports or Police Duty Meet, or in a National Sports/Athletics tournament shall be awarded marks as under :  Ist Position 3 marks 2nd Position 2 marks 3rd Position 1 mark Similarly all constables who secure positions in the International Sports or Athletics tournaments shall be awarded marks as under :  Ist Position 10 marks 2nd Position 7 marks 3rd Position 5 marks The list of tournaments securing of positions which will make a constable eligible for award of marks shall be decided by the Inspector General of Police-cum-Director General of Police, Haryana, and he will also be competent to make additions or deletions in the same from time to time as per necessity.
(g) The marks to be deducted for punishment will be as under : For every major punishment 5 marks For every minor punishment 2 marks A constable who is awarded a major punishment shall not be considered for admission list B-I for the following three calendar years.
For the purpose of deduction of marks for major or minor punishments only those punishments shall be considered which are awarded before the list (last ?)
day of December, of the year which immediately precedes the year, in which selection is made.
(h) If at the time of selection for admission in list B-I, the score of two constables, is found to be equal then the constable who is senior in service shall be selected for admission to list B-I Further, in case, two constables who have equal scores and the same seniority, then the constable who is higher in inter se merit in the recruits course shall be brought on list B-I" 8.
A perusal of the aforesaid criterion reveals that the entire process was mechanical and there was scope for subjective interference therewith.
9.
Rule 137 of the Rules, came to be amended once again by a notification dated 2862001, just in the same manner as on the previous occasion, the process of selection for placing candidates on list B-I, under the latter amendment, was to be undertaken in the month of January every year.
Therefore, in sum and substance the notification dated 2862001 amending Rule 137 of the Rules (which was introduced by the notification dated 2991995) would be operative for the first time in January, 2002.
By the amendment that was sought to be made to Rule 137 of the Rules, through the notification dated 2862001, the Rule making authority carved out 3 categories of candidates whose names were to be placed on list B-I The first category comprised of a quota of 35%, which was to be filled on the basis of the rule of seniority-cum-fitness.
The second category, comprised of a quota of 55%, which was to be filled up on the basis of selection.
And the third category comprised of a quota of 10% which, was to be filled up by candidates on the basis of their consistently outstanding performance.
Under Rule 137 of the Rules (introduced through the notification 2862001), the criterion for determining the eligibility of candidates was also changed.
The change incorporated for determining eligibility of candidates under the second category comprising a quota of 55%, is being extracted hereunder :-  "(2)(1) All constables irrespective of their educational qualifications shall be eligible to appear for B-I test, if they are under the aged of 35 years and have completed 5 years of service on the 1st day of January of the year in which selection is made.
However, if a constable belonging to reserved category who is recruited after attaining the age of 27 years as per Government instructions/orders then he shall be allowed to appear for minimum three consecutive chances after completion of five years of service even if he has crossed the age of 35 years upto a maximum of 40 years of age."
10.
So far as the first category comprising a quota of 35% is concerned, all those constables who were under the age of 40 years and had completed 5 years of service on the 1st day of January of the year (in which selection was to be made), were to be treated as eligible.
So far as 10% seats, to be filled on the basis of consistently outstanding performance is concerned, the amended Rule stipulated the maximum age of 40 years and completion of 2 years of service, as on the first day of January of the year (in which selection was to be made).
Once again an exhaustive criterion for the determination of inter-se merit of eligible Constables was laid down.
Since the aforesaid criterion is not relevant for the controversy in hand, it is not necessary to refer to any further details in connection thereto in the instant order.
11.
In terms of the conditions laid down for eligibility, by the amendment notified on 2991995, both the petitioners in the instant writ petition were eligible for selection and inclusion in list B-I It is in the aforesaid circumstances that their claim was considered by a Departmental Promotion Committee, comprising of an officer of the rank of Superintendent of Police and two officers of the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
In the said process of selection, the petitioners were placed at Sr. Nos. 11 and 18 in the merit list.
On the basis of their aforesaid position in the merit list, the petitioners seek a writ in the nature of mandamus, for a direction to the respondents, to enter their names in list B-I and thereupon to depute them to the Lower School Course.
12.
In his effort to controvert the claim projected on behalf of the petitioners, learned counsel for the respondents has invited the Court's attention to an affidavit dated 822004 in order to highlight some essential facts which go to the root of the controversy.
Referring to the assertions made in paragraph 2 of the aforesaid affidavit, it is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, that the process of selection wherein the candidature of the petitioners was considered, was initiated by a Departmental Promotion Committee, comprising of an officer of the rank of Superintendent of Police assisted by two officers of the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
It is, however, pointed out that the said selection process never came to be finalised, because the deliberations of the aforesaid Departmental Promotion Committee were never approved by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Learned counsel for the parties, however, jointly point out that the approval of the selection process which was originally vested with the Deputy Inspector General of Police, has since been altered, inasmuch as the approval is now to be granted by the Inspector General of Police.
13.
The second contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is that although in the process of selection conducted by the Departmental Promotion Committee, the names of fifty male Constables and five female Constables were finalised by the Departmental Promotion Committee, as a matter of fact, there were only three vacancies of Head Constables in district Faridabad as on 3062000.
In this behalf, the Court's attention has been invited to paragraph 3 of the affidavit under reference.
14.
Insofar as the first contention is concerned, the only reason for not placing the petitioners in list B-I, and in not deputing them to the Lower School Course is, that the list finalised by the Departmental Promotion Committee was not approved by the Inspector General of Police.
The approval of the list under Rule 137 of the Rules is not a matter of discretion.
The aforesaid approval is mandatory.
If a process of selection has been conducted in accordance with the Rules, and if, the selection is not vitiated for reasons of favouritism etc., it is imperative for the Inspector General of Police to approve the same.
The conditions of eligibility, as well as, the criterion of selection (for inclusion of names of the Constables in list B-I) is extremely exhaustive and leaves nothing to the subjective satisfaction of the authorities conducting the process of selection.
A lengthy extract of Rule 137 of the Rules (introduced through the notification dated 2991995) delineating the selection criterion, has been reproduced in an earlier part of this order, only to highlight this aspect of the matter.
Thus viewed, there is clearly no justification in the stance of the respondents that non-approval of the proceedings of the Departmental Promotion Committee by the Inspector General of Police can frustrate the statutory rules under reference.
In fact, and in law, the respondents are bound to follow the aforesaid statutory rule, so as to include the names of Constables in list B-I as well as to depute them to the Lower School Course for onward promotion to the rank of Head Constable.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, it would thus be imperative to direct the respondents to examine the deliberations of the Departmental Promotion Committee in which the claim of the petitioners, for including their names in list B-I was considered, and have the same approved by the Inspector General of Police, in accordance with Rule 137 of the Rules (introduced by the notification dated 2991995), unless there is some patent infraction of the rule, or for some other material reason justifying non-approval thereof.
15.
Insofar as the second contention is concerned, the only reason for not including the names of the petitioners in list B-I, is that there were only three vacancies of Head Constables in district Faridabad as on 3062002.
The justification (for indicating the number of vacancies), as only three, in the affidavit is, that eligibility in respect of age and length of service is to be determined as on 1st of July of the preceding year.
The instant determination of the number of available vacancies, at the hands of the respondents, is clearly contrary to the mandate of Rule 137 of the Rules itself.
As already noticed hereinabove, each process of selection for inclusion of names in list B-I, is to be conducted (in terms of the notification dated 2991995), in the month of January; every year.
Each process of selection is to be in respect of the number of seats allotted to the district for the entire year.
The petitioners having participated in the process of selection in January, 2000; ordinarily the vacancies which would become available upto December, 2000 would have to be taken into consideration.
The depiction in the affidavit that three vacancies only were available upto 3062000, has absolutely no nexus/relevance to Rule 137 of the Rules.
The instant conclusion emerges from the following portion of Rule 137 of the Rules (notified on 2991995) :-  "1.
It shall include the names of all constables selected for admission to the Lower School Course to be held at the Police Training College.
Selection to the list shall be made in the month of January, each year and shall be limited to the number of seats allotted to the district for the year.
For reasons to be recorded, the number of seats can be increased by 20 per cent.
Allotment of seats to each district shall be done on the basis of existing vacancies and the number of vacancies which are likely to occur during the next one year."
16.
The pleadings of the case reveal, that after the selection process, in which the names of the petitioners were considered in January, 2000, the next process of selection was conducted under the amended Rule 137 (notified on 2862001).
The aforesaid amended Rule notified on 2862001 would be operational only in January, 2002 since the instant amendment expressly envisaged that the selection process to be conducted thereunder would be held in the month of January each year.
It is, therefore, apparent that the amendment to Rule 137 of the Rules (notified on 2991995), was to govern all vacancies in the rank of Head Constables, which arose upto December, 2001.
17.
The names of the petitioners were admittedly at Sr. Nos. 11 and 18 in the merit list prepared under Rule 137 of the Rules (amended vide notification dated 2991995).
The names of the petitioners could be entered in list B-I, only if sufficient number of vacancies were available to accommodate them.
The process of selection for inclusion of Constables in list B-I under Rule 137, of the Rules (notified on 2991995) was to continue upto December, 2001, as also already been concluded above.
While conducting the exercise to determine the number of vacancies relevant to the issue in hand, therefore, the respondents must calculate/determine the number of vacancies which had become available upto 31.12.2001, specially because no further process of selection under Rule 137 of the Rules (notified on 2991995) was conducted after the process of selection in which the petitioners had participated.
The exercise already conducted (as per the affidavit dated 822004) in shortlisting the vacancies upto 3062000 is, therefore, wholly irrelevant to the controversy in hand.
18.
In view of the conclusions drawn above, the instant writ petition is allowed.
A writ in the nature of mandamus is hereby issued to the respondents to require the Inspector General of Police to accord approval to the proceedings of the Promotion Committee in which the names of the petitioners have been included, subject to the condition that the same is in conformity with the selection process expressed in the said Rule and also subject to the condition that there is no other material reason justifying non-approval thereof.
A further direction is issued to the respondents to determine the number of vacancies from January, 2000 to December, 2001, and in case the vacancies are in excess of the merit position of the petitioners determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee (duly approved by the Inspector General of Police), their names shall be placed in list B-I In the aforesaid eventuality the petitioners shall be deputed to the Lower School Course, and shall also be entitled to al consequential benefits.
Order dasti on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.