MM Kumar, J - In this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the prayer made by the petitioner is for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the petitioner for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector.
It has further been prayed that writ of certiorari be also issued for quashing Order dated 1651989 (Annexure P-3) rejecting the representation of the petitioner.
Another prayer made by the petitioner is for issuance of a writ of mandamus commanding the respondent-State not to enforce Rule 9(g)(i) of the Haryana Labour Department (Group C) Service Rules, 1982 (for brevity, `the 1982 Rules') declaring the same as ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
2.
Brief facts of the case necessary for deciding the controversy raised in this petition are that the petitioner was appointed as a Draftsman on 3121970 on the basis of his qualification of Matric and two years Diploma in Draftsman (Civil).
According to the averments made in the petition, it is claimed that although promotional avenues for the post of Draftsman have been provided by making the same as a feeder post to the post of Cartographer by virtue of Rule 9(h)(i) of the 1982 rules, yet it is no promotion in the eyes of law as the pay scale of both the posts are the same.
The petitioner has made averment that with effect from 1.4.1979, the pay scale of Draftsman was revised to Rs. 525-1050 and that of the Cartographer to Rs. 600-1100.
However, the Anomaly Committee revised the pay scale of Draftsman to Rs. 600- 1100 with effect from 121981.
It is pertinent to mention that the pay scale of Labour Inspector is also Rs. 600-1100.
3.
The stand of the respondents in the reply is that after the revision of pay scale with effect from 111986, the cadre of Draftsman has been given the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300 and the Cartographer has been kept in the higher scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
Therefore, the cadre of Cartographer is higher than the cadre of Draftsman and is infact a promotional cadre for them.
It has further been clarified that during the pendency of the petition the petitioner already stand promoted to the post of Cartographer in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 in accordance with the provisions of the 1982 rules vide Order dated 1881989 (Annexure R-1).
On the aforementioned basis, the respondents have submitted that the representation of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector could not be accepted which was right declined by the impugned Order, Annexure P-3.
4.
Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the post of Cartographer and the post of Draftsman were initially in the same pay scale of Rs. 160-400.
Once the post of Cartographer has been made a feeder post for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector, then excluding Draftsman which carry identical pay scale would be violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
According to the learned counsel, all categories of posts like Accountant, Assistant, Head Clerks (Fields), Senior Scale Stenographer, Statistical Assistant and Cartographer have been made eligible for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector to the extent of Rs. 50% of the posts.
However, the Draftsman alone has been excluded from that category.
The learned counsel however has not advanced any argument to show as to how Rule 9(g)(i) or 9(h)(i) of the `1982 Rules' are unconstitutional being violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
5.
Mr. SS Brar, learned State counsel has argued that every effort has been made by the rule making authority to provide avenues of promotion to various categories of posts.
According to the learned counsel, a Draftsman, who is now in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300, is eligible for promotion to the post of Cartographer which is in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
The post of Labour Inspector also has been kept in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
The learned counsel has maintained that in no way the scheme of the rules violates Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution and the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that this petition is liable to be dismissed.
It would be appropriate to first make reference to the 1982 Rules.
Rule 7 read with Appendix B deals with the qualifications laid down for the post of Labour Inspector, Cartographer and Draftsman.
Rule 9(g)(i) envisages various categories of feeder posts for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector and under Rule 9(h)(i) and (ii), the feeder post for promotion to the post of Cartographer has been given.
Rule 7 alongwith Appendix B and Rule 9(1)(g) and (h) are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "7.
Qualifications :- No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix B to these rules in the case or direct recruit and those specified in column 3 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of appointment other than by direct recruitment.
APPENDIX B Sl.
No.
Designation of Posts Academic Qualifications and Experience, if any, for direct recruitment Educations qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment 1 2 3 7.
Labour Inspector (a) A degree of Bachelor of Arts including Public Administration of a recognised University or its equivalent.
Persons possessing the qualifications of Diploma/Degree in Social Welfare and Specialisation in labour laws shall be preferred (a) Matric (b) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard.
(b) Four years experience as Accountant or Assistant Head Clerk or Senior Scale Stenographer or Statistical Assistant or Cartographer.
8.
Cartographer Post-graduate Diploma in Cartography or Matric or its equivalent with Diploma in Commercial Arts/Draftsmanship.
Three years experience as Draftsman.
17.
Draftsman (a) Matric of a recognised University/Board or its equivalent.
(a) Matric of a recognised University/Board or its equivalent; (b) Two years Diploma course in Draftsman (Civil) from a recognised Institute or its equivalent.
(b) Two years Diploma course in Draftsman (Civil) from a recognised Institute or its equivalent.
(c) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard.
(c) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard.
xxx xxx xxx 9.
Method of recruitment.
- (1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made, -  (g) in the case of Labour Inspector :- (i) 50% by promotion from amongst the Accountant or Assistant or Head Clerks (Field) or Senior Scale Stenographers or Statistical Assistant or Cartographer; (ii) 50% by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India; (h) in the case of Cartographer :- (i) by promotion from amongst the Draftsman; or (ii) by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India; (g) in the case of Draftsman :- (i) by direct recruitment; or (ii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India."
7.
A perusal of Rule 7 read with Appendix B shows that for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector, qualification of Matric and four years experience as Accountant or Assistant, Head Clerk or Senior Scale Stenographer or Statistical Assistant or Cartographer is required.
Similarly for promotion to the post of Cartographer, three years experience as Draftsman is required.
The qualification for promotion to the post of Draftsman is Matric with two years Diploma course in Draftsman (Civil) has been laid down.
A perusal of Rule 9(g)(i) shows that the post of Draftsman has not been included for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector whereas Accountant, Assistant, Head Clerks (Field), Senior Scaler Stenographer, Statistical Assistant and Cartographer have been included.
The post of Draftsman, according to Rule 9(h), is a feeder post for promotion to the post of Cartographer.
From the stand taken by the respondents in their written statement, it is patent that the post of Cartographer is a higher post as it has now been granted the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 with effect from 111986 and the post of Draftsman is in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
Moreover, the petitioner has been promoted as Cartographer during the pendency of the writ petition on 1881989 vide Annexure R-1.
Therefore, the basic grievance of the petitioner that the post of Cartographer does not provide any promotional avenue being in the same pay scale, does not survive any longer.
8.
I am further of the view that promotion should only be made from one post to another having higher pay scale and higher status.
For the afore-mentioned view, support can be drawn from the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of Tarsem Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(3) SCT 604 (SC) : 1994(4) SLR 577.
In para 9, their Lordships have observed as under :-  "A person holding the post of Superintendent may be a "ministerial employee" but unless his appointment to the post of Labour Inspector can be made by way of promotion, he is not eligible under Rule 8(1)(a)(i) of the Rules.
Promotion as understood under the service law jurisprudence means advancement in rank, grade or both.
Promotion is always a step towards advancement to a higher position, grade or honour.
Opting to come to a lower pay-scale or to a lower post cannot be considered a promotion, it is rather a demotion.
A Superintendent in the Labour Department who is holding a higher pay-scale and higher status cannot seem (seek) promotion to the post of Labour Inspector which post is lower in grade and status.
Since a ministerial employee under Rule 8(1)(a)(i) can be appointed Labour Inspector only by the process of promotion, a Superintendent, who is in a higher pay-scale, cannot seek promotion to the post of Labour Inspector and as such is not eligible for the same under Rule 8(1)(a)(i).
Even otherwise it is difficult to comprehend why a person drawing a higher pay-scale and enjoying a better status as a civil servant should hanker for a post which is carrying lesser pay and is comparatively of lower status.
We are, therefore, of the view that only those ministerial employees are eligible for promotion under Rule 8(1)(a)(i) who are in the pay scale which is equal or lower than the pay scale of the post of the Labour Inspector."
(emphasis added) 9.
I am further of the view that no mandamus could be issued to the respondents for amendment of the statutory rules for including the post of Draftsman as a feeder post for promotion to the post of Labour Inspector.
The above mentioned proposition is well settled because the rule making power under Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution is legislative in character.
The Supreme Court in Mallikarjuna Rao v. State of AP, 1990(2) SCC 707, P. Murugesan v. State of TN, 1993(2) SCT 416 (SC) : 1993(2) SCC 340 and RL Bansal v. Union of India, 1992(3) SCT 125 (SC) : 1992 Supp.
(2) SCC 318 has taken the afore-mentioned view.
However, it would be advisable if the State Government revise Rule 9(1)(g) which has made the post of Cartographer as a promotional post for the post of Labour Inspector.
The writ petition, however, is liable to be dismissed.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.