MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant the benefit of ad hoc service to the petitioner towards seniority, promotion and other benefits.
At the time of hearing, the learned counsel for the petitioner, however, has not pressed the writ petition insofar as the prayer made for grant of benefit towards seniority and promotion are concerned as the petitioner has already retired from service during the pendency of the writ petition.
However, he has claimed that the benefit of ad hoc service followed by regularisation should be given for the purposes of pension and other retiral benefits.
2.
The petitioner was admittedly appointed as Information Centre Assistant on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
731972 in the pay scale of Rs. 160-400 (Annexure P.1).
He continued in service without any interruption and was regularised on the post of Information Centre Assistant on 111980 (Annexure P. 2).
Thereafter, the petitioner was confirmed as Accountant/ICA w.e.f.
30.6.1980 (Annexure P.3).
3.
Shri KG Chaudhary, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab, 1988(5) SLR 27 and argued that any ad hoc service preceding the date of regularisation has to count for retiral benefits.
Learned counsel has further argued that the petitioner should be granted interest on the delayed payment as the law has been declared by the Full Bench in the year 1988.
4.
Shri SS Brar, learned State counsel has submitted that the main thrust of the petitioner in the petition is for grant of benefit of ad hoc service rendered by the petitioner towards his seniority and promotion.
However, he has not disputed the proposition of law laid down in Kesar Chand's case (supra).
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties.
I am of the considered view that the petitioner is entitled to count his ad hoc service w.e.f.
731972 to 111980 as qualifying service for the purposes of pension and other retiral benefits.
The Full Bench of this Court in Kesar Chand's case (supra) has laid down that once the services have been regularised then there is no reason for not to count the work-charge period or even the ad hoc period as a qualifying service.
The Full Bench had struck down Rule 3.17(ii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II which had excluded the counting of work- charge service of an employee who was lateron regularised.
6.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to count the ad hoc period of service rendered by the petitioner from 731972 to 111980 towards pension and other retiral benefits as qualifying service and grant the benefit to him within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order by the concerned authority.
Petition allowed.