MM Kumar, J - This appeal is directed against order dated 11.2.1992 passed by the learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 12316 of 1990 vide which the appellants were directed to bring the name of the writ petitioner-respondent on the approved list of Assistant Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command from the date when a person immediately junior to him was so promoted and to give him benefits which may accrue to him as a consequence of promotion.
The facts :  2.
Respondent-AK Narula joined the Central Reserve Police Force (for brevity, `CRPF') as Deputy Superintendent of Police on 1.12.1971.
He was promoted on the post of Assistant Commandant on 23.7.1983 superseding 10 officers.
He suffered a setback in the matter of seniority which was downgraded as a consequence of the judgment of the Supreme Court in C.W.P.
No. 44 of 1975 - U.B.S.
Teetia and others v. Union of India.
In 1990, the Departmental Promotion Committee (for short, `the DPC') considered 46 Assistant Commandants including the respondent for approval for appointment as Second-in-Command, but he was not recommended and persons junior to him were approved for promotion.
The respondent challenged his supersession in C.W.P.
No. 12316 of 1990 by contending that the DPC had superseded him without any rational reason and notwithstanding his outstanding record of service.
He averred that he was one of the 8 Assistant Commandants from amongst 100 officers selected from Punjab-based battalions for attachment with Punjab Police during `Ghalu Ghara Week' to work as SP (Operation).
It was further averred that his work as SP (Operation), Hoshiarpur had been appreciated by the then Director General of Police and Inspector General of Police (Operations), Punjab.
Still further, it was pleaded that since June/July, 1987, he was holding charge of two to three Assistant Commandants and was also performing duties of Second-in-Command from time to time.
Reference was also made to the appreciation letters issued by various officers, namely, Shri JP Virdi, the then Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur and Shri Shiv Mohan Singh, Inspector General of Police.
Reliance was also placed on the fact that his name had been recommended in 1988, 1989 and 1990 for police award and it was submitted that there could be no justification, legal or otherwise, to supersede him.
It was also claimed that the record of his service was far meritorious than that of his junior -- Shri RS Virk which was recommended for promotion as Second-in-Command.
3.
The stand of the appellants before the learned Single Judge was that according to instructions dated 1031989, an officer who satisfies the bench mark of securing at least four `Very Good' reports out of the last five reports could be eligible for being brought on select list.
According to them, the record of the respondent did not warrant giving of bench mark `Very Good' which could entitle him to claim promotion.
They relied on instructions vide circular dated 1031989, the relevant extracts of which are reproduced below :  "(i) xx xx xx xx (ii) In respect of all posts which are in the level of Rs. 3700-5000 and above, the bench mark grade should be `Very Good'.
However, officers who are graded as `Out-standing' would rank en block senior to those who are graded as `Very Good' and placed in the select panel accordingly upto the number of vacancies, officers with same grading maintaining their inter seniority in the feeder post.
(iii) xx xx xx xx (iv) xx xx xx xx" 4.
Thereafter, the respondent filed Civil Misc. No. 7179 of 1991 in which averments were made that the DPC had the power to modulate the reports and such a power was given by paragraph 221(e) of the instructions dated 1031989.
It was further asserted that the name of the respondent was recommended for award of the Police Medal in the years 1988, 1989 and 1990.
The DPC was under obligation to modulate the reports of the respondent from `Very Good' to `Outstanding' and from `Good' to `Very Good' especially when earlier process of recording bench mark as `Very Good' or `Outstanding' was not in vogue and was introduced for the first time in the year 1989.
The respondent also asserted that the DPC constituted in 1991 did modulate the reports of others to bring them within the periphery of promotion criteria and promoted Shri SP Mehra, Assistant Commandant who had adverse remarks which were communicated to him and who did not fulfil the bench mark criteria.
Other examples quoted by him were of Sarv Shri VSS Chauhan, S.S.L.
Sharma and RS Virk who were promoted despite failing to secure the prescribed bench mark.
5.
After considering the rival pleadings and arguments of the counsel for the parties, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and held that once the DPC had modulated the remarks in the cases of other persons, its failure to apply the same criteria in the case of the respondent was arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The observations of the learned Single Judge in this regard read as under:-  ".....However, on the second contention of Mr. Randhawa this petition deserves to succeed.
As has been indicated above, there is absolutely no specific denial with regard to the averments made by the petitioner in Civil Misc. No. 7179 of 1991 that the Departmental Promotion Committee had unfettered discretion to modulate the remarks and that in fact and reality some of those who came to be promoted to the post of Second-in- Command either prior to the petitioner or at the time when the petitioner was superseded or even thereafter did not answer the requisite promotional criteria, spelt out from the instructions issued in the year 1989.
The contention of Mr. AS Tewatia that as per instructions Annexure R-1 as also of 1989, it was in the absolute discretion of the Departmental Promotion Committee to ignore a senior even though he was within the zone of promotion, cannot be accepted for nothing like that is available from reading of the Annexure R-1 and instructions of 1989.
Also, it has not been shown even on facts that those, who were actually promoted by superseding the petitioner, had a better service record.
It is on admitted position between the parties that on account of even newly laid down criteria of promotion, the petitioner has since been promoted to the post of Second-in-Command during the pendency of this petition.
The limited relief that survives is for promoting the petitioner from the date, junior to him was promoted.
The respondents could not possibly relax the promotional criteria with regard to others and in particulars those, who were considered alongwith the petitioner for promotion and yet adopt different yardstick for the petitioner.
The action of the respondents in promoting others by relaxing the criteria or by modulating the bench mark in the case of one and without any differential criteria not doing the same for the petitioner amounts to discrimination and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds.
A direction shall be issued to the respondents to bring the name of the petitioner in the approved list of Assistant Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second- in-Command from a date, when person immediately junior to him was so promoted.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential reliefs that may accrue to him because of this judge."
6.
Shri HS Giani assailed the impugned order by arguing that the direction given by the leaned Single Judge for bringing the name of the respondent in the approved list of Assistant Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command with retrospective effect is contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court and, therefore, the same may be set aside.
He submitted that the post of Second-in-Command is a selection post and, therefore, the respondent could be promoted only on attaining the bench mark as laid down in instructions dated 1031989.
Shri Giani argued that the recommendations made by the DPC were based on a comparative evaluation of the record of the respondent and other candidates and the learned Single Judge was not justified in imposing his opinion over the one formed by the DPC.
He argued that the post of Second-in-Command is a selection post and, therefore, there is no question of supersession of a senior person and only those (who) specify the criteria laid down by the government can be promoted.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel has placed reliance on judgments of the Supreme Court in Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 Supreme Court 434, Kuldip Chand v. State of HP and others, AIR 1998 Supreme Court 2606 and State Bank of India and others v. Mohd.
Mynuddin, (1987) 4 SCC 486.
Learned counsel further submitted that the function of the Selection Committee is administrative and not judicial or adjudicatory one and, therefore, it is not required to give reasons for selecting a candidate and rejecting the other one.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of National Institute of Mental Health and Negro Sciences v. Dr. K Kalyana Raman and others, 1992(3) SCT 488 (SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 1086.
He also placed reliance on another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union Public Service Commission v. Hiranyalal Dev and others, (1988) 2 SCC 242 and argued that the fact of considering certain irrelevant factor while not selecting a candidate and in selecting juniors would not necessarily mean that the selection of the respondent could be ordered.
Another argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellants is that even if the post of Second-in-Command is to be considered as a promotional post then merit-cum- seniority is the criteria as provided by Rule 55 of Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 (for short, `the 1955 Rules').
Learned counsel also placed reliance on a judgment of Delhi High Court in the case of Devender Kumar v. Union of India and others, rendered in Civil Writ No. 2517 of 1993, decided on 27.5.1998 and argued that the learned Single Judge had acted beyond his jurisdiction by issuing direction to bring the name of the respondent on the approved list of Assistant Commandant for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command from a date when person immediately junior to him was so promoted because it would amount to issuing a mandamus to the appellants to promote the respondent.
According to the learned counsel, Court is not competent to issue direction to promote the respondent.
Learned counsel also argued that the judgment of Delhi High Court in Devender Kumar's case (supra) was upheld by the Letters Patent Bench in LPA No. 551 of 1998 decided on 771999 and the order passed by the Letters Patent Bench was further upheld by the Supreme Court in SLP No. 16951 of 1999 decided on 2722001.
Shri HS Giani also made reference to Section 4 of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (for short, `the 1949 Act') and argued that instructions dated 1031989 have been issued while exercising power under that section.
According to the learned counsel, such power has been upheld by Delhi High Court in Devender Kumar's case (supra).
7.
Shri RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the respondent argued that the instructions issued vide letter dated 1031989 are ultra vires to the 1955 Rules and, therefore, the same could not have been invoked for making promotions.
He further argued that the DPC had committed a serious illegality by not upgrading the remarks recorded in the confidential reports of the petitioner.
8.
Before dealing with the arguments of the learned counsel, we consider it proper to notice Rules 4, 5-A, 55 and 105 of the 1955 Rules, which have bearing on the decision of this appeal.
The same read as under :  "4.
Powers of the Central Government and Certain Officers of the Force : (a) In all case not special (specially ?)
provided for in these rules, instructions issued from time to time by the Central Government or the Director General or under his directions by the Additional Director General or the Inspector General shall regulate working of the Force.
xx xx xx xx 5A.
Battalion other than Signals Battalion.
(1) The force shall be constituted as follows :- (a) Superior Officers :- Commandant Assistant Commandant (Second-in-Command) One for each Assistant Commandant Battalion.
(Adjutant) Quarter Master One for each Battalion.
Company Commander (officer) One per service Company plus one leave and training reserve for each Battalion.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (2) Subject to the provisions contained in Section 4, the Central Government may make such changes in the Composition of the Force as it thinks fit.
(inserted vide GSR 436 dated 471959) (3) (a) There shall be a Central Training College with a Principal and an Assistant Principal as its superior officers.
(b) The Principal and the Assistant Principal shall be equal in rank and status to, and shall exercise the administrative, disciplinary, financial and other powers of the Commandant and the Company Commander respectively.
(inserted vide GSR 1242 dated 1491962) B Signal Battalion  (4) (a) There shall be one or more Signal Battalion in the Force.
(b) The Composition of any such Signal Battalion shall be as follows :- (i) Superior Officers  Commandant -1 Assistant Commandant -1 Company Commander } 1 (Deputy Superintendent of Police) } xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (c) The Commandant, Assistant Commandant and Company Commander (Deputy Superintendent of Police) referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (b) shall be equal in rank and Status to, and shall exercise the same administrative, disciplinary and financial powers as are conferred respectively on, the Commandant, Assistant Commandant and Company Commander (Deputy Superintendents of Police) of a battalion other than the Signals Battalion.
(Inserted vide GSR No. 1003 dated 2961967).
55.
Merit : (a) All promotions shall be governed by merit.
Other things being equal seniority shall count for promotion.
For promotion, a member of the Force must be qualified and recommended by the Commandant, Assistant Commandant or Company Commander as the case may be.
(b) For exceptional reasons the Commandant may promote an unqualified Head Constable to the rank of Sub-Inspector or an unqualified Sub-Inspector to the rank of Subedar (Inspector) with the prior approval of the Deputy Inspector General or Inspector General respectively, provided that such promotions in either case do not exceed ten percent of the sanctioned strength in such ranks.
105.
Appointment and Promotion of Superior Officers : (1) The post of Commandant of a Bn.
other than Signal Battalion or Principal, CTC shall be filled :- (i) by transfer on deputation from the rank of Lt.
Colonel from the Army or Indian Police Service (Senior Scale) Officers or State Police Officers holding posts of Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts, preferably with experience of Armed Police duties or (ii) by re-employment of retired or released Army Officers or Indian Police Service (Senior Scale) Officers or State Police Officers holding posts of Superintendent of Police or equivalent posts, preferably with experience of Armed Police duties or  (iii) by promotion from amongst Assistant Commandant (Second-in- Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officers, Vice Principal, Central Training College) who have either served in the Force for a minimum period of two years or are otherwise eligible to be posted as Commandant under clause (i); or  (iv) in cases not falling under clause (iii), by promotion form amongst the locally promoted and substantive Assistant Commandants (Second-in- Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officer/Vice Principal, Central Training College).
xx xx xx" 9.
A conjoint reading of the rules reproduced above shows that the post of Commandant is to be filled up by way of promotion from amongst the Assistant Commandants (Second-in-Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officer/Vice Principal, Central Training College).
Similarly, an Assistant Commandant is to be promoted from the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police etc.
The promotion has to be made in accordance with criteria of merit.
Therefore, according to the statutory rules, there is no independent promotional post known as Second-in-Command between the posts of Assistant Commandants and Commandants.
In fact, it is an admitted position that senior-most Assistant Commandant used to function as Second-in-Command as it was not a rank but a posting.
Even the pay scales of Commandant and Assistant Commandants (Second-in-Command) used to be the same, namely, Rs. 1200-1700/-.
The only difference was that Commandant used to draw Rs. 100/- as special pay along with compensatory amount.
In the case of Assistant Commandant, he used to get only the compensatory amount.
The Fourth Pay Commission revised the pay scale of Assistant Commandant to Rs. 3000-4500/- w.e.f.
111986.
However, it granted the pay scale of Rs. 4100- 5300/- to Assistant Commandants (Second-in-Command) and Commandants.
On the basis of higher pay scale having been given to the post of Assistant Commandant (Second-in-Command), the appellants stated treating the post of Assistant Commandant (Second-in-Command) as a promotional post from the post of Assistant Commandant.
10.
At this stage, it would be appropriate to mention that in pursuance of the direction given by the Court on 16121997, leaned counsel of the appellants produced the files of the respondent and Sarv Shri SB Mehra, VDS Chauhan, S.S.L.
Sharma and RS Virk along with the proceedings of the DPC.
A bare scrutiny of these files shows that the service record of respondent-AK Narula was similar to that of Shri RS Virk if not superior.
This is evident from the following comparative table of the remarks recorded in their ACRs of 1985-86 to 1989-90 :  Respondent (AK Narula) (RS Virk) 1985-86 Good Good 1986-87 Very Good Very Good 1987-88 Good Very Good 1988-89 Very Good Good 1989-90 Very Good Very Good 11.
Notwithstanding this, the name of Shri RS Virk was included in the select list of officers by giving him bench mark `Very Good' and that of the respondent was placed in the category of officers who were given bench mark `Good'.
This factual position emanates from the meeting of the Departmental Promotion Committee convened on 1361990 to consider the cases of Assistant Commandant as 2nd Commandant.
It is also clear that Shri RS Virk was at serial No. 427 whereas the respondent was at serial No. 429 and that the Selection Committee has followed the guide-lines for assessing the officers for promotion as are given in the letters dated 25111988 and 851990.
In the summary of reports presented to the Selection Committee, it is revealed that for the year 1988-89, the Accepting Authority has rated Shri RS Virk as Good whereas the Reporting Officer as well as the Reviewing Officer has rated him Very Good.
The fact remains that the last report of the Accepting Authority given to Shri RS Virk was Good and that is the entry which should have been made in the ACR of Shri RS Virk.
The DPC, however, upgraded the report of the Accepting Authority from Good to Very Good by recording the reason that since the Accepting Authority has failed to disclose any reasons for downgrading, the report has to be treated as Very Good.
If the same logic and reason is applied to the report of the respondent, then the summary of his report would reveal that for the year 1987-88 he was given Very Good report by the Reviewing Officer but by the Accepting Officer he was downgraded as Good.
No plausible explanation has been disclosed as to how different yardstick has been adopted in the case of two different officers.
It is pertinent to mention that the respondent has been given various testimonials like Annexures P2 to P.5 by the various officers and has never earned the single adverse remarks.
12.
In view of the above, we agree with the learned Single Judge that the case of the respondent had not been considered fairly but, at the same time, we are inclined to accept the submission of Shri HS Giani that the learned Single Judge should not have given direction for bringing the name of he respondent on the approved list and should have left it to the DPC to reconsider his case.
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, guaranteed equality in the matter of employment.
This includes the right to be considered for appointment by direct recruitment or promotion without discrimination.
However, there is nothing like the vested right to be appointed or promoted on a particular post.
In this regard reference may be made to the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of State of Mysore v. PN Nanjundiah, 1969 SLR 346; and Badri Nath v. Government of Tamil Nadu, 2000(4) SCT 832 (SC) : (2000) 8 SCC 395.
In PN Nanjundiah's casee (supra), the Bench of three Judges laid down that no writ of mandamus could be issued directing the appellants to promote an employee.
Approving he opinion expressed in Syed Mohamood's case (supra), their Lordships observed as under :-  "The argument was stressed on behalf of the appellants that in any event the High Court was not right in issuing a writ of mandamus "directing the appellants to promote respondent No. 1 as Overseer with effect from April 1, 1963 and to give him all consequential benefits."
In our opinion there is justification for this argument.
It has been pointed out by this Court in the State of Mysore v. Syed Mahmood and others that in matters of this description the High Court ought not to issue writs directing the State Government to promote the aggrieved officers with retrospective effect.
The correct procedure for the High Court was to issue a writ to the State Government compelling it to perform its duty and to consider whether having regard to his seniority and fitness the Ist respondent should have been promoted on the relevant date and if so what consequential benefits should be allowed to him.
In the present case we are informed that both respondent No. 1 and respondent No. 2 have been promoted as Overseer after the filing of the writ petition.
In the circumstances we consider that the proper course is to issue a direction to the appellants to consider whether the respondent No. 1 should have been promoted to the post of Overseer with effect from December, 1961 and as a Supervisor with effect from April 1, 1963 what should be the relative seniority as between respondent No. 1 and respondent No. 2 and what consequential benefits should be allowed to respondent No.
1."
Similar view has been expressed in the case of HP State Electricity Board v. KR Gulati, 1998(2) SCT 112 (SC) : JT 1998(1) SC 387.
13.
In the result, the appeal is partly allowed.
The direction given by the learned Single Judge for promotion of the respondent is set aside.
It is directed that the DPC shall reconsider his case while adjudging suitability keeping in view the observations made in this order.
If on reconsideration, the respondent is found suitable, then he shall be promoted with retrospective effect, i.e., the date from which Shri RS Virk was promoted and be given all consequential benefits.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed within 3 months of the receipt of attested copy of this order by the learned counsel for the appellants.
Appeal partly allowed.