M Karpagavinayagam, J - Chudalayandi Pillai, the petitioner herein was removed by the order dated 941983 by the Director of Town and Country Planning, the second respondent herein.
He filed the appeal before the Secretary to Government, Housing and Urban Development Department and the same was confirmed by the order dated 391985.
Challenging the same, he filed the petition before the Tribunal and the petition has been taken up by the Tribunal, which in turn held that out of three charges, two charges were proved and in view of the nature of the proved charges, modified the punishment of removal which was disproportionate, by ordering reinstatement without any backwages.
Having not satisfied with this, the petitioner has filed this writ petition before this Court.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Junior Assistant in the Directorate of Town and Country Planning on 14101970.
He was promoted as Assistant on 12121975.
In the year 1981, he was sent on transfer to the office of the Coimbatore Local Planning Authority.
From the date of joining in the said office, he was not allotted any work.
Hence, he was forced to seek leave even on loss of pay to avoid mental depression and physical boredom.
Complaining about this, the petitioner sent a memorandum on 20101982 to the Director of Town and Country Planning, the second respondent herein.
By the reply dated 29101982, the second respondent ordered the petitioner to join duty immediately.
He sent another letter on 4111982 about his inability to join, since his grievances have not been set right.
Therefore, on 6121982, the second respondent issued a charge memo framing three charges : (1) The petitioner failed to join duty immediately as per the order of the Director and thereby it was disobeyed.
(2) The petitioner tried to threaten the Director that he would send representation to the higher authorities if his grievances are not set right.
(3) The petitioner used to take leave often, thereby acted in a prejudicial manner in his duty.
3.
On receipt of the charge memo, the petitioner gave a detailed explanation.
Ultimately, after personal hearing, the second respondent passed orders on 941983 removing the petitioner from service.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the first respondent, who in turn dismissed the same.
Hence, he preferred the petition before the Tribunal.
4.
The Tribunal though held that the second charge is not proved, concluded that both the first and third charges have been proved and held that ends of justice would be met, if he is reinstated without backwages.
5.
Assailing the above order dated 2882001, Mr. SJ Jagadev, the learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that the order of the Tribunal that reinstatement without backwages is a harsh punishment, especially when the Tribunal held that the second charge which is a serious charge was not proved.
6.
We have heard the counsel for the petitioner and the Special Government Pleader and also gone through the impugned order and other records.
7.
In regard to the first and third charges, namely, not joining the duty in spite of the direction given by the Director and habitually taking leave, it has to be stated that the petitioner himself admitted the same in his explanation.
However, he said that failure to join the duty and applying for leave often were due to the grievances that he had at the hands of the officers under whom he was serving.
Under those circumstances, we are unable to go into the merits of the conclusions with reference to the charges 1 and 3.
8.
However, as pointed out by the counsel for the petitioner, we are of the view that reinstatement without backwages would be a harsh one and the same is disproportionate to the charges proved which are not so serious in the light of the factual situation.
9.
It is seen from the records that the petitioner was working from the year 1970 and he was promoted and he has put in 15 years unblemished service.
Even the issuance of the charge memo dated 6121982 was as a result of the petitioner's letter dated 4111982 complaining about the officers under whom he was working.
In the light of the fact situation, it cannot be said that the entire backwages are to be withheld.
10.
In a similar situation, the Supreme Court would hold in Syed Zaheer Hussain v. Union of India, 1999(4) SCT 749 (SC) : AIR 1999 SC 3367, that reinstatement with backwages of 50% for the intermediate period would meet the ends of justice.
11.
Accordingly, the impugned order of the Tribunal is modified to the effect that the petitioner is entitled for reinstatement with 50% backwages.
The same shall be paid within four weeks from the date of receipt of this order.
12.
The writ petition is allowed accordingly.
The order of the Tribunal dated 2882001 is modified as indicated above.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.