Surya Kant, J - The petitioners, who at the relevant time, were working as Assistants in the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board in its head office at Chandigarh, have approached this Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India to command respondents No. 1 to 3 to consider and promote them to the posts of Superintendent Grade-I, which are lying vacant in the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board.
2.
The brief facts are that the petitioners joined as Clerks in the office of Chief Engineer, Punjab, PWD Public Health Branch at Patiala, on different dates and in due course of time, they were promoted as Assistants.
Pursuant to the enactment of the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act'), the Government of Punjab established and notified the Constitution of the Board under Section 3 of the Act.
Under Section 29 of the Act, Punjab Government, in consultation with the Board, is competent to direct (either by general order or otherwise) to allocate services of the government employees at the disposal of the Board.
Vide order dated 14101976 (Annexure P-1) the Chief Engineer, Punjab PWD Public Health Branch, Patiala, placed the services of the petitioners at the disposal of the Board on deputation basis.
Thereafter, the petitioners' consent was sought for their permanent absorption by the State Government vide its memo dated 2391985.
The petitioners gave their willingness for permanent absorption in the Board subject to certain conditions as are reflected in the consent letter dated 31101985 (Annexure P-2) given by petitioner No. 1.
The Government of Punjab vide its memo dated 121986 (Annexure P-3) on the subject of final allocation of the employees of Public Health Department to the Board, informed that the service conditions of the employees of the department of Public Health, transferred to the Board for permanent absorption, shall not be varied to their disadvantage; that there are two cadres i.e. Head Office Cadre and the Field Cadre in the Public Health Department and the petitioners who belong to the Head Office Cadre were accordingly placed in the seniority list of the Head Office Cadre; that since the service conditions of the petitioners could not be varied to their disadvantage they were entitled to be promoted to the posts of Superintendent Grade-I in view of the fact that Assistants of the Public Health Department were entitled to such promotions in their parent department; that the petitioners had been allowed to hold the current-duty- charge of the posts of Superintendent Grade-I vide order dated 2081987 (Annexure P-7) and thus they had been asked to perform the duty of Superintendent Grade-I but without promoting them on regular basis; since the petitioners had been permanently absorbed in the Board and their service conditions were duly protected under Section 29 of the Act, they were entitled to be promoted as Superintendent Grade-I in the Board w.e.f.
October 14, 1987.
3.
Upon admission of the writ petition on 551988, notice was issued to the respondent-Board.
As per the office report the Board was duly served.
However, neither any reply was filed nor anyone put in appearance on behalf of the Board.
It may also be stated herein that the petitioners had also questioned the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Superintendent Grade-I in the Board.
4.
However, Mr. Gurnam Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners has stated at the bar that during the pendency of this writ petition, respondent No. 4 has already retired from service, therefore, the petitioners do not claim any relief whatsoever against him.
5.
It also needs to be mentioned here that during the pendency of this writ petition the petitioners moved Civil Misc. No. 21039 of 1988, inter alia praying that their reversion from the post of Superintendent Grade-I, on current-duty-charge basis, may be stayed.
The aforesaid civil miscellaneous application came up for hearing before this Court on 2.8.1988 and it was stated at the bar on behalf of the petitioners that the stay application had become infructuous as the first three petitioners had been promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade-I As such the said application was dismissed as infructuous.
6.
Mr. Gurnam Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners contends that three of the petitioners, namely, petitioners No. 1 to 3 had been promoted as Superintendent Grade-I retrospectively w.e.f.
1101987, therefore, nothing survives so far as their claim is concerned and the writ petition qua them has become infructuous.
He further contends that the claim of petitioner No. 4 for promotion as Superintendent Grade-I has not yet been considered by the Board despite the fact that vacancy for considering his claim was available at the relevant time.
Learned counsel contends that denial of consideration for promotion to petitioner No. 4, therefore, is patently arbitrary and in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Mr. KK Goel, Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab states that the Govt. of Punjab vide memo No. 12/17/88-3C/31 Spl.
dated 1571988 had already conveyed its decision to the Board that the post of Superintendent Grade-I, lying vacant in the head office of the Board, cannot be filled from the open market in disregard to the claim of the Assistants allocated from the head office of the Chief Engineer, PWD Public Health Branch, Patiala.
He further contends that it is within the domain of the Board to consider and decide the claim of petitioner No. 4 regarding promotion as Superintendent Grade-I  7.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioners and Sh. Goel, learned Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab and in view of the fact that neither has any written statement been filed by the Board nor has it been represented through some learned counsel, I am of the view that the averments made by the petitioners (which now confine to the claim of petitioner No. 4 only) have not been rebutted and the same are deemed to have been admitted.
Further, the State Government in exercise of its statutory powers under Section 29 of the Act was competent to issue directions to ensure that service conditions of its employees, who were transferred and absorbed in the Board, were not varied to their disadvantage.
These powers having been actually exercised by the State Government vide Memo No. 12/17/88-3C(i)/31 Spl.
dated 1571988, referred to above, it was imperative upon the Board to consider the claim of the Assistants who had been transferred and absorbed in the Board from the Public Health Department for their further promotions as Superintendent Grade-I In this vein it is apparent that claim of petitioner No. 4 too ought to have been considered for such promotion.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of with a direction to the respondents-Board to consider the claim of petitioner No. 4 for promotion as Superintendent Grade-I in accordance with law within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Needless to say that the claim of petitioner No. 4 will be considered from the due date and in the event of acceptance thereof, he will be entitled to all the consequential benefits, including the arrears of pay, if any.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.