HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of above-mentioned Civil Writ Petitions.
2.
The present writ petitions pertain to the appointments of Clerks/Multipurpose Health Workers in various departments in the State of Punjab.
The petitioners applied for the posts in question under the Advertisement, Annexure P-1, and after a type test and interviews held in November/December, 1999 the final result was declared on 832000 and 512 candidates in all were finally selected for appointment.
The petitioners (in C.W.P.
No. 16687 of 2002) were recommended for appointment to the office of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies on 13122001.
They visited the office aforesaid to seek formal posting orders between December 18 and 24, 2001 but they could not be handed over as the dealing assistant was on leave and unfortunately, before this formality could be completed, elections in the State of Punjab were announced leading to the enforcement of the model code of conduct and thereafter a ban was also imposed by the Election Commission on further appointments on 1612002.
The net result is that the petitioners have not been able to get appointments till today.
3.
In the reply filed by the respondents, the facts, as stated, have not been denied but it has been reiterated that as a ban had been imposed by the Election Commission and thereafter by the State Government on fresh appointments, the petitioners were not entitled to appointment on the posts in question.
The fact that some persons were not lower in the merit list, had been accommodated in other departments, has, however, not been denied.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners have placed reliance on the Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in Civil Writ Petition No 10315 of 2002 (Parveen Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 18.8.2003, which dealt with an identical situation.
We quote the relevant observations of the Division Bench hereunder :-  "The primary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that they were required by the Subordinate Services Selection Board to assume their duties in different departments of the State Government, in response to which they submitted the requisite papers with the respective Departments.
The papers were submitted by the petitioners well before the imposition of the Model Code of Conduct on 1612002.
The aforesaid factual position is not disputed by learned counsel for the respondents.
He, however, states that the scrutiny of papers of the petitioners could not be completed before 1612002 and it is, therefore, that the petitioners could not be allowed to assume their duties in the Departments to which they were deputed.
It is further contended that the petitioners have no right whatsoever to assume their duties at the present juncture in view of the ban on recruitments imposed in a meeting of the Cabinet Sub-Committee held on 2442002, wherein it was resolved to impose a complete ban on recruitments to the posts lying vacant and/or likely to fall vacant.
All such available vacant posts according to the decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee were deemed to have been abolished forthwith, likewise all the vacancies which arise on account of the retirement or any other reason after the decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee would likewise be deemed to be abolished as and when they arose.
Despite the attractive submissions at the hands of the learned counsel for the respondents his contentions do not impress us.
It is also not a matter of dispute that in the process of selection in which the petitioners participated, a number of candidates who have been placed at a position below the petitioner in the merit list have since been appointed against the posts of Clerks in various Departments of the State Government.
It is not open to the State Government to pick and choose at the time of making appointments.
The petitioners in furtherance of their success in the process of selection had submitted their papers for assuming duties in the various Departments (to which they were deputed by the Subordinate Services Selection Board) well before the imposition of ban on 1612002.
For no fault of theirs, the screening process would not be completed by the respective departments.
For those placed in the merit list below the petitioners the process was completed, whereupon they were substantively appointed.
The petitioners have obviously been unfairly ignored, the deprivation of the petitioners is clearly unsustainable in law in view of the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India which ensures equality before the law.
The ban imposed on the policy decision taken by the Cabinet Sub-Committee on 2442002 (as is apparent from Annexure R-3), will also be inapplicable in the facts and circumstances of this case.
The appointment of the petitioners must relate back to a date earlier to 1612002 when their cases were forwarded to various Departments of the State Governments for appointment when persons lower in the merit list vis-a-vis the petitioners were substantively appointed.
In view of the conclusions drawn above, neither the Model Code of Conduct which was enforced w.e.f.
1612002 will apply to the petitioners, nor the decision of the Cabinet Sub-Committee dated 2442002.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to issue formal appointment orders to the petitioners and allow them appropriate posting orders within 4 weeks from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the order.
The appointment of the petitioners will relate back to the date when persons junior to them were appointed against the posts of Clerks.
The petitioners, however, would not be entitled to back wages under the principles of `No Work No Pay.'"
5.
Shri Sidhu, the learned counsel for the respondents, has, however, placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in Sat Pal Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2003(2) SCT 578 (SC) : Civil Writ Petition No 105 of 2003, decided on 712003, to contend that it was open to the State Government to deny appointments to the petitioners.
We find from a reading of the facts of this case that it pertains to appointments of persons who had been selected against posts, which had been sanctioned under a centrally sponsored scheme and not to a situation like the one before us today.
We also find that the aforesaid short order does not lay down any broad principle and has been decided on its own peculiar facts whereas the judgment relied upon by the petitioners is a detailed one and pertains to this very selection for the same posts in which all the issues raised by the parties have been discussed.
We accordingly allow the writ petitions in terms of Parveen Kumar's case (supra).
Petition allowed.