MM Kumar, J - This is an application with a prayer that the case of the petitioner be decided as it is covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in the case of Jagar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(4) SCT 1014 (P&H) : 2003(1) RSJ 795.
The Division Bench in Jagar Singh's case (supra) has by following the judgment in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao, 1988(1) SLR 798 held that vacancies which have arisen before the amendment in the Haryana Revenue Department District Subordinates (Group "C") Service Rules, 1988 were to be filled up in accordance with the unamended rules and the vacancies which have arisen after the date of amendment have to be filled up in accordance with the amended rules.
In other words, it is necessary to fulfil the following two conditions :-  (a) that the vacancy has arisen before the date of amendment; and (b) that he fulfilled the eligibility criterion for promotion.
2.
The petitioner has been working on the post of Assistant from 16.3.1995 and he completed five years of service on March 15, 2000.
According to the seniority list (Annexure P-2) his name has been shown at S. No. 2.
It is appropriate to mention that Mohinder Singh, Sr.
Scale Stenographer stood promoted on the post of Assistant Superintendent on 30.9.1994.
It has been admitted that three posts of Assistant Superintendent have become available in the year 1996 as is evident from the averments made in paras 7 and 12 of the writ petition which have not been controverted in the corresponding paras of the written statement.
However, it is alleged that some wrong details have been given with regard to the date of retirement but it has no material effect on the question required to be decided.
The fact remains that three vacancies have arisen in 1996.
The petitioner became eligible on 1532000 having completed 5 years service as Assistant to each promotion on the post of Assistant Superintendent.
It is further appropriate to mention that after the promotion of Mohinder Singh, Sr.
Scale Stenographer the petitioner is the senior-most in the seniority list of Assistants.
3.
Shri BB Gupta, learned State counsel has argued that a charge-sheet against the petitioner was issued for inflicting major penalty under Rule 8 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1987.
However, on one count the charge has not been proved and he stood exonerated and in respect of the other charge the proceedings have been converted for inflicting minor punishment which are still pending.
On the afore-mentioned ground, the learned State counsel has argued that the case of the petitioner was not considered.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the judgment of this Court in Jagar Singh's case (supra) because three vacancies on the posts of Assistant Superintendent have arisen in 1996 which is much before the amendment of the Rules effected on 1882000.
The petitioner is eligible as he has completed five years service on 1532000 on the post of Assistant.
He is seniormost in the list of seniority of Assistants (Annexure P-2).
Accordingly a direction is issued to the respondents commanding consideration of the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Superintendent.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from today.
The application as well as the main petition stands disposed of.
Petition allowed.