Swatanter Kumar, J - An FIR No. 727 dated 20th June, 2000 was registered against the petitioner under Sections 420, 467, 468 and 471 IPC.
The petitioner was placed under suspension on 11th November, 2002.
A charge sheet dated 20th June, 2001 was issued to the petitioner containing statement of imputation, copy of which is annexed with the petition as Annexure P/1.
The petitioner submitted a reply to the charge sheet on 5th October, 2001 and the respondents appointed an Inquiry Officer who has now fixed hearing of the departmental proceedings on 23rd September, 2002.
2.
According to the petitioner, the contents of the charge sheet served upon the petitioner and the charges framed by the learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Gurgaon, are identical.
The petitioner would be compelled to expose his defence in the departmental proceedings, which is bound to prejudicially effect the interest of the petitioner even in the criminal trial.
With an intention to avoid exposer of his defence to be taken in the criminal case, the petitioner has prayed for stay of departmental proceedings till the conclusion of the criminal trial.
This request of the petitioner was declined by the respondents, giving rise to the filing of the present petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of this Court in the case of BK Aggarwal v. State Bank of India, reported as 2000(1) SCT 702 in support of his above contention.
4.
It is settled principle of law that the departmental proceedings in all the cases cannot be stayed till the conclusion of the proceedings before the criminal court merely on the ground the articles of charges and charges before the criminal court have the similarities.
It will have to be decided keeping in view of the facts and circumstances of each case.
5.
At this stage, it may be relevant to refer to the view expressed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in various cases relating to desirability of continuation of disciplinary proceedings despite criminal charges having been filed against the delinquent official.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Kushal Bhan, A.I.R. 1960 Supreme Court 806 held as under :-  "Though very often employers stay enquiries into the misconduct of the employees pending the decision of the criminal trial courts dealing with the same facts and that is fair, it cannot be said that principles of natural justice require that an employer must wait for the decision, at least of the criminal trial court, before taking action against an employee.
6.
Further reference can be made to the case of Jang Bhadur Singh v. Baij Nath Tewari, reported as A.I.R. 1969 SC 30.
7.
The above view was reiterated with approval and with further extended limits of desirability of continuation of disciplinary proceedings even after being absolved or otherwise by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab & Anr. v. Dalbir Singh & Ors., 2001(1) SCT 125 (SC) : JT 2000(10) SC 456, where the court held as under :-  "The question that arises for consideration, therefore, is whether the levy of penalty under the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act would absolve the concerned employee from all liabilities and would debar the disciplinary authority to initiate disciplinary proceedings.
In other words, the question would be whether initiation of a departmental proceedings would tantamount to violation of provision contained in Article 20(2) of the Constitution.
Having examined the relevant facts involved in these appeals and having examined the judgment of the Full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court, we have no hesitation to come to the conclusion that the Full Bench rightly interfered with the judgment of the Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court.
In our view, the payment of penalty under the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act would not absolve the employee fully from all other liabilities nor would it debar the employer from initiating a departmental proceedings form the alleged misconduct of the concerned delinquent employee.
Such initiation of a departmental proceedings by no stretch of imagination, can be held to be a violation of provision of Article 20 of the Constitution of India.
8.
Similar view was expressed a Division Bench of this Court in RN Yadav, Accountant Sugar Mills, Shahabad Markanda, Haryana v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) SCT 332.
9.
Another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Som Parkash Wadhawan v. The Uttari Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam and others, decided on 1242002, where the Court held as under :-  "It is a well settled rule of law that the scope, effect and consequences of the criminal and departmental proceedings are distinct and different.
One necessarily may not determine the fate of the other.
Once the employer has a reasonable suspicion on its employee for a serious offence like demanding and accepting illegal gratification, to prevent the department from taking recourse to conclusion of the proceedings, merely because the criminal proceedings have also been initiated against the official by the police/State Vigilance Department, would neither be just nor fair.
The burden to show serious prejudice to his rights is upon the delinquent officer/official.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show as to what prejudice the petitioner is likely to suffer if both the proceedings continue.
The rules governing a criminal trial are so stringent that a delinquent officer as an accused may get benefit of doubt and resultant acquittal, but that necessarily may not entitle him clearance in the departmental enquiry.
The department would be well within its right to conduct an enquiry and pass appropriate orders in accordance with law.
In the present case the evidence of the petitioner has still to start and it is not certain as to when the criminal proceedings pending before the Court of competent jurisdiction would attain finality.
To keep the departmental proceedings in abeyance for such an indefinite period even otherwise would not be in consonance with the settled canons of service jurisprudence.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a judgment of the learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of BK Aggarwal v. State Bank of India and others, 2000(1) Labour & Services Judicial Reports 407 to contend that the departmental proceedings should be stayed.
With respect we are unable to find ourselves to agree to the view expressed in BK Aggarwal's case (supra) as an absolute proposition of law.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Rajasthan v. Shri BK Meena and others, 1996(4) SCT 708 (SC) : JT 1996(8) SC 684 : AIR 1997 SC 13, while rejecting such a request and quashing the order of the Tribunal, held as under :- "One of the contending consideration is that the disciplinary enquiry cannot be - and should not be - delayed unduly.
So far as criminal cases are concerned, it is well known that they drag on endlessly where high officials or persons holding high public offices are involved.
They get bogged down on one or the other ground.
They hardly ever reach a prompt conclusion.
If a criminal case is unduly delayed that may itself be a good ground for going ahead with the disciplinary enquiry even where the disciplinary proceedings are held over at an earlier stage.
The interests of administration and good government demand that these proceedings are concluded expeditiously.
The charges against the respondent are very serious.
They pertain to misappropriation of public funds to the tune of more than Rupees one crore.
The observation of the tribunal that in the course of examination of evidence, new material may emerge against the respondent and he may be compelled to disclose his defence is, at best, a surmise - a speculatory reason.
We cannot accept it as valid.
Though the respondent was suspended pending enquiry in May, 1990, the order has been revoked in October 1993.
The respondent is continuing in office.
It is in his interest and in the interest of good administration that the truth or falsity of the charges against him is determined promptly.
To wit, if he is not guilty of the charges, his honour should be vindicated early and if he is guilty, he should be dealt with appropriately without any avoidable delay.
The criminal court may decide - whenever it does - whether the respondent is guilty of the offences charged and if so, what sentence should be imposed upon him.
The interest of administration, however, cannot brook any delay in disciplinary proceedings for the reasons indicated hereinabove.
The standard of proof, the mode of enquiry and the rules governing the enquiry and trial in both the cases are entirely distinct and different.
Staying of disciplinary proceedings pending criminal proceedings, to repeat, should not be a matter of course but a considered decision.
Even if stayed at one stage, the decision may require reconsideration if the criminal case gets unduly delayed.
It also must be noticed that there is no rule which on its plain reading or on the principle of necessary implication can be construed as a bar for continuation of the two proceedings simultaneously.
Thus, unless it is demonstratively shown that the petitioner would be exposed to grave prejudice and the proceedings are so intermingled that one cannot continue de-hors the other it may not be appropriate for the Court to stay the continuation of departmental proceedings till conclusion of the criminal proceedings.
In this regard reference can also be made to a judgment of the Calcutta High Court and a Division Bench judgment of Rajasthan High Court respectively in the cases of Basudev Mitra, 1994(5) S.L.R.
401 and Laxman Lal v. State of Rajasthan, 1995(2) SCT 412 (Raj.)
(DB)."
10.
As already noticed, the charge sheet dated 20th June, 2001 along with statement of imputation of charges as well as the charges framed by the criminal court have been placed on record Annexure R/2 and R/3 respectively to the writ petition.
A perusal of these documents show that the statement of imputation has much wider and larger scope within the charges framed against the petitioner before the criminal court.
The relevant portion of the articles of charges reads as under :-  "The modus operandi adopted by Shri Birbal, ALM was to remove the matter body cover by tempering with the M&P Meter Cover seals and after manipulating with the meter mechanism and meter reading, again the meter cover used to be refixed with the held (help ?)
of material and T&P taken into possession at the time of arrest.
Sh. Birbal, ALM in association with Shri Deep Chand provided duplicate seals on the meter body cover after manipulating with the meter reading mechanism of the energy meter.
The above set (act ?)
on the part of the official had put the Nigam into financial loss worth Rs. 200 lacs in addition to bringing bad name to the Nigam.
11.
The criminal charge relates to a particular incident while departmental proceedings are of general nature.
The facts and evidence in both the cases is not so intermingled that it would cause any prejudice to the petitioner.
Furthermore, in the interest of the petitioner the departmental proceedings should conclude as expeditiously as possible.
The rules framed by the Board also imposes an obligation upon them to conclude the proceedings expeditiously and in any case we are of the considered view that continuation of departmental proceedings would be no way prejudicial to the interest of the petitioner.
12.
For the reasons afore-stated this writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.