KC Gupta, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been filed against judgment and decree dated 6.10.1988 passed by Additional District Judge, Amritsar whereby the appeal of Palwinder Singh was accepted and it was held that the action taken against the respondent was totally and wholly illegal.
2.
The respondent (plaintiff) Palwinder Singh was serving as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways and was posted in Amritsar Depot.
He filed a suit for declaration that the order of termination of his services dated 2891983 passed by the General Manager was illegal, void and inoperative for the reasons specified in the plaint.
The said suit was dismissed by Sub Judge, Ist Class, Amritsar, vide judgment and decree dated 361987.
The respondent filed appeal which was accepted by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, vide judgment and decree dated 6.10.1988.
3.
Still dissatisfied, the State of Punjab has filed the present appeal.
4.
I have heard Mr. SS Behl, Addl.
AG Punjab, for the State of Punjab, Mr. BR Mahajan, Advocate for the respondent and carefully gone through the file.
5.
The counsel for the respondent contended that it is not a case that any embezzlement had been committed by the respondent while working as conductor in Amritsar Depot but on the other hand the case is that some luggage was placed by a passenger on the roof of the bus for which the conductor had not negligently charged.
Statement of the passenger whose luggage had been kept on the roof had been recorded.
He had stated during inquiry that the respondent was not at fault as he did not know that he had placed the luggage on the roof of the bus.
The counsel for the respondent further contended that it was required on the part of the Inquiry Officer to inform the respondent that if he so liked, he could be represented by his colleague or co-employee but no such information was conveyed to the respondent and as such the respondent had been prejudiced in conducting his case.
In support of this contention, he placed reliance on an authority of Hon'ble Apex Court in Shri Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others, 1983(1) SLR 626.
In view of the said authority which has also been relied upon by the appellate Court, there is no illegality or infirmity in the impugned judgment.
Rather, I agree with the reasoning give in the impugned judgment and decree.
Consequently, the Regular Second Appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.