Hemant Gupta, J - Petitioner has sought a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to count the entire service rendered by the petitioner on temporary/ad hoc basis by condoning interruption on account of summer vacations for pensionary benefits.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as JBT teacher on temporary basis on 1981968 on the recommendation of the employment exchange, Jalandhar.
The services of the petitioner was regularised with effect from 2571970.
Petitioner was promoted as Giani teacher with effect from 18121973 and subsequently promoted as Punjabi Master on 1371994.
Petitioner retired on 31122001.
Petitioner has claimed that he is entitled to claim retiral benefits after taking into consideration his entire service with effect from 1981968.
3.
In reply, it has been averred by the State Government that only notional break of 30 days is condonable but there is gap of 138 days and thus, such break in service cannot be considered and counted for the purpose of gratuity and pension.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner has referred to Rule 317, 317-A and Rule 423 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol II to contend that the temporary or officiating service under the State Government is to be counted for pensionary benefits, if that employee was holding a substantive post on the date of his retirement.
Rule 317, 317-A and Rule 423 reads as under :  "317.
If an employee was holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary or officiating service under the State Government, followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post, shall count in full as qualifying service except in respect of : (i) periods of temporary or officiating service in non-pensionable establishment; (ii) periods of service in work-charged establishment; and (iii) periods of service paid from contingencies.
317-A.
(1) Subject to the provisions of rule 423 and other rules and except in the cases mentioned below, all service rendered on establishment, interrupted or continuous, shall count as qualifying service :- (i) Service rendered in work-charged establishment.
(ii) Service paid from contingencies.
Provided that after the 1st January, 1973 half of the service paid from contingencies will be allowed to count towards pension at the time of absorption in regular employment subject to the following conditions : (a) Service paid from contingencies should have been in a job involving whole-time employment (and not part-time or for a portion of the day) (b) Service paid from contingencies should have been in a type of work or job for which regular post could have been sanctioned e.g. malis, chowkidards, Khalasis, etc. (c) The service should have been one for which the payment is made either on monthly or daily rates computed and paid on a monthly basis and which though not analogous to the regular scale of pay should bear some relation in the matter of pay to those being paid for similar jobs being performed by staff in regular establishment.
(d) The service paid from contingencies should have been continuous and followed by absorption in regular employment without a break.
(iii) casual or daily rated service.
(iv) Suspension adjudged as a specific penalty.
317A (2) An interruption in the service of a Government employee caused by wilful absence from duty or unauthorised absence without leave, shall entail forfeiture of the past service.
423.
In the absence of a specific indication to the contrary in the service record, an interruption between two spells of service rendered under the State Government shall be treated as automatically condoned, and the pre- interruption service shall be treated as qualifying service for pension purposes, except where the interruption has been caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service or due to participation in a strike, but the period of interruption itself shall under no circumstances be reckoned as qualifying service for pension purposes.
5.
The petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis on 1981968 and continued in service till his service was regularised on 2571970.
It has been asserted by the petitioner that break in service was only on account of summer vacations.
The State Government had taken time to ascertain the cause of break in service on 2792002.
However, Sh. Sran could not dispute at the time of hearing of the case that the break in service was on account of summer vacations.
6.
We are of the opinion that the period of ad hoc temporary service prior to regularisation of the service is liable to be counted for the purpose of gratuity and pension.
The break in service was only on account of summer vacations a reason beyond the control of the petitioner.
7.
The petitioner has also relied upon Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(5) SLR 27, Bidhi Chand v. State of Punjab, 1999(1) Service Cases Today 481, and Joginder Singh v. State of Haryana, 1998(1) Service Cases Today 795 in support of his contention that the entire service is to be counted for pensionary benefit.
In Kesar Chand's case (supra) full Bench of this Court has held that the temporary or officiating service under the State Government has to be reckoned for determining the qualifying service.
It was held that it is illogical when the period of service by employee in work charged establishment before his regularisation has not been taken into consideration for determining his qualifying service.
Consequently, Full Bench has struck down sub-rule (ii) of rule 317 mentioned above.
8.
In Joginder Singh's case (supra), this Hon'ble Court has considered rule 423 reproduced above as substituted on 2691985.
As per substituted Rule 423 interruption between two stretches of service rendered under the State Government is treated automatically condoned and such service is treated as qualifying service for pension except when interruption has been caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service.
"It is evident from a bare perusal of Annexure P-11 the notification dated 26th September, 1985 that the amended Rule 423 (on which the petitioner relies and reproduced above) had come into force with effect from 111997.
The petitioner having retired some time in 1998 was, therefore, entitled to seek the benefit of this amendment.
It is also evident that prior to amendment stringent conditions had been laid down with regard to condonation in the break in service but these conditions have been done away with by the amendment with the result that interruption between two stretches of services under the Punjab Government stood automatically condoned for the purpose of qualifying service for pension except in the circumstances mentioned above."
9.
The service rendered on establishment even on casual or daily rated service is to be counted as qualifying service.
The petitioner was in a whole time employment and has been paid wages on monthly basis.
There was no wilful absence from the duty by the petitioner which was on account of unilateral action of the State.
Therefore, the ad hoc period of the petitioner i.e. from 1981968 till 2571970 is liable to be taken into consideration while condoning interruption in service on account of summer vacations.
10.
Consequently, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to redetermine the retiral benefits after taking into consideration the ad hoc/temporary service of one year six months and twenty days rendered by the petitioner.
The retiral benefits as may be due to the petitioner on account of this exercise be paid within a period of three months from the date the certified copy of the order is supplied to the respondents.
Petition allowed.