JS Narang, J - The petitioner retired as Treasury Officer from the Treasury Office, Sirsa.
The son of the petitioner, Shri Sanjay Bansal who was studying in MA in the subject of Public Administration, in the Panjab University in the year 1997, was staying in University Hostel.
It is at that time he met with an accident in the University Campus in January 1997 at night.
He suffered multiple injuries on head and fractured his left forearm.
He was admitted in P.G.I.
Chandigarh and remained under treatment from January 14, 1997 to February 4, 1997.
He had also been subjected to certain surgeries.
Consequently, lot of expenditure was required to be incurred, which was paid accordingly.
2.
The petitioner lodged a claim of Rs. 3728530 as medical bills and asked for reimbursement accordingly.
The claim has been supported by prescriptions, vouchers, photo copies of the discharge card and also the receipts for having made the aforestated payments.
The case of the petitioner has been rejected vide order dated April 8, 1997 on the ground that the son of the petitioner had attained the age of majority at the time of accident and, therefore, as per the instructions dated March 26, 1997, April 8, 1997, copy Annexure P3, the petitioner is not entitled to reimbursement of the aforesaid claim.
A letter dated April 21, 1997 had been sent to the concerned quarters for reconsideration on the premises that the son of the petitioner was dependent upon him at the time of suffering the injury and that the expenditures have been incurred by the petitioner.
The State reiterated its stand and has rejected the representation of the petitioner vide communication dated April 22, 1997, copy Annexure P4.
The second representation was again rejected vide communication dated 2781997, copy Annexure P6.
Similarly, the third representation met the same fate vide communication dated 1911998, copy Annexure P8.
Being dissatisfied the petitioner has filed the present petition impugning the instructions dated July 6, 1985 copy Annexure P9 and so also the impugned orders vide which the claim of the petitioner has been rejected i.e. copies Annexure P3, P6 and P8 respectively.
The instructions have been challenged inter alia on the ground that the instructions dated July 6, 1985 are not sustainable under law as the same run counter to the principle of dependency vis-a-vis the minority spelt out under law.
There is no judgment to the effect that when a minor attains majority at the age of 18 years, the element of dependency is wiped out at that stage.
It is not necessary and normally it is not possible that a major at the age of 18 years would be in a position to earn livelihood and would be eligible for a job.
There are number of regulations which require the minimum age for a person to be taken into job as 25 years, 30 years and 35 years and that the qualifications required also vary from job to job.
For example ; in a teaching profession a person has to be Master in the subject and should also have acquired the qualification of MPhil.
and in some cases the qualification of Ph.
D is also the requirement.
By no stretch of imagination, a child would or can acquire the entitling qualifications at the age of 18 years.
Thus, they would be dependent till they acquire professional qualifications or at least acquire graduation.
There is no doubt, in some of the jobs the basic qualification is Matriculate or may be 8th standard.
However, the comparative analysis would show that generally a child would remain dependent till he acquires the requisite qualifications and for that the matrix of age vis-a-vis attaining the age of majority cannot be applied in a rational manner.
3.
The stand of the State is that as per the Government instructions which have been impugned before this Court, only the minor children have been accepted as dependents, as such, the Government has correctly rejected the claim of medical reimbursement in respect of son of the petitioner who had attained the age of maturity as per his own admission.
Thus, the stand of the Government is sustainable under law and the petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to any reimbursement.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusal of the facts brought on record and also the documentary evidence appended as annexures, I am of the view that the instructions dated July 6, 1985, copy Annexure P9, are not sustainable under law vis-a-vis the children who have attained the age of majority and yet can be termed as dependent upon their parents.
The law prescribes the age of majority but the rule of dependence cannot be defeated by the said provision.
It is a matter of fact that after taking the age of majority i.e. 18 years, no child can be said to have become independent of his parents because at that age he may not be in a position to get employment and may not be able to earn his livelihood.
It is also a matter of common knowledge that the Government prescribes qualifications and the age for being considered for employment and that for acquiring such qualifications the period is certainly required by a child beyond the age of 18 years and in some given cases it may be take time for them and till then they would remain dependent upon the parents.
It is also a matter of common knowledge that a child acquires the qualifications of matriculation at the age of 15/16 years and thereafter for graduation he requires another period of four-five years.
If a child proposes to acquire the professional qualification another period of 4-6 years or 4 to 8 years is required and all this while he remains dependent upon the parents.
It would be appropriate for the government to analyse the rule of dependency in an appropriate manner and with rationale.
The mathematics of attaining the majority under law cannot be allowed to negate the rule of dependency.
The "dependency" would depend upon each case in a different manner under different circumstances.
We cannot lose sight of the act of God where a child may be retarded and, therefore, would be dependent upon the parents for all times to come.
Rules may define but they cannot override the ways of his Almighty.
Thus, in each case, the Government must examine as to whether the child is dependent upon the parents and if so, under what circumstances.
It is only after such determination, the right of the claimant can be subjected to the curbs of the regulation promulgated by the Government.
5.
In view of the above, petition is allowed and the instructions dated 671985, copy Annexure P9, are quashed.
Resultantly, the impugned orders Annexures P3, P6 and P8 vide which the claim of the medical reimbursement of the petitioner has been rejected, are also quashed.
It is directed that the claim of the petitioner in respect of the reimbursement of the medical bills incurred for and on behalf of the child be examined in the light of the aforestated observations and that in this regard the appropriate affidavit be called for from the petitioner and so also the child in respect of gainful employment or independent existence of the child, relying thereon, the decision in respect of the claim of the petitioner should be taken by the competent authority.
It goes without saying that the said claim shall be decided by the Competent Authority within two months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
So far as claim of interest by the petitioner is concerned, in the case of medical bills the interest is not granted in view of the dicta of the apex Court.
However, in this case, the Government is not to be blamed in view of the stand taken by them under the shelter of the instructions though they are not sustainable under law.
The petition stands allowed in the above terms with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.