Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer made in the petition is for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the orders dated April 16, 2002 vide which his claim for appointment as Lower Division Clerk has been rejected.
A further prayer has been made for directing the official-respondents to promote/appoint the petitioner to the post of Lower Division Clerk with effect from December 3, 1998 when he was appointed under the exgratia scheme and also grant him all consequential benefits.
2.
The father of the petitioner Raj Mal was employed with the Haryana Vidyut Parsaran Nigam Limited.
He died while is service.
On the basis of the policy dated May 8, 1995, with regard to the exgratia appointment, the petitioner was offered a post of officiating Peon vide order dated December 7, 1998.
A copy of the aforesaid appointment order has been appended as Annexure P/1 with the petition.
Respondent No. 5-Sanjay Kumar was also a person who was similarly situated and was offered a similar appointment as a Peon under the aforesaid exgratia scheme.
Aforesaid Sanjay Kumar was also appointed as a Peon with effect from December 10, 1998.
3.
The department considered the entitlement of the father of the petitioner as well as that of the father of respondent No.5-Sanjay Kumar for grant of first ACP scale.
Vide orders dated June 23, 2000 and July 15, 2000, respectively, the aforesaid scales were granted to their respective fathers with effect from January 1, 1996.
On the grant of the aforesaid higher scales, the petitioner as well as respondent No. 5 become entitled to be appointed as Lower Division Clerks in the scale of Rs. 4000-60000 i.e. one step lower than the scale being drawn by their respective fathers at the time of their death, as per policy dated August 2, 1995.
A copy of the aforesaid policy has been appended as Annexure R/1 with the written statement filed by the respondents.
4.
On representations filed by the petitioner as well as respondent No. 5, their case for appointment as Lower Division Clerks was considered by the respondents.
In the month of December, 2000, respondent No. 5 was appointed a Lower Division Clerk.
However, the case of the petitioner was kept pending for verification of his matriculation certificate.
When the process of verification was still going on, the State Government formulated a new policy dated February 7, 1002 governing the exgratia appointments.
5.
As per the aforesaid policy, it was decided that the dependent of deceased-employee was merely entitled to the post which was one step lower than the post held by the deceased-Government employee.
A copy of the aforesaid policy dated February 7, 2001 has been appended as Annexure R/2 with the written statement filed by the respondents.
After the enforcement of policy Annexure R/2, the case of the petitioner was considered.
Vide order dated April 16, 2000, his claim was rejected.
It was held that the petitioner was not entitled to be appointed as Lower Division Clerk in terms of the policy Annexure R/2.
A copy of the order dated April 16, 2002 has been appended as Annexure P/3 with the present petition.
6.
The petitioner has approached this court challenging the aforesaid order Annexure P/3.
It has been averred that the case of the petitioner was identical with that of respondent No. 5-Sanjay Kumar and as such the action of the respondents was not only contrary to the policy Annexure R/1 but was also discriminatory.
7.
The respondents have put in appearance and filed written statement.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
The basic plea of the respondents is their reliance upon policy Annexure R/2.
It has been claimed that since the aforesaid policy came in operation prior to the decision having been taken in the case of the petitioner with regard to his claim for appointment as Lower Division Clerk, therefore, the said policy was applicable to his case and as such under the aforesaid policy his claim was not sustainable.
8.
We have heard Shri Narender Hooda, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, Shri Rohit Ahuja, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for respondents No. 1 to 4 and Shri Arvind Singh, Advocate, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 5 and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
9.
The facts are not in dispute.
It is not in dispute that the claim of the petitioner for appointment on exgratia basis was duly considered by the department and he was actually offered the post of Peon vide order dated December 7, 1998.
When the aforesaid order Annexure P/1 was passed, the policy Annexure R/1 was in operation.
It was only when the higher scale was sought to be given to the father of the petitioner by passing the order dated June 23, 2000, retrospectively, with effect from January 1, 1996, that he became entitled to be appointed as a Lower Division Clerk i.e. on a post which was one step lower as per the aforesaid policy Annexure R/1.
10.
The stand adopted by the respondents that the claim of the petitioner was liable to be considered under the policy Annexure R/2 is based upon a complete miscomprehension of the aforesaid policy.
In fact it is clearly provided under the aforesaid policy that the cases which have already been decided will not be reopened.
It is not in dispute that the case of the petitioner stood already decided under the old policy.
It was only on the grant of higher scale to his father retrospectively with effect from January 1, 1996 that the petitioner became entitled to be appointed as a Lower Division Clerk.
The said claim of the petitioner in fact related back to his date of appointment i.e. December 7, 1998.
Admittedly, on December 7, 1998, the new policy Annexure R/2 had not come into being.
When the petitioner made a request, on the grant of the higher scale to his father, for being offered the post of Lower Division Clerk as per his entitlement under policy Annexure R/1, he was merely making a request as per the existing policy Annexure R/1.
Since the higher scales were given to his father retrospectively with effect from January 1, 1996, therefore, the same also resulted in a higher entitlement for the petitioner.
Apparently the policy Annexure R/2 was not attracted to such a situation.
The policy Annexure R/2 in our considered opinion, was only applicable to such cases which were still being processed and no final decision has been taken thereupon.
In the case of the petitioner, a final decision having already been taken, it is only the consideration of his entitlement which was also to be decided as per policy Annexure R/1.
11.
Even otherwise we are also satisfied that the claim of the petitioner was similarly situated as that of Sanjay Kumar-respondent No. 5.
Simply because the processing in the case of the petitioner had taken more time, than in the case of aforesaid respondent No. 5-Sanjay Kumar, such a delay could not operate to the disadvantage of the petitioner.
12.
In this view of the matter we have to hesitation in allowing the present petition and while quashing order Annexure P/3, we direct the respondents to pass a fresh order considering the claim of the petitioner for appointment as a Lower Division Clerk in terms of the policy/instructions dated August 2, 1995.
A final order in this regard shall be passed by the respondents within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is received.
However, we make it clear that although the petitioner would be entitled to all his service benefits, such as seniority etc. from the date of his original appointment on December 7, 1998 but he shall not be entitled to any arrears on such appointment which actually shall be admissible to him from the date he is so appointed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.