Ashutosh Mohunta, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of R.S.A.
No. 626 of 1987 and Civil Revision No. 2811 of 1996 as inter-connected matters are involved in both of them.
2.
Shiv Kumar appellant (now deceased) has filed R.S.A.
No. 626 of 1987 to contest the judgment dated January 12, 1987 passed by the Additional District Jude, Kurukshetra, whereby the suit filed by Ram Sarup, respondent No. 1 (now deceased), against the his promotion as House Tax Superintendent has been decreed by setting aside the judgment dated October 29, 1993 passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Kurukshetra.
Civil Revision No. 2811 of 1996 has been filed by Ram Sarup to challenge the order dated May 29, 1996 passed by the executing Court denying him the arrears of salary of the promotional post retrospectively.
The facts of the case are being taken from R.S.A.
No. 626 of 1987 as the decision in the appeal will decide the fate of the revision petition.
3.
The following question of law arises for determination in the present appeal :-  Whether a junior employee can be promoted by ignoring the claim of the employee senior to him by applying the principle of `seniority-cum-merit'?
4.
Both Shiv Kumar appellant and Ram Sarup respondent were working as Clerks in the Municipality Thanesar.
Ram Sarup was senior while Shiv Kumar appellant was junior to him.
The post of Tax Superintendent fell vacant.
Names of both the candidates, i.e. Ram Sarup and Shiv Kumar, were considered On the basis of the service record of Ram Sarup, he was ignored, while Ram Sarup was promoted as Tax Superintendent with effect from 111979 vide resolution No. 451 dated 27121978.
Ram Sarup challenged the promotion of Shiv Kumar on the basis of his seniority as well as on the ground that he belonged to a Scheduled Caste.
The suit filed by him was, however, dismissed by the Senior Sub Judge, Kurukshetra, vide judgment dated 29101983 by holding that the service record of Ram Sarup, plaintiff-respondent, did not make him fit for promotion as Tax Superintendent as fine was imposed upon him twice; there were several entries of warnings administered on him and he was also placed under suspension.
However, the appeal filed by Ram Sarup, respondent No. 1, was accepted and the suit filed by him was decreed by the learned Additional District Judge, Kurukshetra, vide judgment dated January 12, 1987.
It is against the judgment passed by the Additional District Judge, Kurukshetra, that Shiv Kumar has filed this appeal.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the evidence adduced on record.
6.
It has been contended by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 that Ram Sarup had crossed the efficiency bar and his increments were never stopped.
Thus, according to him, the supersession of Ram Sarup was illegal and violative of the principles of natural justice.
It has further been contended by the counsel that Ram Sarup respondent was retired prematurely without giving any opportunity before passing the order of compulsory retirement.
Thus, according to him, his retirement by the respondent Municipality prematurely was illegal.
In support of his contention, he has placed reliance on KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) SLR 1.
7.
Admittedly, Ram Sarup was imposed fine twice during his service career He was also given several warnings.
It is also the admitted case that he was placed under suspension on August 18, 1975.
It is also not disputed that Ram Sarup was under suspension when Shiv Kumar was given promotion as Tax Superintendent.
As compared to the record of Ram Sarup, the service record of Shiv Kumar was much better.
There was no blot in the service record of Shiv Kumar appellant.
An employee has a right to be considered for promotion but it is for the authorities to see whether to grant him promotion or not.
Merely on the basis of seniority one cannot claim promotion to a higher post.
Merit is also considered when a promotion is to be given effect to.
In routine promotions, the principle of seniority-cum-merit is to be applied.
It has come on record that earlier the Municipality had promoted one Sant Parkash to the post of the Tax Superintendent.
That Sant Parkash was even junior to Shiv Kumar appellant.
Both Ram Sarup and Shiv Kumarthen filed their representations against the promotion of Sant Parkash.
Their cases were then considered by the Government.
As the record of Shiv Kumar was much better than that of Ram Sarup, the former was given promotion to the post of Tax Superintendent in place of Sant Parkash.
8.
The contention of Mr. WR Dua that Ram Sarup was prematurely retired without giving him any opportunity of hearing before passing the order of premature retirement has no substance.
The order of premature retirement has not been challenged in the present proceedings.
Ram Sarup has only challenged the order of the executing Court denying him arrears of the promotional post retrospectively in filing Civil Revision No 2811 of 1996.
As he has not challenged his premature retirement, no order can be passed with regard to that.
Thus, the contention raised by him that the compulsory retirement of Ram Sarup was illegal and violative of the principles of natural justice is without any force.
In the light of the above discussion, I allow R.S.A.
No. 626 of 1987 and set aside the judgment and decree January 12, 1987 passed by the Additional District Judge, Kurukshtra and restore the judgment and decree dated October 29, 1983 passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Kurukshtra.
As a result of the decision in the RSA Civil Revision No. 2811 of filed by Ram Sarup, respondent No. 1, is dismissed.
Appeal allowed.