Amar Dutt, J - Briefly stated the facts giving rise to the filing of the present petition are that petitioner Dilbag Singh joined the Process Server Establishment of the District & Sessions Judge, Ropar, in the year 1976.
On 3111981, on a complaint made by the Senior Sub Judge, Ropar, an enquiry was ordered into the refusal of the petitioner to perform the duties of a Chowkidar.
The petitioner was found guilty of the charges.
However, the petitioner, who was placed under suspension, was reinstated pursuant to an order dated 511984 passed by this Court.
On 1211984, the services of the petitioner were again terminated by the order Annexure P-3, which reads as under :-  "The services of Shri Dilbag Singh, Process Sever of the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Rupnagar, who was appointed on purely temporary basis, are hereby terminated w.e.f.
1211984 afternoon as no longer required."
The petitioner filed an appeal on 2121984 and when the same was not decided sent reminders dated 22111998 and 1031989.
He had then moved this Court through C.W.P.
No. 19203 of 1991 for the following relief :-  "Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of :- (a) writ of certiorari quashing the order dated 1211984, contained in Annexure P-6, by which the services of the petitioner have been terminated; (b) writ of mandamus, directing the respondent to reinstate the petitioner into service with effect from 1211984 with all consequential benefits of service in terms of pay, allowances etc." 2.
This writ petition was dismissed on 20121991, whereafter Dilbag Singh petitioner filed petition for special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 14435 of 1992 before the Apex Court, which was decided on 7.12.1992 in the following terms :-  "The only submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner's Departmental appeal made to learned Chief Justice of the High Court on 21284 is still pending without any decision thereon.
We find that the High Court has not been made a party either in the writ petition filed by the petitioner or even in this Special Leave Petition.
In these circumstances, we can only observe that if the petitioner's submission be correct, we expect the High Court to dispose of the petitioner's Departmental appeal as expeditiously as possible and preferably within a period of three months from today.
A copy of this order be sent to the Registrar of the High Court.
The Special Leave Petition is dismissed with these observations."
3.
The appeal filed by the petitioner was dismissed by this Court on 3181995 and this dismissal led to the filing of the present writ petition.
4.
In the present petition, Dilbag Singh asserts that the order passed by the District & Sessions Judge, Ropar on 1211984 was in fact an order directing his termination for the reason that he had challenged the earlier termination order on the administrative side before this Court.
According to the petitioner, the fact that the persons junior to him were retained in service shows that the order dated 1211984 served upon him was not as innocuous as it appears to be inasmuch as the principle of last come first go has not been followed.
He also asserts that the fact that after his termination, the respondents have employed as many as 7 new persons in the year 1993 shows that the impugned order is punitive in nature and so after lifting the veil, the Court should set it aside and direct the immediate reinstatement of the petitioner.
5.
In the reply filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2, a preliminary objection has been taken regarding the maintainability of the writ primarily on the ground that for the same relief the earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 19203 of 1991 had been dismissed in limine.
On merits, the stand taken by the respondents is that the impugned order is not punitive in nature and had to be passed on account of the fact that the posts were not available and not as a measure of punishment.
However, the averments regarding the seniority as contained in paras 12 and 13 of the writ petition have not been denied.
6.
I have heard Mr. IP Singh, on behalf of the petitioner and Shri SK Maini, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
7.
The first objection that has been raised is about the maintainability of the present writ petition after the earlier C.W.P.
No. 19203 of 1991 had been dismissed in limine.
This argument has to be repelled because it loses sight of the fact that in S.L.P.
No. 14435 of 1992, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have been pleased to direct the High Court to dispose of the appeal, which was pending before it expeditiously as indicated hereinbefore.
It is after the dismissal of the appeal that the present petition has been filed and so the first objection against the same cannot be sustained.
8.
On merits, the petitioner was asserting lack of bona fide on account of the fact that persons junior to him had been retained in service and he was asked to leave.
This averment is not specifically controverted on behalf of the respondents.
The submissions contained in paras 12 and 13 of the writ petition are in fact not even contested.
The only inference which can be drawn from this state of affairs is that the submissions of the petitioner are necessarily true and that he had been asked to leave not because of lack of employment opportunity leading to retrenchment of process server but on account of the fact that he was insolent enough to disobey the directions issued by the Civil Nazir.
Upon lifting the veil that has been set up to hide the true purport of the impugned order, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that the same is actually punitive in nature and has been passed without following the process prescribed under the service Rules.
The same cannot be sustained and if respondent No. 2 was of the view that the petitioner was not good enough to be retained in service, he should have been charge-sheeted and after expeditious completion of the enquiry dismissed from service.
Moreover, if the petitioner was being terminated for the initial offence for which he had been censured by this Court, the impugned order shows a certain degree of defiance by the District & Sessions Judge of the directions of this Court, which cannot be deprecated.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed, the orders dated 1211984, Annexure P-3 and 3181995, Annexure P-8 are quashed and the petitioner is reinstated in service with all consequential benefits viz. seniority, arrears of pay etc.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.