Viney Mittal, J - Petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of mandamus by directing the respondents to comply with the communication dated September 10, 1993 issued by the Director, Public Instruction(s), Punjab (respondent No. 2).
Further challenge has been made to the selection of respondent No. 4 - Gurnam Singh as Principal of Lyallpur Khasla Senior Secondary School, Jalandhar City by the Managing Committee of the aforesaid school (respondent No. 3).
The petitioner has also consequentially prayed that the official respondents be directed to constitute a Committee in terms of Rule 7 of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised School Employees (Security of Service Rules, 1981 (for short `the Rules').
The petitioner has averred that Lyallpur Khasla Senior Secondary School, Jalandhar City (for short, `the School') is an aided institution getting 95 per cent of the grant-in-aid from the State Government of Punjab.
On October 31, 2002, the Managing Committee of the aforesaid school published a public notice in the newspaper inviting applications for the post of Principal which is an aided post.
In pursuance to the aforesaid advertisement, to carry out the necessary selection, the Managing Committee convened its meeting on November 23, 2002 to interview the candidates for the post of Principal.
The petitioner also applied for the aforesaid post and he was called for interview.
The petitioner has claimed that the selection of respondent No. 4 as Principal of the School in the aforesaid selection is in violation of the Rules as well as the memorandum dated September 10, 1993 issued by the Director, Public Instruction(s), Punjab.
The petitioner has further, averred that the aforesaid selection is vitiated as the government representative had not participated in the selection process and no information in that regard was given in time to the ex-officio member who was the District Education Officer.
The petitioner has appended a copy of the circular dated September 10, 1993 as Annexure P-10 with the present petition.
2.
Upon a notice of the writ petition, the respondents have put in appearance.
Separate written statements has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and respondent Nos. 3 and 4 respectively.
Para No. 17 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 reads as under :-  "That the first part is admitted to the extent that the compliance of letter dated 10.9.1993 issued by the respondent No. 2 has not been made by the respondent No. 3.
Moreover, rest of the para is denied.
Respondent No. 3 issued a meeting notice dated 8112002 to answering-respondents to attend the meeting, the same was received on 29112002 i.e. after the meeting dated 23112002."
3.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 in their written statement have adopted a stand that the selection was carried out in terms of the Rules and there was no violation of any of the provisions and as such selection of respondent No. 4 was absolutely in accordance with the Rules.
4.
We have heard Shri ML Sachdeva, Advocate appearing for the petitioner.
Shri KS Sidhu, Additional Advocate-General, Punjab appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Shri Sanjiv Sharma, Advocate appearing for respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
5.
It is apparent from the stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement as noticed above, that in compliance with the letter dated September 10, 1993, respondent No. 3 had issued a notice of the meeting on November 8, 2002 to the official respondents to attend the meeting.
The said notice was received on November 29, 2002 whereas the meeting had already taken place on November 23, 2002.
6.
In this view of the matter, without adverting to the other pleas raised by the petitioner as well as the various arguments addressed at the Bar on behalf of the respondents, we find that there is a violation of the circular dated September 10, 1993 (Annexure P-10) inasmuch as, an advance notice of the meeting held for selection purposes was to be served upon the official respondents by the Managing Committee of the School.
The said meeting was scheduled for November 23, 2002 whereas the notice to attend the aforesaid meeting was received by the official respondents on November 29, 2002, i.e., much after the meeting had actually taken place.
7.
Accordingly without offering any comments on the other pleas raised by the parties, we deem it proper to quash the selection of respondent No. 4 as Principal of the School and direct respondent No. 3 the Managing Committee of the School to hold fresh selection.
The aforesaid respondent No. 3 shall intimate the date of the meeting to be held for carrying out the said selection.
It is further made clear that in the fresh selection to be carried out in terms of the directions of the Court, only such candidates who had appeared earlier at the time of the selection held on November 23, 2003 shall be allowed to participate.
All such candidates who had appeared at the time of interview on November 23, 2003 shall be intimated of the new date of interview through registered A.D. covers.
The aforesaid process of selection shall now be completed by respondent No. 3 the Managing Committee of the School in terms of the circular dated September 10, 2003 by giving an advance information to the concerned authorities within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of the order is received by them.
8.
Since respondent No. 4 is already working as Principal of the School therefore, it is directed that till such time the new selection and appointment of the Principal through fresh selection is made he shall continue as Principal of the School.
9.
With the aforesaid directions, the writ petition is allowed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.