Swatanter Kumar, J - Six petitioners have approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to grant the petitioners benefit of three months training period towards annual increments after change of option on the revision of their pay scales and for payment of arrears.
2.
The facts which otherwise fall in a very narrow campus, are that the petitioners joined service in the office of the Executive Engineer, Construction Division No. 32, Irrigation Department, Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar and the Executive Engineer, Mohindergarh Canal Water Services Division, Charkhi Dadri, District Bhiwani as Junior Engineers.
These Junior Engineers were sent for training for smooth working of the department and this period was not counted for continuous service and annual increments.
According to the petitioners, the office of the Executive Engineer, Division No. 32 issued instructions for the concerned quarters to count the training period towards increments as continuous service in respect of Junior Engineers.
The petitioners made a representation on 522002 like other applicants praying that they should be permitted to exercise option after revision of the pay scales with effect from 1.4.1979, 111986 and 111996, but the respondents will not accede to the request of the petitioners for change of option, which compelled the petitioners to serve upon the respondents notice through their counsel dated 5122002, Annexure P/3 to the writ petition, calling upon the respondents to grant them leave to exercise their options as well as count the period of three months towards continuous service in terms of instructions dated 21112001 as noticed above.
3.
The respondents contested this petition and filed written statement stating that in terms of instructions of the Government of Haryana dated 18102001 the petitioners cannot be permitted to change options on account of revision of pay scales at this stage.
It is also stated that the Engineer-in-Chief considered their request reasonably and took a decision with circular to all Superintending Engineers dated 18102001, annexed to the reply as Annexure R/1, clarifying that the period of apprenticeship training would be treated as duty period and benefit for granting increments would be allowed.
On facts, other averments are not much in dispute.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners at the very out-set stated that petitioners are not pressing the relief in regard to grant of increments by adding the training period as a condition precedent to the grant of the other relief.
Besides this, we are also of the considered view that petitioners after such a long period of more than 22 years cannot compel the respondents to first grant them the benefit of increments by computing training period as regular service and then grant them the relief in regard to exercise of option.
The petitioners by their conduct and by waiting for such a long period have obviously created an impediment in the way of grant of any relief to them in this regard as well as the plea of limitation cannot be completely ignored.
5.
As far as the relief of the petitioners for grant of writ to exercise option as a result of revision of pay scale retrospectively is concerned, the claim of the petitioners is squarely covered by two Division Bench judgments of this Court in the cases of Mangat Ram Nain and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) Recent Services Judgments 600 : 2002(3) SCT 653 (P&H) and Randhir Kaur and others v. State of Haryana and others, 2003(1) Recent Services Judgments 178 : 2003(3) SCT 240 (P&H).
We see no reason to take a different view and would, with respect, adopt the reasoning arrived at and the relief granted to the petitioner in those writ petitions.
The petitioners had served a notice of demand upon the respondents on 5122002 but still the concerned authorities have not responded thereto by granting or declining the relief prayed for.
It is not disputed that the pay scales were revised w.e.f.
1.4.1979, 111986 and 111996 retrospectively by the concerned authorities.
The revision of pay scales in terms of the Government's instructions also provided an option to be exercised by the employee.
This legitimate expectation of the employees cannot be taken away by the respondents in an arbitrary manner.
No reasons, whatsoever, have been stated on record which could show that the action of the respondent-authorities in ignoring the claim of the petitioners is justifiable.
6.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow the writ petition in the light of Mangat Ram Nain and Randhir Kaur's cases (supra).
The petitioners will be granted limited relief and in the manner as afore-noticed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.