VK Bali, J (Oral) - Nizamuddin, who after discharge from Air Force, where he had served from 811964 to 3111979, was appointed as Sectional Officer (Electrical), now designated as Junior Engineer, on 2051980.
Pursuant to his appointment letter aforesaid, he joined the post aforesaid on 2251980.
His one increment with cumulative effect was stopped vide order dated 841985, Annexure P-2.
Order, Annexure P-2, reads thus :-  "Shri Nizamudin, Junior Engineer (Electrical) was served a charge sheet vide this office memo.
No. PRC/84/E-2/15525-28 dated 23101984 for getting the works of Veterinary Hospitals of Nawanshahr Sub Division done of lower standard and for making bogus entries of works in the concerned Measurement Book.
Its reply was not given by Junior Engineer.
As a result of which a show cause notice was issued to Junior Engineer vide this office memo.
No. PRC/84/E-2/3032 dated 1421985, its reply was also not given by Junior Engineer.
It is clear from this that the allegations levelled against Junior Engineer are proved to be correct and it has been decided that the proposed punishment be awarded to Shri Nizamudin, Junior Engineer (Electrical) and accordingly one increment with cumulative effect of the employee is stopped.
The order will commence immediately."
2.
In the close vicinity of the order aforesaid, a show cause notice under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 was issued to him by virtue of which action was proposed against him on the basis of allegations contained in Annexure P-3 (page 34 of paper book).
Same reads as follows :-  "Due to unsatisfactory work of Shri Nizamudin, Junior Engineer (Electrical), he was given a show cause notice vide this office memo.
No. PRC/85/E-2/14241 dated 1891985 for terminating his service and its reply has not been sent to this office by the employee when he was given full opportunity to explain his defence regarding it.
So keeping in view the above, as a result of which the service of Shri Nizamudin, Junior Engineer (Electrical) are hereby terminated.
This order will come into force at once."
3.
It appears from the records of the case that the petitioner did not respond to the show cause notice and, therefore, his services were terminated vide order dated 13121985, Annexure P-4.
It is this order, to which challenge has been confined during the course of arguments, even though it may be mentioned that the petitioner did challenge order, Annexure P-2, stopping his one increment with cumulative effect as also order, Annexure P-15, dated 481986 vide which, the petitioner was once again asked to quit on his re- employment on 481986.
It may be mentioned here that challenge to Annexure P-15 has been abandoned on the ground that if order, Annexure P-4 is set aside, there will arise no necessity to challenge order, Annexure P-15, as in that case the petitioner will be deemed to be in continuous service eversince the date order, Annexure P-4, was passed.
4.
The only contention that has been raised in challenging order, Annexure P-4, dated 13121985, is that the petitioner was proceeded for the same charge twice over whereas, on one occasion, he was punished with stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect, on the second occasion, he was dismissed from service and this will amount to double jeopardy.
Paragraph 27(g) of the writ petition, on the basis of which the contention aforesaid has been raised, reads thus :-  "27(g).
That the order, Annexure P-4, terminating the services of the petitioner w.e.f.
13121985 is also bad in another way that it amount to double jeopardy.
The petitioner's one increment has already been stopped with cumulative effect as per Annexure P-2 and he has been penalised on the same charges his services were illegally terminated on 13121985 as per Annexure P-4 when he has already been penalised as per order dated 841985 whereby his one increment has been stopped with cumulative effect."
5.
In response to notice of motion issued by this Court, respondents have filed reply.
Sub-para (g) of para 27 of the written statement reads as follows :-  "27(g).
Denied.
One annual grade increment of the petitioner was stopped with cumulative effect against the notice of cause shown upon the petitioner by respondent No. 2 vide letter No. PRC/84/E-2/3002 dated 14285 whereas the services of the petitioner were terminated against notice of cause shown upon the petitioner by respondent No. 2 vide letter No. PRC/84/E-2/3002 dated 14285 whereas the services of the petitioner were terminated against notice of cause shown upon him vide letter No. PRC/85/E-2/14241 dated 18985 to which the petitioner had not submitted any reply.
The termination of services of the petitioner was the result of his poor performance and to keep him in Government service more was not in the public interest."
6.
A perusal of sub-para (g) of para No. 27 of the written statement, reproduced above, shall make it absolutely clear that there is no dispute to the fact that the petitioner was, indeed, proceeded against over same charge twice over and punished, as fully detailed above.
During the course of arguments as well, it remained undisputed that the petitioner was proceeded against twice over on the same charge.
It requires to be mentioned here that when the matter came up for hearing on 532003, learned counsel representing the State was asked to have instructions in the matter by specifically putting to him that he should have information in case the petitioner might have not been proceeded against on account of some other charge as well.
Mr. AS Ladhar, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, who appeared on 532003 as well, on instructions given to him by Mr. Hans Raj, Senior Assistant, Department of Superintending Engineer, Panchayati Raj Circle, Punjab, Chandigarh, on the basis of records, informed that the petitioner was, indeed, charged twice over on the same charge.
7.
In view of the admitted position, as mentioned above, order, Annexure P-4, has necessarily to be quashed as certainly, it is the case of double jeopardy, the official having been punished twice over for the same charge.
Order, Annexure P-4, dated 13121985 is, thus, set aside.
8.
The question now that arises is as to what relief the petitioner should be granted.
Even though it is not a part of the pleadings but has remained undisputed during the course of arguments that the petitioner came to be employed in PGI, Sector 12, Chandigarh in June, 1988 on the post of Sectional Officer and is in employment till date.
Surely, for the period the petitioner has remained employed even though with different employer, he cannot get the pay of that period except for difference in pay, if at all, on the post that the petitioner was holding with the respondent department and with the PGI, Sector 12, Chandigarh.
It may be mentioned here that the petitioner is present in person in Court and confirms his appointment with effect from June, 1988 in the PGI, Chandigarh.
In the circumstances, as mentioned above, while quashing impugned order, Annexure P-4, dated 13121985, it is held that the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits and, in particular, the pay that he was employed in the PGI, Chandigarh, minus three months, for which he was re-employed, i.e., w.e.f.
551986 to 481986.
Over and above, the petitioner shall also be entitled to the difference of wages/emoluments that he might have been drawn had he continued to be in service of the respondent department upto the date of his superannuation, which age he, concededly, has already attained, from the salary/emoluments he has already received from the PGI, Chandigarh.
Let arrears in the manner fully indicated above by issuing a letter to the petitioner who in turn will correspond and give information of all emoluments that he has got from the PGI, which would be authenticated by some responsible officer from the PGI, be worked out and made over to him as expeditiously as possible.
Disposed of in the manner, fully detailed above, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.