VK Bali, J (Oral) - Dr (Mrs.) Bhalinder Kaur, Senior Lecturer in the Department of Paediatrics, Government Medical College, Patiala, through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order, Annexure P-3, dated 1491987 and in consequence of setting aside Annexure P-3 to give a direction to the State of Punjab through the Secretary to Government, Health Department and Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, the first and second respondents herein, to offer the post of Assistant Professor (Paediatrics) in Government Medical College, Patiala, to the petitioner.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner at the time when this petition was filed was serving as Senior Lecturer, Department of Paediatrics in the Government Medical College, Patiala since June, 1977.
It is the case of the petitioner that she qualifies for promotion as Assistant Professor (Paediatrics) on account of her seniority which stands at Sr. No. 1 amongst senior Lecturers.
A post of Assistant Professor in the Department of Paediatrics fell vacant on 1.10.1986 and the petitioner, being the seniormost amongst the senior Lecturers with excellent record and brilliant career, both in academics and service, was expecting promotion on merits.
When, however, she was not offered promotional post, she filed a couple of representations staking her claim to the promotional post on the dint of her seniority but found, to her dismay and disappointment, that person at Sr. No. 6 belonging to reserved category was promoted to the post under contention.
After giving her bio-data and comparing it with Dr. Karnail Singh, the third respondent herein, it has further been pleaded that the Punjab Medical Education Services Rules provide that 25% of the posts are reserved for direct recruit and 75% are to be filled by promotion.
Cadre of Assistant Professor consists of five posts, one post for direct recruits and four posts for promotees.
It is then pleaded that the post of Assistant Professor is Class-I post.
Mr. Chandi, learned counsel representing the petitioner, contends that the petitioner was the seniormost in general category and had to be given precedence over and above respondent No. 3.
It is significant to mention here that it is not disputed that out of four posts meant for the quota of promotees, one is, indeed, reserved for reserved category.
Mr. Chandi, however, on the basis of instructions dated 11.10.1974, which have neither been placed on record nor pleaded in the writ petition but have been shown during the course of arguments, contends that in a cadre of five posts, if a vacancy might occur, it is to be treated as unreserved.
With a view to appreciate the contention of learned counsel, as noted above, it will be appropriate to reproduce part of the instructions that have been relied upon by learned counsel.
Same read thus :-  "I am directed to refer to the instructions contained in Paragraph 2(4)(b) of Punjab Government circular letter No. 6872-WG-66/24917, dated the 23rd August, 1966, read with instructions contained in Paragraph 2(iii) of Punjab Government circular letter No. 3378-SW (ASO)-67/22108, dated the 5th August, 1967.
According to these instructions, in a cadre of less than five posts, if there be only one vacancy, it should be treated as `UNRESERVED', but if on this account a reserved point is treated as un-reserved, the reservation is to be carried forward to the subsequent two recruitment years.
In view, however, of the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Arti Ray Choudhary v. Union of India, it has now been decided that the reservation with respect to the solitary vacancy so unreserved and carried forward must be given effect to on the occasion next arising when a solitary vacancy occurs in the same cadre."
3.
From the perusal of the instructions, as extracted above, in considered view of this Court, it is evident that the same would not advance the cause of the petitioner at all.
First of all, present is not the cadre of less than five posts.
It is of five posts.
On that count, these instructions cannot govern the situation in hand.
Further, clear interpretation of the language employed in the instructions is that if it will be a cadre of less than five posts, say for example of three posts and out of three posts, only one is to be filled, that post would be treated as unreserved.
The instructions cannot be interpreted to mean that out of the cadre of three posts, if one may fall vacant and has to be filled, in that case also it shall be treated as unreserved.
The instructions relied upon by learned counsel do not cover the field at all.
No other point has been urged by learned counsel representing the petitioner.
Finding no merit in this petition, the same is dismissed, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.