Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - In this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India the petitioner prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction quashing the impugned orders Annexure P-4 and P-6 appended to this writ petition vide which the salary of the petitioner has been reduced and recovery ordered after retirement of the petitioner from Government service.
2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the respondents at some length.
The petitioner was working as Private Secretary and retired from the Punjab Civil Secretariat on his superannuation from that post, on 30111982.
Part of his gratuity was withheld and his request for release of the said amount was declined by the respondents.
Vide order dated 7.3.1986 the salary of the petitioner was reduced and in para 2 of the said order it was directed that the excess amount, if any, already drawn by him may be recovered in the suitable manner.
Vide order dated 1041987, the respondents passed the order revising pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity of the petitioner and reduced the same.
The petitioner has challenged these two orders, which were passed after his retirement.
In the written statement the stand of the respondents is that an audit objection was raised by the concerned authority vide para No. 1(d) 10/82-3/84.
After the said audit objections both the orders revising the pay as well as the pension and death-cum-gratuity were passed reducing the amounts payable therein and the action of the respondent- authority, thus, are in consonance with settled principles of law and it does not violate the principles of natural justice.
3.
From the above undisputed facts it is clear that the petitioner was getting higher salary which was fixed by the respondent in accordance with the rules and on the basis of the interpretation (formula) adopted by the respondents themselves.
The petitioner had made no misrepresentation and was not guilty of withholding any information from the respondent which led to the fixation of the pay during his tenure of employment.
After his retirement the respondent-State without even issuing any notice to the petitioner has reduced the salary, pension and death-cum-gratuity payable to the petitioner.
The impugned orders Annexures P-4 and P-6 apparently and admittedly put the petitioner to a great financial loss, particularly in regard to the period for which he has already rendered services in consonance with the terms and conditions governing his services.
Learned counsel appearing for the State fairly conceded that no notice was given to the petitioner and furthermore no misrepresentation was made by the petitioner in regard to fixation of his salary.
In other words, it was neither a case of falsehood on the part of the petitioner nor was there withholding of any material information by the petitioner.
Once the petitioner has retired from service and the respondent-State at its own has taken action in accordance with rules, to correct an error, that too after giving notice to the concerned employees, it cannot deal with the civil servant adversely and act to his detriment for no fault of his own.
It is neither a case of suggestio falsi, suppressio vari.
4.
At this stage it will be appropriate to make a reference to the judgement reported as Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 668, where the Supreme Court held as under :-  "Since the date of relaxation the appellant had been paid his salary on revised scale.
However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances the amount paid till date may not be recovered from the appellant."
5.
The action of the respondents is apparently violative of the maxim audi alteram partem and the respondents have failed to exercise their authority in consonance with the settled principles of law.
6.
For the reasons aforestated this writ petition is allowed and Annexures P-4 and P-6 dated 7386 and 10.4.87 respectively are hereby quashed.
The respondents are at liberty to pass the orders afresh in accordance with law and in the light of above observations of Hon'ble Apex Court.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Petition allowed.