Amar Dutt, J - The petitioner, who is disabled Junior Commissioned Officer, had joined the Army on 21.4.1967 and was released/retired after completion of 31 years of service on 3151998.
As per the opinion of the Classified Specialist & Cardiologist, Command Hospital, Southern Command, Pune, dated 3121997, the petitioner was found to be suffering from Primary Hypertension and was placed in medical category "CEE" (temporary).
At the time of the release of the petitioner, he was examined by Classified Specialist in Medicine in Military Hospital, Jodhpur, on 19.4.1998, and was placed in medical category "CEE" (permanent).
According to the report of the doctor, the disease was aggravated due to service conditions and in view of this opinion, the petitioner was brought before a Medical Board and upon being found declared in medical category "CEE" (permanent), he was invalided out of service.
The Board also recommended his case for grant of disability pension.
2.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the recommendation made by the Medical Board was turned down by the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad-respondent No. 2, without any legal authority.
The petitioner's appeal was also rejected on 2482000 and the petitioner, while moving this Court against the orders of respondent No. 2 rejecting his claim for disability pension, relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993, Ex-Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, decided on 14.1.1993, for asserting that disability pension cannot be rejected by the higher authority until and unless the individual is brought before a fresh Medical Board.
3.
Despite ample opportunities having been given to the respondents to file the written statement, the same has not been placed on record.
I have heard Mr. Munishwar Puri, on behalf of the petitioner and Mr. Gurpreet Singh, Advocate for Mr. Pardeep Bhandari, Additional Central Government Standing Counsel, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
4.
The petitioner relied upon the observations made in Wing Commander RL Sharma (Retd.)
v. Union of India and others, 1994(4) SCT 268 (P&H) : 1994(4) RSJ 107 and Munshi Ram v. Union of India and others, 1996(2) RSJ 705 for asserting that before rejecting the recommendations of the Release Medical Board for grant of disability pension, the respondents were obliged to have his medical condition opined by a Re-Survey Medical Board, which should have been convened for the purpose.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, appearing on behalf of counsel for the respondents, is not in a position to challenge this legal position, according to which, the petitioner would be entitled to be examined by the Re-Survey Medical Board for reassessment of the view taken by the Release Medical Board before the respondents could reject the recommendations thereof.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition has got to be allowed and a direction issued to the respondents to convene a Re-Survey Medical Board in the Command Hospital, Northern Command, Chandimandir, within a period of two months and after the receipt of the report, finalise the case of the petitioner for grant of disability pension within a period of one month therefrom.
Petition allowed.