VK Bali, J (Oral) - Annexures R3 and R4 are not on the record of the case.
The mention of these documents has, however, been made in paragraph 9A of the written statement to the amended writ petition.
Learned counsel representing the respondents, during the course of arguments, has handed over copies of Annexures R3 and R4 to the Court.
The same are taken on record.
2.
Bakshi Ram, Assistant (Academic Section) working with the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks suitable writ so as to quash promotion of Shri Shanti Lal and Shri Jag Mohan, respondents 2 and 3 herein, on the post of Head Assistant and in consequence of setting aside of their promotion, inter alia, claims promotion to the said post.
3.
Brief facts, on which the two connected reliefs are sought to rest, reveal that the petitioner was appointed on the post of Duplicating Machine Operator on 3.12.1965 and was promoted on the post of clerk on 9.12.1969.
He was promoted on the post of Assistant on 10101979.
It is the case of the petitioner that the next channel of promotion is Head Assistant and the Cadre of Head Assistants consists of seven posts.
One post of Head Assistant (Academic) was notified for promotion in the reserved category (P1) on 291985.
The petitioner applied for promotion belonging to reserve category on the post of Head Assistant.
Petitioner, the only candidate who had so applied, ought to have been appointed, but the respondent-department postponed the interview and on 531986, two posts for promotion of Head Assistants were notified (P3).
No person was, however, promoted and instead respondents 2 and 3, who belong to general category, were promoted to the post of Head Assistant.
4.
It appears that during the pendency of the writ petition, it came to the notice of the petitioner that out of seven posts, of which the cadre consisted (Head Assistant), four posts were converted to that of Deputy Superintendents, which necessitated an amendment of the writ petition by adding paragraph 9A.
It has, inter alia, been repleaded in the para aforesaid that the first respondent converted four posts of Head Assistants into the posts of Deputy Superintendents which were recommended by the Board of Governors in their meeting held on 1521985.
It is pertinent to mention that only Rs. 75/- per month was being given as special pay to the Deputy Superintendents and other grade of the Deputy Superintendents is equal to the post of Head Assistants and the petitioners, who is eligible to the post of Head Assistant, is also eligible for the post of Deputy Superintendent.
Out of these four posts of Deputy Superintendents, no post is reserved for the reserved category.
All four persons occupying the post of Deputy Superintendents belong to general category.
It is then pleaded that since the petitioner is also eligible for the post of Deputy Superintendent, he is entitled for the 4th post according to the roster point for reservation.
It is then pleaded that only conversion of Head Assistants into the post of Deputy Superintendents does not affect the roster point for reservation.
Since both the posts have the same grades and same work except Rs. 75/- as a special pay to the Deputy Superintendents, the petitioner is entitled for reserved post among these seven posts (three Head Assistants & four Deputy Superintendents).
It is then pleaded that, even for the sake of argument, if it is accepted that the roster will be applicable independently on the post of Deputy Superintendents, then also the petitioner is entitled for the 4th post to be filled up as Deputy Superintendent.
The petitioner is the only eligible candidate belonging to the reserved category for the post of Head Assistant/Deputy Superintendent.
5.
The pleadings as made in the petition, as briefly mentioned above, would manifest that if cadre of Head Assistants consists of only three posts, petitioner, obviously, cannot be promoted on the said post as it is only the 4th post which is reserved for the category to which petitioner belongs.
Admittedly, three persons working on the post of Head Assistants are senior to petitioner and these three posts had to be filled on the basis of seniority alone.
In the circumstances as mentioned above, all that needs to be examined is, as to whether petitioner can be promoted on the post of Deputy Superintendent on the basis of pleadings referred to in paragraph 9A of the amended writ petition.
Para 9A of the written statement to amended writ petition reads thus :  "9(a) Para No. 9A of the petition is correct to the extent that Respondent No. 1, with the approval of the Finance Committee made in its meeting on 26111985 and the Board of Governors of the College on 4.1.1986 converted the following 4 posts of Head Assistants and one post of PA to Principal into Deputy Superintendents, as per Annexures R-1 and R-2 attached.
Further it is made clear that Head Assistants are promoted (from) amongst Assistants/Jr.
Accountant/Sr.
Steno, Mess-Manager-cum-Accountant, Receptionist/Cashier/Accounts Clerk/Head Cashier on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness and other requirements as per the Non-Teaching Service Rules, 1984.
Then the seniormost persons amongst Personal Assistant/Head Assistants can be offered the posts of Deputy Superintendent which is a higher post than the Head Assistant and carries an additional special pay of Rs. 75/- P.M.
The petitioner cannot be eligible for the post of Deputy Superintendent directly as he was working as Assistant only in the pay scale of Rs. 525-1050.
Since the work of the Deputy Supdt.
and Head Assistant is not same as alleged by the petitioner, rather the Dy.
Supdt.
is on better footing being an Incharge of the Branch/Section.
Moreover, in the case of conversion of these posts into Dy.
Supdt.
and promotion of incumbents by name by the competent authority the roster does not apply.
That Mr. KD Chugh, Deputy Superintendent, respondent No. 4 is not occupying the 4th post as alleged.
In fact respondent No. 4 is the seniormost amongst all the Deputy Superintendents/Head Assistants as per Annexures R-3 and R-4 enclosed.
As these posts were converted into Deputy Superintendents with the approval of the Finance Committee/Board of Governors and offered to persons by name on the basis of seniority (in the shape of personal promotion) there was no necessity to advertise the posts and communicate to the petitioner.
Thus, the appointment of the respondent No. 4, who is the seniormost amongst all the Deputy Superintendents/Head Assistants is legal and within the ambit of rules.
The petitioner has thus intentionally misconceived the facts and twisted the same."
6.
In the considered view of this Court, the averments made in paragraph 9A of the amended written statement are a complete answer to the claim of the petitioner.
If only a seniormost person, amongst the Assistants and the Head Assistants, can be offered the post of Deputy Superintendent, which is the higher post than the Head Assistant and which also carries an additional special pay of Rs. 75/- pm, the petitioner, surely, is not even eligible for the said post.
Once the petitioner is not even eligible for promotion on the post of Deputy Superintendent, question of reserving the place for him in the roster point does not arise.
Finding no merit in this petition, the same is dismissed, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.