Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the order dated 272002, Annexure P/4 to the writ petition, vide which the prayer of the petitioner for enhancement of subsistence allowance during the suspension period has been declined.
Further, it is prayed that the respondents be directed to release the General Provident Fund of the petitioner to the extent of Rs. 2,40,000/-, as he badly needs the money to make his both ends meet.
3.
In view of the course, we propose to adopt in this case, it is not necessary for us to discuss the facts in greater detail.
Suffice it to say that the petitioner (under suspension) is Assistant Cashier working in the Haryana State Transport and is facing a departmental inquiry for alleged embezzlement of a sum of Rs. 27,15,515/-.
An F.I.R. No. 53 dated 1912001 under Section 409/379 of the Indian Penal Code at Police Station City, Rohtak, has also been registered against the petitioner in this regard.
4.
The petitioner was placed under suspension on 2312001.
According to the petitioner, after expiry of six months, the petitioner should be given enhanced subsistence allowance, as no delay in concluding the departmentally inquiry is attributable to him.
5.
On the other hand learned counsel for the State, contends that the petitioner has embezzled more than 27 lacs rupees and therefore, he cannot be granted enhanced subsistence allowance, because it would tantamount to premium to his mis-conduct.
He further states that the departmental inquiry would be concluded expeditiously.
6.
It is not disputed that the department has not taken any effective measure to complete the departmental inquiry despite the fact that the charge sheet was served upon the petitioner way back in the year 2002 and more than a year has elapsed since then.
7.
In view of the afore-stated facts, rules 72, Volume-I, Part-I, of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, as applicable to the State of Haryana and the judgment of this Court in the case of RK Garg v. HUDA, Panchkula Civil Writ Petition No. 6525 of 2001 decided on 11.72002, we dispose of this writ petition with the following directions :-  i.
We are prima facie of the view that the reason given in the impugned order for declining enhancement in the subsistence allowance, that the petitioner was involved in a case of embezzlement of more than Rs. 27 lacs, is not itself a valid ground, in terms of Rule 72 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
Thus, we direct that the petitioner shall make a representation to the respondents again in this regard, and the respondents shall re-consider the request of the petitioner within one month from the date a representation is made, and pass an appropriate order, particularly keeping in view the afore- said judgment as well as language of the rule.
ii) It is not disputed before us that the petitioner would be entitled to get advance from his G.P.F.
However, he will be entitled to the same subject to satisfying the conditions provided under the rules.
In any case, pendency of the criminal case by itself would not be a reason for denying advance G.P.F.
In fact, learned counsel for the State submitted the pendency of charge sheet would not be treated as a ground for non-payment of advance G.P.F.
This request of the petitioner shall also be considered and decided by the respondent within the same period.
iii.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and in order to put an end to this proceedings, we direct that the departmental inquiry shall be concluded by the concerned departmental authority as expeditiously as possible and preferably within six months.
The disciplinary authority - respondent.
No. 2 - Transport Commissioner shall submit progress report of the case and final report to the Advocate General, Haryana, who by means of a Civil Misc.
Application shall place the same on the record of this case, certainly within the period indicated above.
8.
Writ petition stands disposed of.
Compliance report shall be placed before the Court, as indicated above.
Petition allowed.