JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The present petition relates to the quantification of disability pension, payable to the petitioner.
2.
Learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has brought to the notice of this Court, the assessment of the Medical Board in respect of the petitioner, which has been depicted in the reply, filed on their behalf, the same is being extracted hereunder :-  "ID(i) Fracture Dislocation (Lt) Elbow, Attributable 40% Fracture Shaft radius (Lt) optdFracture Shaft Femur Rt.Compound Communited Fractureboth bones (Rt) leg (Lt.) LegCommunited Fracture bothbones (Lt) Leg  ID(ii) IHD (CABG and AVR), Neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service 30%  ID(iii) Stricture Urethera, Attributable 30%  (with composite assessment 100% for 2 years)" On the basis of the aforesaid assessment by the Medical Board, learned counsel acknowledges the fact that the disability pension has to be determined by accepting 70% disability insofar as the petitioner is concerned.
It is, however, submitted that the disability indicated at Sr. No. (ii) i.e. IHD (CABG and AVR) has been determined to be not attributable to, nor aggravated by military service.
As such, the aforesaid disability cannot be taken into consideration while determining the disability pension payable to the petitioner.
3.
I have considered the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties.
Learned counsel for the respondents has very fairly acknowledges the fact that the disability mentioned at Sr. No. (ii) is a heart disease and a number of judgments have been delivered by this Court wherein it has been concluded that the said disease is attributed and aggravated by military service.
In view of the above, even the instant disability to the extent of 30% mentioned at Sr. No. (ii) in the report of the Medical Board extracted above, has to be taken into consideration for determining the disability pension payable to the petitioner.
Thus viewed, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents that the disability of the petitioner be determined as if the petitioner was suffering from 40%+ 30%+ 30% = 100% disability.
Calculations of disability pension be effected at the earliest and the pension based on 100% disability be released to the petitioner within one month from today.
On account of delayed payment, the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 9 per cent annum from the date disability pension was due to him till it is paid.
Disability pension payable in future, shall obviously be subject to such variations (if any), as may be permissible under the rule.
Petition dismissed.