NK Sud, J. (Oral) - Petitioner Nos. 1, 2 and 3 joined service in the office of the Director Industries, Haryana, on 1611976, 641976 and 7.6.1976 respectively.
Initially their appointments were ad hoc, but they continued to be in service without any break and were ultimately regularised with effect from 111980.
Later on petitioner No. 2 was appointed as Steno-Typist on his qualifying the requisite test.
Vide order dated 30121982 (Annexure P-3), six persons including respondent No. 3 were provisionally promoted as Block Level Extension Officers (Ind).
Their promotions were regularised w.e.f.
2581983 vide office order placed at Annexure P-12.
2.
The grievance of the petitioners is that despite the fact that as per the policy decision of the respondent-department 50% of the vacancies for the post of Block Level Extension Officer were to be filled by promotion from amongst the Graduate Clerks/Steno Typists/Junior Scale Stenographers of the field offices and of the Headquarters, who possessed atleast six years experience, the petitioners were not considered for promotion.
Since respondent No. 3 was appointed against this quota, the orders of promotion (Annexures P-3 and P-12) have been challenged qua his promotion only.
3.
On notice of motion, written statement has been filed and the stand taken by the official respondents is that the petitioners could not be promoted as they did not possess the requisite experience of six years since their services were regularised with effect from 111980.
In other words, according to the respondents, the petitioners should have had six years experience in regular service.
4.
Mr. Kapil Sharma, learned Counsel for the petitioners, contends that the objection of the respondents is totally untenable.
He has placed on record a copy of the notification dated 1411983 (Annexure P-5), whereby sub-rule 2(A) in Rule 9 of the Punjab Industries Department (State Service Class III) Rules, 1956 (for short `Rules') has been inserted, which provides the mode of promotion to the post of Block Level Extension Officer (Industries) to the extent of 50% from amongst the Clerks/Steno-Typists and Junior Scale Stenographers of the field staff and Headquarter staff in the ratio of 3:2 respectively.
As per this rule, only such candidates who have graduation qualification from a recognised university and "have six years' experience as such" are eligible for promotion to the said post.
He further contends that for determining the qualifying experience, it makes no difference whether such experience has been gained as an ad hoc employee or as a regular employee.
In support of his contention, he relies on the judgment of this Court in Balbir Singh Yadav and ors. v. The State of Haryana and ors., 1984(1) SLR 466.
5.
I have heard learned Counsel for the parties and have gone through the relevant documents.
A perusal of clause (i) of sub-rule (2A) of Rule 9 of the Rules clearly shows taht for promotion to the post of Block Level Extension Officer, a candidate is required to have six years' experience.
It nowhere states that this experience should be in the regular service alone.
It is not denied by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that the three petitioners have six years' experience as Clerks/Steno-Typists/Junior Scale Stenographers if the period of their ad hoc service is taken into account.
6.
In this view of the matter, I find merit in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that they had the requisite qualifying experience for being considered for promotion to the post of Block Level Extension Officer (Industries) in the 50 per cent vacancies to be filled by promotion as per Rules.
Respondent No. 3 who has been promoted without consideration of the petitioners for promotion, has not filed any reply despite service.
7.
In view of the above and respectfully following the law laid down by this court in Baldev Singh Yadav's case (supra), the impugned orders (Annexures P-3 and P-12) in so far as they relate to respondent No. 3, are set aside.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner to the post of Block Level Extension Officer (Industries) against which respondent No. 3 had been promoted.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.