Swatanter Kumar, J - Ex-Constable Ravinder Singh was discharged from the service of Punjab Police under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules') vide order dated 7.11.1992.
Against this order of discharge, he preferred an appeal by way of representation before the Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar, who vide his order Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, dismissed the appeal by giving detailed reasons.
Aggrieved from the said order, the petitioner approached this Court praying for quashing of these two orders and his reinstatement into service with all consequential benefits.
2.
The facts relevant for determination of the controversy raised before us are that petitioner joined as a Constable in the Punjab Police on 30th November, 1989.
He states that he fell sick and remained ill and admitted to Primary Health Centre, Verka, from 9.9.1992 to 23.9.1992.
He, thus, was absent for 13 days 4 hours and 25 minutes.
This resulted in the passing of order of discharge as afore-referred.
3.
Challenge to the notice of discharge by the petitioner, inter alia, is on the following grounds :  (i) the impugned order is not an order of discharge simplicitor within the scope of Rule 1221 but is punitive in its content; (b) the impugned order of discharge has been passed in violation to the provisions of Rule 195 of the said Rules and, as such, is vitiated; and lastly, the order of discharge is arbitrary.
4.
Upon notice, the respondent-State filed the detailed reply wherein it was stated that the writ petition is not maintainable.
Under Rule 1221 a Constable can be discharged within a period of three years of his enrolment as member of the Punjab Police.
5.
According to the averments made in the written statement, he has been absenting himself continuously in an unauthorised manner and as such passing of the order of discharge was imperative and was in the interest of the organisation.
6.
In the order dated 7.11.1992 the Senior Superintendent of Police, Majitha has referred that the petitioner had been absent earlier on different occasions and even orders were passed with the direction that no salary be paid to him and, resultantly, discharged him from service.
It is a settled principle of law that the order of discharge simplicitor does not postulate responsibility on the part of the respondents to hold a departmental enquiry and to strictly adhere to the principles of nature justice.
The said rule undoubtedly vests a power in the competent authority to discharge a police constable within the prescribed period on the ground that he is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
The conclusion of the authority obviously must be based upon some facts and record.
It cannot be an order without any basis.
An order simplicitor certainly does not mean an order passed without reference to any record and material before the concerned authorities.
If it would be so, it ex facie would be an arbitrary order.
Reference to more facts which are even undisputed would not vitiate the order for non-compliance of the provisions.
7.
In support of the impugned order the respondents in their written statement while replying to paragraph 5 of the writ petition, have stated as under :  "That the contents of para No. 5 of the petition are denied.
The ruling mentioned in this para is not applicable.
The petitioner remained absent from duty during short period of service as mentioned below.
From To Total days 20.6.90 2.8.90, 44 days, leave without pay 11890 16890, 06 days, leave without pay 191190 22.11.90, 03 days, leave without pay 11.12.90 18.12.90, 07 days, leave without pay 8.10.91 14.10.91, 07 days, leave without pay 9992 23992, 14 days leave without pay In view of above record it cannot be said that the petitioner worked diligently and honestly.
His service was less than 3 years when the impugned order dated 7.11.92 was passed by the competent authority.
From this, it is proved that the petitioner was not taking interest in his service and duty and is not likely to become an efficient police officer.
The order dated 7.11.92 is legal, valid, operative and according to rules."
8.
No rejoinder to the counter was filed before us and, in fact, even during the course of arguments it was not disputed that averments made in the written statement are not correct.
Another feature of his case which we must notice is that though no appeal is permissible under Rule 1221, still the Inspector General of Police, Amritsar entertained the representation of the petitioner Annexure P-4 to the writ petition and passed an order Annexure P-2 rejecting the appeal.
Even in the memorandum of appeal it has not been disputed that he was unauthorisedly absent earlier and that he was not paid salary and appropriate order had been passed even on earlier occasion.
All that was stated in the appeal was that he was ill from 9.9.1992 to 23.9.1992 suffering from typhoid and as such he could not have attended to his duties.
In the order, the Inspector General of Police has specifically noticed that no medical treatment or appropriate medical record/certificate was produced from the Medical officer in support of his contention.
From the facts afore- noticed, it is clear that the petitioner was absent repeatedly from service that too without sanction of the competent authority.
In view of the undisputed facts, reliance by the learned counsel for the petitioner upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Jagdish Chander, 1995(2) SCT 42 (SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 108 is not of much help to the petitioner.
9.
Coming to the second argument raised on behalf of the petitioner that the respondents have not complied with the provisions of Rule 195 and as such the order is vitiated, again is a contention without any merit.
Provisions of Rule 195 are regulatory in nature and require the supervising authority to keep an effective control and report on the conduct of the trainee constables at intervals of six months and send it to the higher authorities.
The provision is primarily meant for internal management and supervisory control of the superior police officials over the trainee constables.
In the present case, the records of the petitioner speak volumes about his conduct as a trainee constable.
The concerned authorities were satisfied that the petitioner would not prove to be a good police officer and thus, discharged him.
This opinion of the concerned authorities, cannot be stated to be without any basis or foundation, much less that it could be called an arbitrary order.
10.
For the reasons afore-stated, we find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.