NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Petitioners were working as Excise Inspectors in the Excise and Taxation Department of the Punjab Government when they filed the present writ petition in the year 1987.
They are seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant them selection grade in the scale of Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 17111982 or from an earlier date as recommended by the Second Punjab Pay Commission the report of which has been accepted by the State Government.
2.
In response to the notice issued by this court, the respondents have filed their reply and have controverted the claim made by the petitioners.
There were in all 165 posts in the Department 20 per cent of which were to be placed in the selection grade.
The total number of selection grade posts comes to 33.
On acceptance of the recommendations of the Second Punjab Pay Commission the State Government issued instructions laying down the guidelines in the matter of the grant of selection grade.
Keeping in view those guidelines, the Department found 26 officers eligible and they were given the selection grade.
Others were not found eligible because some of them had not completed 15 years of service while others were junior in the seniority list.
According to the written statement, petitioners No. 1 to 4 had been given the selection grade with effect from the dates when the posts became available while other petitioners had to wait for their turn.
Before their turn could reach the recommendations of the Second Punjab Pay Commission lapsed on account of the recommendations made by the Third Punjab Pay Commission and, therefore, no other petitioner could be given the selection grade.
3.
I have heard the learned Assistant Advocate General and perused the record of the writ petition.
It is unfortunate that no one has appeared on behalf of the petitioners to assist the court.
Since petitioners No. 1 to 4 had been given the selection grade on the posts becoming available they can possibly have no grievance.
As regards other petitioners they would have got the same in due course but before their turn could reach the recommendations made by the Second Punjab Pay Commission lapsed.
In this view of the matter, no fault can be found with the action of the respondents in not granting selection grade to the remaining petitioners.
There is, thus, no merit in the writ petition and the same stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.