NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Petitioners claim to be the employees of M/s Perfect Pac Limited (Polymer Unit), Faridabad.
The labour Union operating in the premises served a general demand notice on 10.12.1999 in regard to the conditions of service of its members.
According to the allegations made by the petitioners, this annoyed the management and, therefore, the services of the petitioners were terminated in January, 2000.
Their termination gave rise to an industrial dispute for which separate demand notices under section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act) were served.
On receipt of these demand notices, conciliation proceedings were taken which proved abortive.
On receipt of the failure report, the State Government has declined to refer the dispute for adjudication on the ground that it has been found during the conciliation proceedings that the petitioners were the employees of contractor and that they were not in the employment of the management.
The petitioners, however, assert that they are the employees of the management.
Their grievance is that instead of referring this dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court or to an Industrial Tribunal under section 10(1) of the Act the State Government has itself adjudicated thereon by holding them to be the employees of the contractor and declined to refer the same.
In the reply filed by the management, it is asserted that the petitioners had never been employed by the management and that they were the employees of a contractor namely M/s Luxmi Enterprises.
2.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused their pleadings.
3.
The primary dispute between the workers on one hand and the management on the other is whether the former were employees of the management.
Divergent stands have been taken by the parties and, as already observed, the petitioners are asserting that they are the employees of the management whereas this plea is being controverted by the management.
This is the real dispute between the parties which, in our opinion, the State Government itself has adjudicated upon when it declined to refer the dispute under section 10(1) of the Act.
It is well settled that the power to adjudicate disputes arising between the workmen and the management is with the Labour Court and that the State Government in such a situation cannot decline the reference.
It is equally well settled that while exercising its powers under section 10(1) of the Act the State Government cannot adjudicate the lis between the parties and must leave it to the adjudicating authority to do so.
We are clearly to the view that by declining the reference the State Government has exceeded its jurisdiction and entered into the field which is exclusively meant for the adjudicating authorities under the Act.
In this view of the matter, the impugned orders Annexure P-4 to P-20 with the writ petition cannot be sustained.
4.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned orders quashed and the matter is remanded to the State Government to reconsider the same and decide the demand notices afresh in accordance with the law.
The needful must be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.