SS Saron, J - The petitioners are Class IV employees working in the Punjab State Warehousing Corporation (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation').
They are in service of the Corporation for more than 15 years.
Under the conditions of service, the petitioners were being paid Rs. 350/- per month as conveyance allowances prior to June 22, 2001.
On November 23, 2001, the Corporation while confirming the action taken of its Chairman regarding entitlement of petrol expenses of the employees of the Corporation in lieu of conveyance allowance, decided to follow pattern of Markfed w.e.f.
June 22, 2001 and granted the following benefits as per scales given to the employees of the Corporation.
The same reads as under :-  "EMPLOYEES HOLDING THE CHARGE  Sr. No.
Basic Pay Particulars Entitlement for Liters of petrol PM 1.
Employees drawing basic pay of Rs. 10025/- and above.
CarScooter/MotorCycle Moped Public Conveyance 67-1/2 Ltrs 25-1/2 21 Ltrs.
13/1/2 Ltrs.
2.
Employees drawing basic pay below Rs. 10025/- Scooter/MotorCycle Moped Public Conveyance 25-1/2 Ltrs.
21 Ltrs.
13/1/2 Ltrs.
EMPLOYEES NOT HOLDING CHARGE.
+ + + Sr. No.
Basic Pay Particulars Entitlement for Liters of petrol PM 1.
Employees drawing basic pay of Rs. 10025/- and above.
CarScooter/MotorCycle Moped Public Conveyance 45 Ltrs 17 14 Ltrs.
09 Ltrs.
2.
Employees drawing basic pay below Rs. 10025/- Scooter/MotorCycle Moped Public Conveyance 17 Ltrs.
14 Ltrs.
9 Ltrs.
Chandigarh dated, Sd/- The 22nd November, 2001 Arun Goel, IAS, Managing Director."
2.
On May 15, 2002, the Chief Secretary to the Government of Punjab, issued a letter to various financial institutions requiring the Corporation to bring its employees for the purpose of pay scales, allowances and prerequisites at par with the government employees.
Vide letter dated June 18, 2002, the Government asked the Corporations to withdraw such allowances.
The Corporation wrote back to the Government that on business principle, it was more prudent for the Corporation to continue with the benefit.
Resultantly, the Finance Department vide its letter dated July 30, 2002 directed the Corporation to withdraw the petrol facility extended to its employees.
The Corporation vide its letter dated August 01, 2002 Annexure P-6 to the writ petition withdrew the said facility giving rise to the filing of the present petition.
3.
Notice to show cause why petition be not admitted was issued by a Bench of this Court on August 23, 2002.
Despite various opportunities, no written statement was filed either on behalf of the Government or by the Corporation.
Consequently, we proceeded to hear the matter on merits.
Arguments in this case were concluded on March 27, 2003 and this case was reserved for judgment.
4.
The short controversy that falls for consideration of this Court in the present writ petition is "whether the petitioners have a legal right to continue to receive petrol expenses/conveyance allowances prior to the issuance of the impugned order and if so, whether the withdrawal of the said benefit is bad by any statutory or executive sanction ?"
5.
Respondent-Corporation is creation of a Statute i.e. the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as `the Principal Act'), under Section 18 of the said Act, the State Government shall establish, by a notification, a State Warehousing Corporation.
In exercise of the said provision, the Punjab State Warehousing Corporations was established.
Under Section 23 of the Principal Act, a State Warehousing Corporation may appoint such officer and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
Furthermore, every employee of the Corporation shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.
Under Section 42 of the Act, a Warehousing Corporation with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette make regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the rules framed thereunder to provide for all such matters.
In exercise of its powers vested in the State Warehousing Corporation, regulations were enacted to call Punjab State Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1960.
They were framed in exercise of powers conferred by Section 34 of the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956 and subsequently made applicable under the provisions of that Act controlling the conditions of service of employees.
Employee of the Corporation has been defined in Section 3(d) of the said Regulations and it includes a whole time or part time person in service of the Board, but not a person on contract or daily wages.
Relevant provision of the said Regulations for the purpose of deciding the present petition is Regulation 14 which reads as under :-  "14.
Dearness and other allowances - Unless otherwise stipulated in the terms and conditions of employment, an employee shall be entitled to dearness and other allowance at rates admissible to employees of corresponding category of the Punjab State Government".
A bare reading of the above provision clearly indicates that the employees of the Corporation shall be entitled to dearness and other allowance admissible to employees of the corresponding category of the Punjab State Government.
Only exception to the general rule is a stipulation to the contrary in terms and conditions of employment.
Terms and conditions of these Regulations do not make out any exception in favour of the petitioners, nor it is a case of the petitioners that their initial appointment was made with such stipulation.
Grant of conveyance allowance and petrol expenses is a concession which have been granted by the Board.
The Board in its wisdom has withdrawn said concession.
Action of the Board in making such withdrawal is in conformity with Regulations 14 (supra).
Action of the Corporation being in conformity with the statutory Regulations cannot be faulted with, the Corporation obviously cannot be directed to plot its own regulations and continue to grant benefit to its employees contrary to the framed Regulations.
It is also not a case of the petitioners that Regulations have ever been amended or altered which could form a valid basis for grant of such relief.
The Government have written to the Corporation the decision of the Cabinet Sub Committee on Fiscal Management to withdraw such prerequisites.
The Corporation had replied to the said letter favouring grant of benefit to its employees.
However, the Government reiterated its earlier stand finally and the Government called upon the Corporation to withdraw the said benefit.
Vide order dated August 01, 2002 Annexure P-6 to the writ petition, the benefit was withdrawn.
The order reads as under :-  "In continuation of the orders issued under Endst No. PWC/Admn/E-91/17069-223, dated 2472002, the facility of petrol expenses extended to remaining categories of employees of the Corporation (in the field), is hereby withdrawn with effect from Ist August, 2002 bringing the employees of the Corporation at par with State Govt. employees in compliance with instructions of the State Government issued vide DO No. DFREI-02/650, dated 1052002.
For undertaking local journeys, the employees of the Corporation shall draw TA/DA on monthly basis as per State Government's instructions/rules on the subject.
Chandigarh, dated., ASHOK KUMAR GOEL, IAS The Ist August, 2002, MANAGING DIRECTOR".
6.
The above order of the Corporation is in conformity with Regulations 14, converse thereof is that claim of the petitioners for grant of petrol expenses/conveyance allowance is not supported by any rules or regulations.
7.
Another contention raised on behalf of the petitioners before us in the present petition is that vide the impugned order as well as in terms of circular earlier issued by the Government, purpose was to place employees of the Corporation at par with the Government employees.
In other words, allowances, perquisities and scales between the State employees and Corporation employees was intended to be at par.
It is argued that despite such intention, there is no parity in perquisities and allowances between Government employees on one hand and the Corporation on the other.
Strictly referring to the present case, the learned counsel states that the conveyance allowances/petrol expenses has been withdrawn, but the Government employees are being granted bus passes for commuting between offices and their residences.
This argument was not denied at the bar neither by the learned counsel appearing for the Corporation nor by the learned counsel appearing for the Government.
8.
In the circumstances afore-noted, though we are declining to interfere in the present writ petition but without hesitation, we must notice that the Board or the Corporation should re-consider the entire matter and ensure parity between the Government and State employees in consonance with Regulation 14 of the Regulations.
It will be unfair and unjust that the benefits granted to the employees of the Corporation are withdrawn but they are not placed at parity with the State employees in regard to the benefits available to such Government employees.
A mandate of Regulation 14 necessarily casts duty on the Board to consider circular of the Government in light of Regulation 14 and endeavour its best to achieve larger interest of the administration of the Corporation.
We do not consider it necessary to go in the question whether Government is competent to issue directive to the Corporation in regard to the conditions of service of its employees and whether it is a matter of general policy of the Corporation.
9.
For the reasons aforestated, we dismiss this writ petition while leaving the parties to bear their own costs and with a specific direction that the Board shall consider the matter in the light of the observations made in this judgment, as expeditiously as, possible.
Petition dismissed.