RL Anand, J - The petitioners have filed the present writ petition against the respondents and it has been prayed by them that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents to permit them to continue to discharge their duties against the post of Lecturers held by them, in accordance with law, laid down by the Division Bench of this Court in Shamsher Singh's case reported as 1998(4) RSJ 708.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that they are working as Lecturers in respondent-Ploytechnic.
These posts are aided one.
Their grievance is that they are being kept on contract basis.
Notional breaks are given in their service.
They are paid their salary on fixed contractual rates and this action of the respondents is against the ratio of the judgment of Shamsher Singh's case (supra).
It was also pleaded by the petitioners that respondents No. 3 and 4 gave an advertisement dated 1841997 in which some posts of Lecturers including one post of Lecturer in Electronics and Communication Engineering, were advertised.
The petitioner No. 1 applied in response to this advertisement and he was given the appointment letter dated 20111997 whereas he actually joined his duty as Lecturer in Electronics and Communication Engineering on 21101997.
As per the letter of appointment, it was stipulated that the contract was valid for 89 days or till a regular person joins.
The grievance of the petitioner is that their service should not be terminated mid-way till the regular selectees are appointed against the post held by them.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed reply and denied the allegations.
It was pleaded at the first instance by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents No. 3 and 4 that so far as the writ of petitioner No. 1 Shri Pardeep Kumar is concerned it may be dismissed as infructuous keeping in view the fact that he has already left the job.
However, petitioners No. 2, 3 and 4 are in service but vis-a-vis petitioner No. 4 Shri Jasvinder Singh, the Government has not given the approval of his appointment on contract basis nor the Government is releasing any aid against the post held by Jasvinder Singh.
4.
In Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1998(4) RSJ 708, which was a case of contractual appointment it was observed by the Division Bench that action of the respondents to appoint the petitioners on contractual basis at a consolidated salary for fixed terms, in spite of the availability of the vacant posts carrying regular pay scales, is arbitrary, oppressive, unreasonable and thus such appointments are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
It is also stated here that against the judgment of Shamsher Singh (supra) SLP filed by the State has also been dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, of course an application for the review is pending.
Be that as it may, the judgment of Shamsher Singh's case holds the field for the present.
6.
The ratio of Shamsher Singh's case (supra) is squarely applicable to the facts in hand.
It is proved on the record that respondents No. 3 and 4 have given the advertisement for the various posts including the posts held by the petitioners and, therefore, to provide the petitioners with contractual appointments in the face of regular vacancy, will be an arbitrary act.
Therefore, we quash the action of the respondent authorities when they offered contractual employment to the petitioners on ad hoc basis and declare that petitioners will be entitled to continue with their posts till they are replaced by the regular selectees.
We further give the declaration in favour of the petitioners No. 2, 3 and 4 that they will be entitled to the regular pay scales from the date they joined the service of respondents No. 3 and 4.
We further give the directions to respondent No. 1 to give the formal approval with regard to petitioner No. 4 Shri Jasvinder Singh as he has been working against the post.
However, writ petition qua petitioner No. 1 Shri Pardeep Kumar is dismissed as infructuous.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.