L Narasimha Reddy, J - This Writ Petition relates to the appointment of 3rd Respondent to the post of Professor in Economics in the Kakatiya University.
The University issued an advertisement dated 16-1-1992 inviting applications from eligible candidates for the purpose of selecting and appointing a professor in Economics, along with certain other posts of professors.
The Petitioner was appointed as a lecturer in the same University in March, 1981.
She had undertaken research work in the Jawaharlal Nehru University at New Delhi and submitted thesis on Tribal Integration in a Developing Economy.
Thereafter she was promoted as Reader in Economics.
At the relevant point of time she was the Head of the Economics Department.
2.
Along with the Petitioner 5 other candidates have also applied for the post, one of them being the 3rd Respondent.
He was appointed as lecturer in the University in January, 1981 and was promoted as Reader along with the Petitioner in July, 1984.
He did his PhD with the specialisation in Rural Development and Political Economy.
While the Petitioner had 8 years of research experience and published 7 research papers, the 3rd Respondent had 11 years of research experience and 26 publications to his credit.
The Selection Committee, on an appreciation of the relative merits of the applicants has selected the 3rd Respondent to the post and consequently through orders dated 13-8-1992. the 3rd Respondent came to be appointed as professor.
3.
The petitioner contends that the appointment of 3rd Respondent is contrary to the stipulations in the advertisement itself and that he does not hold the essential qualifications.
Another ground is raised to the effect that the 3rd Respondent was a student under the 2nd Respondent, who in turn headed the Selection Committee as Vice Chancellor of the University and there is every likelihood of the 2nd Respondent being biased in favour of the 3rd Respondent.
4.
The 1st Respondent filed counter-affidavit.
The qualifications held by the Petitioner on the one hand and the 3rd Respondent on the other have been furnished in the counter-affidavit.
It is also stated that having regard to the relative merits of the candidates before it, the Selection Committee found that the 3rd Respondent is more meritorious and accordingly selected him.
5.
Heard Sri S Laxma Reddy, learned Counsel for the Petitioner and Sri B.N.R.
learned standing counsel for the 1st Respondent.
6.
Though notice is served upon the Respondents 2 and 3, they did not choose to respond to the same.
The contention raised by Sri S Laxma Reddy, learned counsel for the Petitioner is that in the advertisement the 1st Respondent has categorically stated that the candidate should have specialisation in Rural and Tribal Development in PhD, and the 3rd Respondent does not hold such a qualification.
According to him since, the petitioner holds such a qualification she ought to have been selected and appointed and the Selection of the 3rd Respondent was not proper.
7.
It is true that in the advertisement a condition is stipulated as to the specialisation in the following manner.
Specialisations required in Economics : Rural and Tribal reflected in the Development Ph.D/M.Phil/PG degrees and other Published work.
8.
There is absolutely no controversy as to the fulfilment of the other qualifications by the Petitioner as well as the 3rd Respondent.
The question involved in this Writ Petition depends on the meaning to be given to the clause referred to above.
What is required under the clause is, the specialisation as reflected in the Research or PG degree and other published work.
If such a specialisation is to be ascertained with reference to any degree conferred on successful completion of stipulated syllabus, the same does not present any problem.
However, in this case the specialisation is required to be reflected in the research work.
Whether a particular research work reflects the required specialisation is a matter, which should squarely be left to the assessment by the Selection Committee.
If one goes by the nomenclature of the thesis submitted by the Petitioner on the one hand and the 3rd Respondent on the other, none of them fulfils the specialisation referred to in the advertisement.
While the thesis of the 2nd Respondent laid stress on the rural aspect, that of the Petitioner is tribal specific.
The question as to whether one or the other of these theses have reflected the specialisation in a perfect and balanced manner, cannot be the subject-matter of adjudication in the Writ Petition.
It is for the Selection Committee to take stock of the entire matter and to arrive at a conclusion.
Such a conclusion, unless challenged on the grounds of bias or tainted with illegality cannot be interfered in Writ Petitions.
Therefore, the contention of the Petitioner in this regard cannot be accepted.
9.
It is also alleged in the affidavit that the 2nd Respondent was biased in favour of 3rd Respondent.
The only ground in support of this contention is that the 3rd Respondent was a student of the 2nd Respondent.
It should not be forgotten that by the time the Selections took place, the Petitioner as well as the 3rd Respondent were associated with the university for about 11 years.
The 2nd Respondent is alleged to have been part of the Department before his having been appointed as Vice-Chancellor.
In the circumstances, where the Petitioner as well as the 3rd Respondent worked in association with the 2nd Respondent for a period of 11 years, the fact that the 3rd Respondent happened to be a student of the 2nd Respondent cannot at all be a factor to assume bias.
Further, in every selection, the members of the Selection Committee are bound to have some of their past students as candidates.
If the allegation is that some of the applicants are the students of members of the Selection Committee and nothing more, the same cannot persuade the Court to assume the existence of any bias.
Therefore, this contention of the Petitioner also cannot be accepted.
10.
The Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.