VK Bali, J (Oral) - Union of India through Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Defence and others have filed the present Regular Second Appeal which emanates from the judgment and decree passed by the Subordinate Court, dated January 3, 1994, decreeing the suit of the plaintiff-respondent for declaration to the effect that he be promoted to the rank of Subedar with retrospective benefits, i.e., pensionary and other allied benefits while taking into consideration the length of service and which decree has since been confirmed in appeal by learned Additional District Judge vide his order dated May 7, 1996.
2.
Brief facts giving rise to this appeal, as contained in the pleadings of the parties, show that Ex.Nb/Sub.
Tarsem Singh was enrolled in Indian Army on December 7, 1963 and was transferred to Pension Establishment on December 31, 1989 after serving Armed Forces for a continuous period of 26 years and 25 days without any blemish on record.
He was, however, denied promotion to the rank of Subedar and aggrieved by the same he challenged the order dated January 16, 1991 on that behalf by way of suit giving rise to the present appeal.
In the impugned order, it was stated that the plaintiff was not promoted to the rank of Subedar as he did not meet the ACR criteria for promotion to the rank of Subedar but the plaintiff challenged the order aforesaid saying that this act of the defendants is wholly illegal inasmuch as no ACR containing adverse remarks was ever communicated to him and further that he did not fulfill the criteria required for the promotion to the post of Subedar.
The appellant Union of India contested the cause of the plaintiff and inter-alia averred that on completion of service, the plaintiff was discharged and struck off from regimental strength with effect from January 1, 1990.
As per the Annual Confidential Report criteria laid down for promotion to the rank of Subedar, Naib Subedar should have at least three high average reports out of last five annual confidential reports.
Inasmuch as the plaintiff was not meeting the Annual Confidential Report criteria for promotion to the rank of Subedar as laid down by Army headquarters letter dated December 18, 1985, he was not promoted to that rank.
The Initiating and Reviewing Officers found the plaintiff just average during his yearly performance from 1984 to 1985.
It is further averred that it was not necessary to write any adverse remarks nor there was any requirement of communicating the same to the plaintiff.
The plaintiff was indeed considered for promotion as per his seniority during 1987, 1988 and 1989 but he was found ineligible for promotion to the rank of Subedar, as he was not fulfilling the Annual Confidential Report criteria.
On the pleadings of the parties, learned trial Court framed the following four issues :-  "1.
Whether notice under Section 80 Cr.PC served by the plaintiff upon the defendants before the filing of the suit is invalid ?
OPD  2.
Whether the civil court has got no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD  3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to seek the relief of declaration as prayed for ?
OPP  4.
Relief."
Trial resulted into judgment and decree in favour of the plaintiff which, as mentioned above, has since been confirmed in an appeal that was filed by the Union of India before learned first Appellant Court.
3.
Mr. Rathee, learned counsel representing the appellants, vehemently contends that assertion of the appellants that the plaintiff does not fulfil the Annual Confidential Report criteria for promotion to the post of Subedar has since been admitted and so found in favour of the appellants but the order challenged in the suit has been set aside on the only ground that average reports containing confidential remarks of the plaintiff were not communicated to him and as such cannot be taken into consideration in considering his case for promotion to the post of Subedar.
4.
The reading of the judgment of learned first Appellate Court would clearly show that the contention of Mr. Rathee that the plaintiff did not fulfil the criteria for promotion to the post of Subedar is correct.
The promotion policy in respect of JCOs and NCOs was stipulated in the Army Headquarter's letter of even number dated December 20, 1979.
Subsequently, relaxations in the ACR criteria were given upto December 31, 1985 vide para No. 2 of Headquarter's letter of even number dated August 22, 1985.
A review of ACR criteria was carried out and the revised standards as enunciated in para No. 3 below was to operate from January 1, 1986 to December 31, 1987.
It was not disputed that the criteria, which is being reproduced below, was applicable in the case of the plaintiff :-  "3(c) For promotion to the rank of Ris/Sub :  (i) Three out of the last five reports rendered on an individual should be ` High Average' out of which at least one should be on regimental duty or as an instructor in any army school of instruction in the rank of Nb Ris/Nb Sub.
(ii) No report should be lower than `Average' in the last three years.
(iii) Should have been recommended for promotion the last three reports."
5.
Learned first Appellate Court on the basis of criteria, as mentioned above, proceeded to observe as follows :-  "A bare reading of the aforesaid letters makes it clear that three out of last five reports rendered on individual should be high average out of which at least one should be regimental duty or as an instructor in any Army School.
Copies of the Annual Confidential Reports of the respondents are Ex. D3 to D7.
The confidential reports for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986 are average whereas for the years 1987 and 1988, these are high average.
His confidential reports for the above five years were considered by the appellant and he was ignored from promotion simply because three out of five reports were average whereas according to the promotion criteria referred to above his three ACRs should have been high average.
So it is clear that the promotion of the plaintiff/respondent has been withheld due to the aforesaid average confidential reports for three years which were never conveyed to him."
6.
After observing, as extracted above, learned Appellate Court proceeded to hold in view of some judicial precedents that the average reports, which were not communicated to the plaintiff, could not be taken into consideration while considering the case of the plaintiff for promotion to the post of Subedar.
First Appellate Court relied upon a judgment of Supreme Court in UP Jal Nigam and others v. Prabhat Chandra Jain and others, 1996(2) SCT 227 (SC) : 1996(1) RSJ 761.
Following observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court were taken into consideration by the first Appellate Court :-  "Confidential reports - Down grading entries - If the grade entry is of going a step down, like falling from `Very Good' and `Good' that may not ordinarily be an adverse entry since both are a positive grading - All what is required by the Authority recording confidential in the situation is to record reasons for such down grading on the personal life of the officer concerned and inform him of the change in the form of an advice."
7.
Learned first Appellate Court then relied upon judgments in State of Haryana v. PC Wadhwa, IPS, and another, 1950-88 Recent Services Judgments 540 and Dharambeer Singh v. Union of India and others, 1991(3) Recent Services Judgments 143, wherein it was held that adverse remarks or an overall assessment as `below average' in the ACR of an employee must be communicated to him in writing.
So was the finding of first appellate Court as well.
In view of this Court none of the judicial precedents relied upon by learned first Appellate Court is applicable to the facts of this case.
In UP Jal Nigam's case (supra) all that has been held is that if confidential report is down graded, reasons must be recorded, whereas in two judicial precedents, as referred to above, what has been held is that an entry which is below average should be communicated to the concerned employee.
In the present case, plaintiff had three average reports.
These reports are not adverse.
Concededly as well, no adverse remarks have been contained therein.
What kind of confidential reports should be communicated to a non-commissioned Officer is governed by statutory instructions, which are known as AMC ROI 5/90, which provide that adverse remarks/weak points in the Annual Confidential Report will invariably be communicated to the ratee, irrespective of the grading awarded or `recommended/not recommended'.
Paras 16 and 17 of the instructions aforesaid run thus :-  "16.
In the case of NCOs graded `Average', discretion to recommend them for promotion or otherwise should be left to the IO/RO and they need not justify the non-recommendations.
17.
In the event of an individual's performance being adjudged `below average it is obligatory on the part of the IO and the RO that periodical warnings are administered to him in writing and a record of such warnings/performance counseling is kept, before grading the individual below average' in the ACR.
However, adverse remarks/weak points in the ACR, irrespective of the grading awarded or `R/NR' will invariably be communicated to the ratee, his signature obtained and communication posted/recorded in the ACR."
8.
Reading of paras 16 and 17 of the instructions, extracted above, would manifest that there was no requirement of communicating average reports to the plaintiff.
In somewhat similar circumstances, a Division Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court in Satpal Singh v. Union of India, 2000(4) SLR 251, has held "a reference to para 16 of these instructions, which provides that in the case of NCOs graded "Average", discretion to recommend them for promotion or otherwise should be left to the IO/RO and they need not justify the non- recommendations, makes it further clear that the remarks "not recommended" in the Annual Confidential Report graded `Average' remarks.
Had it been so, it would have been made obligatory on the part of the IO/RO to give a periodical warning in writing and keep record of such warning/performance counseling, as required in the case of adverse remarks, as per para 17 of the instructions.
If the submission made on behalf of the petitioner is accepted and the remarks "not recommended" are held as adverse remarks, it will be in violation of the very provision contained in para 17 of the instructions.
Hence, we reject this submission and hold that the remarks "not recommended" for promotion contained in the Annual Confidential Report for the year 1992 are not adverse remarks, liable to be communicated to the petitioner and the respondents have rightly considered the said Annual Confidential Report grading the petitioner as `average' along with other Annual Confidential Reports for the period 1990 to 1996 to hold him ineligible and superseded him for promotion to the post of Naib Subedar against the vacancy on 1111995."
The case in hand is on better footing inasmuch as complaint is only of non-communication of everage reports to the plaintiff, whereas in the cited case even non-recommendation so recorded in the Annual confidential Report was not considered necessary to be communicated to the concerned person.
In view of the discussion made above, this appeal is allowed.
Judgment and decree passed by the trial Court and confirmed by first Appellate Court is set aside.
The suit of the plaintiff is dismissed.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.