Viney Mittal, J - The present application has been filed by the petitioner for fixing the case at an early actual date on the ground that the controversy in the case is covered by a judgment of the Division Bench rendered in CWP No. 14967 of 1997 decided on April 11, 1998, titled Ved Pal Singh and another v. State of Haryana and others.
A copy of the aforesaid judgment has been appended as Annexure A1.
2.
I have heard Shri J.V.
Yadav, the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as Shri Amol Rattan, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana for the respondents.
3.
In my considered opinion, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, I feel it proper that the main case itself be decided at this stage.
Therefore, with the consent of the parties, I take the main case today itself for decision.
4.
The petitioner Dharam Singh, who is working as a Canal Patwari in the office of Executive Engineer, Mohindergarh Canal Water Supply Division No. 1, Charkhi Dadri, District Bhiwani has approached this Court through the present petition filed under Articles 226, 227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing of the order dated November 2, 1993 (Annexure P.3) whereby Azad Singh, respondent No. 6 has been promoted as Assistant Revenue Clerk.
A further prayer has been made to issue a writ of mandamus directing the official respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as Assistant Revenue Clerk against a vacancy which was available on May 1, 1991 ie prior to the coming into force of the new rules.
5.
Certain facts may be noticed.
The petitioner was appointed as a Canal Patwari on ad hoc basis with effect from August 8, 1980.
The services of the petitioner were regularised.
The service conditions of the Canal Patwaris as well and their promotions are covered by the rules known as the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Revenue Clerks State Service Class-III Rules, 1956 (hereinafter called, `the Rules').
6.
In 1992, the seniority list was circulated.
The petitioner was shown at Serial No. 1 being the senior-most Patwari in the Circle.
A copy of the seniority list has been appended as Annexures P-1 with the petition.
As per the rules, the appointment to the post of Assistant Revenue Clerks was to be made in the ratio of 60:40 ie 60% recruitments were to be made directly from the open market whereas 40% appointments were to be made from the departmental candidates.
7.
The petitioner claims that he was the senior-most candidate from the departmental candidates and, therefore, was entitled to be promoted as Assistant Revenue Clerk.
However, the official respondents ignored the claim of the petitioner and instead promoted one Azad Singh, respondent No. 6 vide order dated August 31, 1992 as Assistant Revenue Clerk.
The petitioner claims that the aforesaid Azad Singh was junior to the petitioner.
Later on, vide order dated November 2, 1993 the aforesaid respondent Azad Singh was given a regular promotion with effect from May 1, 1991.
The petitioner felt aggrieved and made repeated representations to the department to grant him appointment from the date his junior was promoted.
A legal notice was also served.
When no action was taken, the petitioner has approached this court through the present petition.
8.
Notice of the writ petition was issued.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 5.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
The stand taken by the respondents to contest the claim of the petitioner is that the petitioner did not fulfil one of the eligibility conditions on the date when respondent No. 6 Azad Singh has been given deemed date of promotion to the post of Assistant Revenue Clerk.
It is stated that the upper age limit for departmental candidates was 35 years which was relaxable upto 40 years.
The respondents have stated that even after the aforesaid relaxation, the petitioner did not remain eligible for promotion, Since he has already crossed 40 years on May 1, 1991.
On these grounds, the promotion given to Azad Singh, respondent No. 6 who admittedly was junior to the petitioner has been sought to be justified.
9.
The controversy in the present case stands duly covered by the judgment rendered by a Division Bench in Ved Pal Singh's case (supra).
10.
In Ved Pal Singh's case (supra), the Division Bench while dealing with the aforesaid Rules of 1956 had held that there was no age limit provided for persons to be considered for promotion.
It was further held by the Division Bench that in fact the aforesaid upper age limit was made only for direct recruits.
The relevant observations made by the Division Bench in this case may be noticed as under :  "From the reading of the Rules, we are of the view that the ratio which is given in Rule 10(2) (supra) is for only direct recruitment.
While making direct recruitment, 60 percent is to be made from the direct candidates i.e. from the open market and 40 percent direct recruitment is to be made from the departmental candidates.
From the reading of the definition of Departmental candidates in Rule 2(h) (supra), it is evident that departmental candidate means a candidate who is appointed to the service from within the Departmental e.g. Patwaris etc. and while defining direct appointment, it has been clearly laid down that direct appointment can be made by selection of departmental candidates and direct candidates.
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that there is no age limit provided for persons to be considered for promotion.
Otherwise also providing of age limit for the purpose of promotion may be termed as arbitrary as a person may not get a chance for promotion for a sufficiently long period as the same depends on the number of posts that are available in the promotional cadre.
Supposing in the present case a person does not get a chance for promotion while he attains the age of 35 years, it would mean that throughout the rest of the career he would keep on working as a canal patwari.
This will also result in some juniors getting promotion because they may happen to be less than 35 years whereas seniors may stagnate as Canal Patwaris."
Keeping in view the authoritative pronouncement of the Division Bench of Ved Pal Singh's case (supra), I have no hesitation in allowing the present petition and directing the official respondents to consider the case of the petitioner in accordance with 1956 Rules for promotion to the rank of Assistant Revenue Clerk with effect from the date person junior to the petitioner, namely, Azad Singh, respondent No. 6 was so promoted.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits including the promotion to the next higher rank, if any of his juniors have since been so promoted.
The respondents shall carry out these directions within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by them.
No costs.
Petition allowed.