Nirmal Singh, J - The facts of the present case are that M/s. Punjab Construction Company was allotted the work of SYL Canal RD 74300 to 74700.
Agreement No. 18 was executed between the parties on 2841986.
The dispute has arisen between the parties.
There was an arbitration clause in the agreement.
As per the agreement, arbitrator was appointed to adjudicate upon the dispute.
Accordingly, the Chief Engineer, SYL Canal Project, Punjab appointed Gurbachan Singh as Arbitrator vide order dated 2651992.
The arbitrator announced the award declining the claim of the petitioner on 2181995.
The petitioner filed the objections on 12101995 within the prescribed period of 30 days.
The objections were dismissed and the award was made the rule of the Court.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Ropar, who vide order dated 15.2.2001 dismissed the appeal, aggrieved by the orders of the Courts below, present revision petition has been preferred.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the order of the Courts below solely on the ground that in the arbitration agreement, there was clause No. 63, the relevant portion of which is reproduced below :-  "All awards shall be in writing and in case of award amounting to Rs. 1 lac and above such awards shall state the reasons for the amount awarded."
3.
Shri Rana, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that as per this clause the arbitrator is to give reasoned award.
He contended that the arbitrator has not given any reason while passing the award.
4.
I have considered the submission and find force in it.
5.
The Arbitrator while declining the claim of the petitioner has passed the following order :-  Claim No. 1  Claim for site clearance (Bushes and Jungle) Rs. 2 lacs.
The claim is rejected and nothing is due to the claimant.
Claim No. 2 Payment for stripping Rs. 150 lacs The claim is rejected and nothing is due to the claimant.
Claim No. 5 Payment due on account of REM Rs. 5,55,174/-.
The claim is rejected and nothing is payable to the claimant.
6.
The Arbitrator has not given any reason while rejecting the claim of the petitioner.
It is settled law that award is not to be set aside or remitted back solely on the ground that arbitrator has not given any reason.
When there is specific clause in the arbitration agreement that arbitrator has to pass a reasoned award, then it is incumbent upon the arbitrator to pass a reasoned award as it has been laid down in Raipur Development Authority etc. etc. v M/s. Chokhamal Contractors etc. etc., A.I.R. 1990 SC 1426.
In the instant case, there was a specific clause in the agreement for arbitration that the arbitrator will give award in writing and will pass reasoned award.
No such reason has been given while declining the claim.
The Courts below have overlooked clause 63 of the agreement.
The learned Senior Sub Judge while making the award as rule of Court has misread clause 63 of the agreement by observing that the arbitrator has not awarded the amount of Rs. 1 lac or above, so he was not required to give the reasons in the award.
The claim of the petitioner was with regard to claim Nos. 1, 2 and 5.
These claims have been rejected by the arbitrator without giving reasons.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the petition is accepted and the award is set aside and is remitted back to the arbitrator to pass the reasoned award according to law.
The parties are directed to appear before the Civil Judge (SD), Ropar on 19.2.2002, for further proceedings.
Petition allowed.