VK Bali, J - Avtar Singh-petitioner has filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution seeking issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash orders, Annexures P-6/A, P-10, P-14 and P-18 dated 141976, 16.1.1973, 24.12.1976 and 2021985 respectively.
In consequence of setting aside of the aforesaid orders, he further prays that he may be considered for promotion to the post of Senior Auditor and be promoted as such from the dates persons junior to him, namely, respondents No. 5 to 42 were promoted.
2.
The case has a chequered history but there is no need to give the same as suffice it to say that the impugned order dated 2021985, Annexure P-18 primarily came to be passed against the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner, even though having been appointed as Inspector on general side on 1431964, did not agitate the matter pertaining to seniority in the Audit Wing for which he had made his option way back in the year 1956 ie for long six years.
The conclusion to the aforesaid effect was drawn that by conduct, the option given by the petitioner had already come to an end.
It requires to be mentioned here that order, Annexure P-18 came into being on a direction issued by the Court when an earlier petition was filed by the petitioner wherein it was directed that the concerned authority shall decide the representation of the petitioner by passing a speaking order.
3.
Mr. Bawa vehemently contends that the Audit Wing of the Department was not a permanent affair.
Some times the said Department was abolished and some times it was revived.
When the petitioner was promoted on the post of Inspector on the general side, the Audit Wing was not in existence.
In a situation as mentioned above, counsel further contends that once there was no Audit Wing in existence, the petitioner had no choice but to accept the post of Inspector on the general side and that being so, it was not possible for the petitioner to agitate the matter of seniority in the Audit Wing.
4.
The contention of Mr. Bawa, learned counsel for the petitioner is not entirely correct inasmuch as he conceded during the course of arguments that the Audit Wing came into being on 2611966, even after the promotion of the petitioner, and remained in existence upto 3171968.
In this period of two and half years, the petitioner made no representation as is clear from the impugned order, Annexure P-18.
The Court would like to mention that, of course, it is the case of petitioner that he has been making representations but the finding returned is that no such representation was made during the aforesaid period.
Mr. Bawa was asked to refer to representation of the petitioner, if any, made during the period 2611966 to 3171968 but nothing has been pointed out in that direction and what is all being urged by him is that representations were being made by the petitioner from time to time.
It is significant to mention here that during this period, about 35 persons said to be junior to the petitioner, were promoted in the Wing as Inspector and yet to another higher post of Senior Auditor.
So many persons having been promoted during this period, should have normally caused concern to petitioner, and yet as mentioned above, no representation came to be filed by the petitioner.
Even though the finding recorded in order, Annexure P-18 that the petitioner did not evince any interest in the matter of promotion for a period of six years, may not be wholly correct but as mentioned above, it is certainly correct to the extent that the petitioner did not move the matter for two and half years during which period number of persons junior to the petitioner were promoted.
The delay, even though may be of two and half years and, during which period, as mentioned above, so many persons were promoted over and above the petitioner, would have the same effect, i.e., the petitioner not being entitled to ask for any relief in view of his own conduct, as has been in the impugned order, Annexure P-8.
5.
Consequently, finding no merit in this writ petition, the same is hereby dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petiton dismissed.