SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioners have challenged the order, Annexure P-1, dated 2771999 removing their names from the approved list of Executive Clerical Cadre (Extra Hand) with immediate effect and transferring them to the general duty Constables.
All the petitioners had joined Executive Clerical Cadre in the year 1992-93.
At the time of appointment, they had been asked to exercise an option as to the cadre of their preference.
It was in terms of rule 2 of the Punjab Police (First Amendment) Rule, 1990, which provides as under :-  "Provided that each of the Tele-communications Branch, Finger Prints Bureau, Women Police Wing, Band Staff, Mounted Police, Armourers and Executive Clerical Wing that is uniformed clerical functionaries posted in various subordinate offices, shall from its separate cadre."
2.
A perusal of the aforesaid rule clearly shows that the Executive Clerical Wing forms a separate cadre.
Therefore, the cadre of the petitioners could not have been changed without their consent.
A similar matter came up for consideration before this Court in CWP No. 9552 of 1999.
In the said judgment, it has been held as follows :-  "We have thoughtfully considered the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
A perusal of memo, dated 29101990 (Annexure RIII) would reveal that approval to the amendment in Rule 1.1. of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 was accorded by State Government on 15.6.1990 and Executive Clerical Cadre i.e. uniformed clerical functionaries posted in various subordinate offices were expected to be a separate cadre than the Women Police Wing.
Admittedly, the petitioner has been working as Typist or AP Clerk since 1993 which is a duty to be discharged by a member of Executive Clerical Cadre.
On the basis of memo.
dated 29101990, options were obtained and she preferred to continue in the existing cadre vide her option letter dated 18121998.
The Deputy Inspector General, Faridkot Range, Faridkot accepted her request vide order dated 921999.
Once the petitioner had exercised option, the Senior Superintendent of Police recommended her option and the Deputy Inspector General of Police had accepted that option by passing an order on 921999, the transfer of the petitioner under ipse dixit of the Deputy Inspector General of Police in pursuance to a letter issued by the Director General of Police dated 1.3.1999 is not justified.
In these circumstances, the order of transfer of the petitioner dated 11.3.1999, Annexure P.8, being an order of the inter cadre transfer cannot be sustained unless the consent of the petitioner was obtained.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order dated 11.3.1999 is quashed and it is directed that the petitioner shall continue in the Executive Clerical Cadre in pursuance to the orders dated 921999.
No order as to costs."
3.
The aforesaid ratio of law laid down by a Division Bench of this Court is fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
4.
In view of the above, order, Annexure P-1, is quashed.
The respondents are directed to send the petitioners back to their parent cadre i.e. Executive Clerical Cadre (Extra Hand).
The period spent by the petitioners in Police Line shall be treated as period spent in the Executive Clerical Cadre for all intents and purposes.
The petition stands disposed of.
Petition allowed.