Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as Lecturers in Physical Education.
Their pay-scale is Rs. 6400-10640.
They complain that the posts of Assistant Education Officers are being filled up by the appointment of Masters who are working in the lower scale of Rs. 5480-8925.
The petitioners represented.
Having failed to get any relief, they have approached this Court through the present writ petition with a two-fold prayer.
Firstly, they pray for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to consider and decide the representation dated February 25, 1999.
Secondly, they pray that their claim for appointment to the higher post should be considered.
2.
No written statement has filed.
However, the claim made on behalf of the petitioners is being contested on behalf of the respondents.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. Jattana contends that the action of the respondents in promoting junior persons as Assistant Education Officers in preference to the Lecturers is arbitrary and illegal.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
5.
Admittedly the posts of Lecturers carry the scale of Rs. 6400-10640.
The posts of Masters are in the scale of Rs. 5480-8925.
Even the posts of Assistant Education Officers carry the same scale viz. Rs. 5480-8925.
In this situation, it cannot be said that a Master who is posted as an Assistant Education Officer is being promoted to a higher post without considering the claim of a person holding a comparatively senior post.
In fact, the posting of a Senior Lecturer as a Assistant Education Officer would amount to reversion because the post of Assistant Education Officer, admittedly, carries a pay-scale lower than that in which the petitioners are working.
6.
In view of the above factual position, which has not been disputed by the counsel for the petitioners, it is clear that they have no real cause for grievance.
7.
Resultantly, no cause for the issue of any direction to the respondents or interference by this Court is made out.
The petition is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.