SS Saron, J - This order shall dispose of C.W.P.
No. 17981 of 2000, Tirath Singh v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 17462 of 2000, Kanshi Ram Miglani v. State of Haryana, and C.W.P.
No. 7335 of 2001, Maru Ram v. State of Haryana as common questions of law and facts are involved.
2.
The facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 17981 of 2001, titled Tirath Singh v. State of Haryana.
The petitioner-Tirtha Singh was appointed at the Municipal Committee, Nilokheri on a consolidated salary on regular basis on 2741960.
He was initially paid Rs. 80/-, and then Rs. 111/- per month.
Thereafter the petitioner was given regular grade of Rs. 60-175 on 1271968.
He retired from service on superannuation on 28.2.1999.
His service was continuous and without break.
At the time of retirement, the petitioner was posted with the Municipal Committee, Indri (Karnal) and drawing basic pay of Rs. 1760/-.
3.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the action of the respondent in not counting his entire length of service w.e.f.
2741960 for the purpose of pensionary benefits.
Consequently, he seeks quashing of order dated 22112000 (Annexure P-1), to the extent that pension has been given to him from only the date of his regular appointment i.e. 1271978 to the date of his retirement on 28.12.1999.
He claims that the period of service from the date of initial appointment i.e. 2741960 is also liable to be counted towards pensionary benefits.
The petitioner also seeks mandamus to grant revised pension and other retiral benefits on the revised pay scales w.e.f.
1.1.1996 for Haryana State Employees.
Besides for release of Rs. 37109/- with 18% interest withheld as the pension contribution which had already been deducted by the Municipal Committee Nilokheri/Indri from his monthly salary each month.
4.
Notice of the petition was issued.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed their written statement, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 i.e. Deputy Commissioner, Karnal and Municipal Council Nilokheri have also filed their written statement.
Besides, another written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 5 i.e. Deputy Commissioner Karnal and Municipal Committee, Indri through its Executive Officer.
5.
It is admitted position in the written statement that the petitioner worked on consolidated salary till 1271968 and later on he was given regular scale as admissible to him.
It is averred that the petitioner is not entitled to claim pensionary benefit from the date of his initial appointment on 2741960.
It is further stated that the period in which the petitioner worked on consolidated salary is not be counted towards qualifying service as per Rule 312 and 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rule, Volume-II.
Besides, it has been contended that the basic salary has been rightly fixed.
With regard to the retaining of Rs. 37,109/-, it has been submitted that this amount was deposited by the Municipal Committee with the Director Local Bodies, who is competent to release the payment.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records.
7.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has contended that the period of service rendered by the petitioner from 2741960 to 1271968 is also liable to be counted towards qualifying service for the grant of pensionary benefits.
In support of his contention learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgments of this Court in the case of Sandhya Negi v. The Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Ltd Chandigarh, 1992(1) SCT 475 (P&H) (SC) : 1992(1) R.S.J.
742 (D.B.).
8.
On the other hand learned counsel for the respondent has contended that the petitioner is not entitled to count the service rendered on consolidated salary for the purpose of pensionary benefits.
Besides, the amount of Rs. 37,109/- has been deducted from the arrears of pension towards less pension contribution and the petitioner has given his consent by way of affidavit in this regard.
The pension has also been rightly fixed according to the learned counsel for the respondents.
In support his contention learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon judgment in the case titled Jagdish Chander v. Punjab State, 1994(3) S.C.T.
439, to contend that period of temporary or officiating service of the employees in non-pensionable establishment rendered before provincialisation of service are not to be counted towards qualifying service for the purpose of pension.
9.
In order to appreciate the respective contention of the parties, reference may be made of the relevant provisions contained in Chapter 3 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II (as applicable to Haryana).
The relevant rules are as follows :-  CHAPTER III Service Qualifying for Pension General 31 to 37.
Omitted.
A - Beginning of Service 38.
Unless it be otherwise provided by special rule or contract, the service of every Government employee begins to qualify for pension when he takes charge of the post to which he is first appointed.
Note :- In every contract with a Government employee appointed abroad, a clause should be inserted to the effect that service begins from the date on which the Government employee joins his post in India.
39 xx xx xx xx xx 310 Deleted.
311 Deleted.
Conditions of Qualification A - General 312 The service of a Government employee does not qualify for pension unless it conforms to the following three conditions :- First - The service must be under Government.
Second - The employment must be substantive and permanent.
Third - The service must be paid by Government.
These three conditions are fully explained in the following rules.
Note - The question whether service in a particular office or department qualifies for pension or not is determined by rules which were in force at the time such service was rendered; orders subsequent issued declaring the service to be non-qualifying, are not applicable with retrospective effect.
313.
The competent authority may, however, in the case of service paid from the Government revenues, even though either or both of the first two conditions in the Rule 312 are not fulfilled, - (1) declare that any specified kind of service rendered in a non-gazetted capacity shall qualify for pension.
(2) in individual cases, and subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose in each case, direct that services rendered by a Government employee shall count for pension.
Note :- All services rendered in additional police if followed without a break by permanent service, shall qualify for pension.
314.
A competent authority may, when both the first and the second conditions mentioned in Rule 312 are fulfilled, declare that service paid from funds administered by Government shall in the event of the provincialisation of such funds, count for pension.
315 xx xx xx xx xx B - First Condition Service Under Government 316(a) The service of a Government employee does not qualify unless he is appointed and his duties and pay are regulated by the Government, or under conditions determined by the Government.
(b) Past service rendered in a Part-B State (excluding Surashtra but including an Indian State which subsequently became a Part-B State) shall be treated as equivalent to Government service for the purpose of pension and shall count for pension on permanent absorption in the Punjab Government service in the same manner as such service rendered in a former Part "A" State Counts.
Note 1 - The following are examples of Government employees excluded from pension by this rule :- (1) Employees of a municipality.
(emphasis added) (2) Employees of grant-in-aid schools and institutions.
(3) Subordinates appointed by Treasurers on their own responsibility.
(4) Service on as establishment paid from a Contract Establishment allowance, with the detailed distribution of which the Government does not interfere, whether such contract allowance is a fixed amount or consists of fees.
(5) Service on an establishment paid from the household allowance of the Governor.
Note 2 :- If a Government employee has served partly in capacity which would have given him claim to pension if the service had been paid from the Government revenues on the household establishment of the Governor, and partly on establishment paid from the Government revenues, he is entitled from Government revenues to a share of any pension to which he would have been entitled if his whole service had been paid from the Government revenues, proportionate to the length of the service which has been so paid.
C - Second condition - Substantive and Permanent  317.
In the case of an Officer retiring on or after 5th January, 1961, if he was holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary or officiating service under the State Government, followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post, shall count in full as qualifying service except in respect of :- (i) Period of temporary or officiating service in non-pensionable establishment; (ii) (Deleted) (iii) Period of service paid from contingencies.
Note (1) :- In the case of Central Government employee who is permanently transferred to Haryana Government and becomes subject to these rules under Rule 1.1.
(b) of these Rules, the terms "continuous temporary service or continuous officiating service", shall include such service rendered under Central Government.
Note 2 :- In case of a purely temporary Central Government employee who is permanently transferred to Haryana Government and becomes subject to these rules, the term "continuous temporary service" includes the temporary service under the Central Government.
The pensionary liability in respect of such cases shall be allocated on the length of service.
Note 3 :- (a) In respect of temporary employees of the following categories who render service under the Central/State Governments prior to securing posts under the Central/State Governments on their own volition in response to advertisements or circulars, including those by Union/State Public Service Commission and who are eventually confirmed in their new posts, the proportionate pensionary liability in respect of temporary service rendered under the Central/State Governments to the extent such service would have qualified for grant of pension under the rules of the respective Government, will be shared by the concerned Governments on a service share basis:- (1) Those who having been retrenched from the service of Central/State Governments secured on their own employment under State/Central Government either with or without interruption between the date of retrenchments and date of new appointment.
(2) Those who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Governments apply for posts under State/Central Government through proper channel/with proper permission of the administrative authority concerned.
Explanation :- Where an employee in category (2) is required for administrative reasons for satisfying technical requirement, to tender resignation from the temporary post held by him before joining the new appointment, a certificate to the effect that such resignation had been tendered for administrative reasons and/or to satisfy a technical requirement, to join, with proper permission, the new posts, may be issued by the authority accepting the resignation.
A record of this certificate may be also be made in this service book under proper attestation to enable him to get this benefit at the time of retirement.
The gratuity, if any, received by the Government employee for temporary service under the Central/State Governments will, however, have to be refunded by him to the Government concerned.
(b) Those employees who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Governments apply for post under Central/State Government direct without permission and resign their previous post to join the new appointment under the Central/State Government will not be entitled to count their previous service for pension.
10.
The heading A deals with beginning of service.
Rule 38 thereunder envisages that unless it be otherwise provided by special rule or contract, the service of every Government employee begins to qualify for pension when he takes charges of the post to which he is first appointed.
11.
Rule 312 provides the condition of qualification for grant of pension.
The three conditions are that the service must be under the Government; the employment must be substantive and permanent and the service must be paid by the Government.
These three conditions are explained in the subsequent rules.
12.
Rule 313 provides that the competent authority may, however, in the case of service paid from the Government revenues, establishing the fact that either or both conditions in Rule 312 are not fulfilled, may declare that any specified kind of service rendered in a non-gazetted capacity shall qualify for pension.
Besides, in an individual case, and subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose in each case, direct that services rendered by a Government employee shall count for pension.
13.
Rule 314 envisages that the competent authority may when both the first and second conditions mentioned in Rule 312 are fulfilled, declare that service paid from funds administrated by Government shall in the event of the provincialisation of such funds, count for pension.
14.
Rule 315 deals with special provisions, which apply to the Police Department, and, therefore, are not relevant for the present matter.
The heading B deals with the first condition i.e. `Service Under Government'.
Under heading B is Rule 316.
Rule 316(a) provides that the service of Government employee does not qualify unless he is appointed and his duties and pay are regulated by the Government, or under conditions determined by the Government.
Rule 316(b) relates to past service rendered in Part B State, which again is not relevant for the present case.
Note 1 below Rule 316 sets out various examples of Government employees excluded from pension by said Rule 316, which amongst others includes employees of Municipality.
15.
The heading C relates to the second condition - Substantive and Permanent Employment.
Under the said heading is Rule 317, which provides that in the case of an officer retiring on or after 5th January, 1961, if he was holding substantively a permanent post on the date of his retirement, his temporary or officiating service under the State Government, followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or another post, shall count in full as qualifying service except in respect of temporary or officiating service in non-pensionable establishment and period of service paid from contingencies.
16.
The respondent-State of Haryana has framed the Haryana Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1993 Rules').
The 1993 Rules, are applicable to the employees of the Municipality who were in service or are appointed on or after 16.4.1992 on whole time regular basis and were working immediately before 1992 and opt for 1993 Rules.
The said 1993 Rules are not to apply to the employees who opt out of the same; are members of the All India Services or members of the Haryana Civil Services or the members of Haryana Government serving in the Municipalities; are paid out of contingencies are work charged employees; are employed on contract basis, except when the contract provides otherwise; are em-employed after superannuation and are specifically excluded wholly or partly from the operation of these Rules.
Rule 3(h) of the 1993 Rules defines `qualifying service' as follows :-  "qualifying service" means the service rendered under a Municipalities for which an employee is paid from the Municipal fund and shall include any service rendered under the Haryana Government and Improvement Trust, or a Corporation immediately before joint the Service : (Emphasis Added) Rule 3(i) defines `Service' as follows :- "Service" means the service rendered under the control of a municipality."
Rule 4 of the 1993 Rules provided for exercise of option.
Rule 5 provides for the establishment of pension fund.
Rule 6 deals with transfer of amount to pension fund.
Rule 7 deals with operation of pension fund.
Rule 8 deals with maintenance of accounts.
Rule 9 deals with grant of pension.
Rule 10 deals with payment of pension.
Rules 9 and 10 of the 1993 Rules read as under :- "9.
Grant of Pension :- (1) For the purpose of grant of pension to the employees the rules relating to pension as contained in the Punjab Civil Serviced Rules, Volume II as applicable to the State of Haryana shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees and for that purpose the terms and expressions not otherwise defined in the rules, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Punjab Civil Services Rule, Volume I, Part I.
(2) After completion of the pension papers of the retiring municipal employees in the form and manner as specified in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, as amended from time to time, the Executive Officer/Secretary of the concerned municipality shall send the pension papers to the Examiner, Local Fund Accounts, Haryana for verification of qualifying service and emoluments of the employees.
The examiner, Local Fund Accounts, Haryana after necessary verification shall send the pension papers to the sanctioning authorities concerned as shown in Appendix "A" for sanction of pension.
10.
Payment of pension : (1) The Director shall issue pension payment order in the form and manner as specified as in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II to the pensioner with a copy thereof to the Bank/Post Office as specified in sub-rule (3) of Rule 6 for payment of pension to the pensioner every month regularly.
(2) While making payment of pension, the Director shall be guided by the Punjab Treasury Rules which shall apply mutatis mutandis to the pensioner of the municipality."
17.
The perusal of Rule 9 of 1993 Rules shows that for the purposes of grant of pension to the employees, the rules relating to pension as contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, as applicable to the State of Haryana are to apply mutatis mutandis to the employees and for that purposes, the terms and expression not otherwise defined in 1993 Rules, are to have to same meaning as assigned to them in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I.
18.
Rule 10 provides for payment of pension.
The Director is to issue pension payment order in the form and manner as specified in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II to the pensioner with a copy thereof to the Bank/Post Office as specified in sub-rule (3) of Rule 6 for payment of pension to the pensioner every month regularly.
In terms of Rule 10(2) of the 1993 Rules while making the payment of pension, the Director is to be guided by the Punjab Treasury Rules which shall apply mutatis mutandis to the pensioner of the municipality.
19.
The primary ground taken by the respondents for declining the payment of pension to the petitioner for the period from 2741960 to 12.6.1968 is that the same was on consolidated salary basis and could not be taken as qualifying service for the purposes of granting retiral benefits.
Respondents in their written statement have emphasised the position as it existed in the Punjab Civil Services Rules (as applicable to the State of Haryana) in Volume II Chapter 3, reference to which has been made above.
However, the position under the 1993 Rules which came into force w.e.f.
16.4.1992 as per Rule 1(2) of the 1993 Rules has not been adverted to by the respondent authorities.
Rule 3(h) of the 1993 Rules which is reproduced above defines qualifying service to mean the service rendered under the Municipality for which an employee is paid from the Municipal funds and shall include any service rendered under the Haryana Government and Improvement Trust or a Corporation immediately before joining the service.
Rule 3(i) defines the `service' to mean the services rendered under the control of Municipality.
Therefore, the definition of qualifying service as contained in Rule 3(h) and `service' as defined in Rule 3(i) in our view clearly provides that the services rendered under the Municipality for which an employee is paid from the Municipal funds is qualifying service for the purposes of grant of pension.
The 1993 Rules have over-riding effect over the Punjab Civil Services Rules (as applicable in Haryana).
The 1993 Rules have come into force with a view to bring the employees of the Haryana Municipalities on the pension scheme and it is a piece of beneficial legislation which provides for the grant of pension.
It is settled legal position that pension is a valuable right and is not a bounty to be paid at the sweet will of the employer.
The 1993 Rules, therefore, are to be given full effect and the service rendered by the petitioner on consolidated salary earlier is liable to the counted as services rendered by him towards the qualifying services in terms of the definition contained in Rule 3(h) of the 1993 Rules, which in clear terms provides for the services rendered under Municipality which would mean any kind of service and which would include services rendered on a consolidated salary.
It may also be noticed that Rule 13 of the 1993 Rules deals with over-riding effect.
The same reads as under :-  "Over-riding effect - The provisions of these rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other rules governing the payment of the pension for the time being in force."
The perusal of the above rule shows that the provisions of 1993 Rules shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other rules governing the payment of pension for the time being in force.
This is a piece of beneficial legislation by a welfare State for the employees of the Municipalities.
In Sandhya Negi's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court considered the case of the a typist who was appointed on consolidated salary of Rs. 500/- and thereafter made regular and fixed in a particular pay scale.
The question to be considered in the said case was whether the period of services rendered by the employees therein on consolidated salary was also to be taken into consideration while determining her seniority.
It was held that the mere fact that the petitioner was appointed on consolidated salary would not change the character of the post held by her.
It was in respect of that very post that subsequently an order of regularisation was passed and she was in a running pay scale.
It was held by paying her a consolidated salary it could not be said that the post of typist-cum-clerk that the employee therein was holding was in any manner lower in rank to the post of Clerk on which she was made regular subsequently.
In this view of the matter, the fact that the petitioner had worked on consolidated salary which is followed by his subsequent regularisation, it cannot be said that the period of service rendered by the petitioner on consolidated salary cannot be treated as qualifying service for the purposes of grant of pension.
This is particularly so keeping in view the definition of "qualifying service" as contained in Rule 3(h) of the 1993 Rules.
The judgment in the case of Jagdish Chander cited by the learned counsel for the respondents is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the said case the employee was a teacher in District Board Schools.
He prayed for the counting of the period of service rendered by him prior to provincialisation of the services.
Keeping in view, the provisions of Rule 317(i)(ii) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume II, it was held that the period of temporary service of the non-pensionable establishment earlier to the provincialisation of service is not be counted towards qualifying service for the purposes of pension.
The said case is confined to its own facts and there were no rules like 1993 Rules as in the case in hand.
The provisions of the 1993 Rules provides for the grant of pensionary benefits to the employees of the Municipalities like the petitioner who had been working immediately before 16.4.1992 and had opted for the pension Rules.
In this view of the matter, the stand taken by the respondents that the period of service on consolidated salary rendered by the petitioner cannot be counted towards qualifying service as per Rules 313 and 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (as applicable in Haryana) is devoid of any merit.
20.
Therefore, the memo dated 27112000 Annexure P-1 which declines the period of service on consolidated salary from 2741960 to 11.7.1968 as qualifying service for the purposes of pension is not sustainable and is accordingly quashed.
21.
In so far as the claim for an amount of Rs. 37,109/- is concerned, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement have stated that the said amount has been deducted from the arrears of pension of the petitioner towards less pension contribution and that the petitioner has given any intimation in this regard by way of an affidavit which is appended as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
In the said affidavit, the petitioner has deposed as follows :-  "1.
That I retired as a Clerk from the Office of Municipal Committee, Indri, District Karnal.
2.
That my pension contribution which has been deducted less, including interest thereon, may be made good from my already sanctioned pension and thereafter my case for pension be reconsidered and sanctioned accordingly.
I shall not raise any objection or make any claim therefor."
22.
This deduction from the pension, in our view is inconsonance with Rule 6(1) of the 1993 Rules, which relates to transfer of amount to pension fund.
Rule 6(1) of the 1993 Rules reads as under :-  "6.
Transfer of amount to Pension fund - (1) The share of money alongwith interest standing in the Contributory Provident Fund Account to the credit of an employees of municipality who opts or who is governed by these rules, shall stand transferred to the pension fund to the extent it was contributed by the concerned municipality during the period of Service of an employee alongwith any loss caused to the contribution of the concerned through withdrawal during the Service which shall be made good by the employee paying the amount alongwith interest due for that period to the pension fund."
23.
Therefore, the amount of Rs. 37,109/- which has been deducted is in our view in accord with the provisions of Rule 6(1) of the 1993 Rules.
Besides, the petitioner has given his consent by way of affidavit Annexure R-1.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the relief of the said amount of Rs. 37,109/-.
24.
In view of our above discussion, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The petitioner is entitled to count the period of services rendered on consolidated salary i.e. from 2741960 to 11.7.1968 towards qualifying service for the grant of pension in terms of Haryana Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1993.
However, his claim for directing the respondents to release Rs. 37,109/- withheld as a pension contribution is not sustainable and is accordingly declined.
There shall however, be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.