SS Sudhalkar, J - Petitioner having died on 10-11-1995, his heirs have been brought on record.
2.
Petitioner was born on 23-1-1936.
He joined service as an Overseer (Junior Engineer) on 12-8-1952.
He continued in service.
On 15-10-1971, he was promoted as SDO.
The adverse remarks were recorded in the year 1981 against the petitioner, in which the integrity of the petitioner was doubted.
On 4-9- 1981, he was placed under suspension.
However, the suspension was revoked after one and a half month by order dated 23-10-1981.
It was ordered that the reinstatement was without prejudice to the action that might be taken in the departmental enquiry.
The matter was referred to the Vigilance Wing of the Irrigation Department for conducting preliminary enquiry.
In the report of the Vigilance Officer in the preliminary enquiry, the petitioner along with Chetan Lal and Mohinder Singh, JEs.
were indicted.
However, respondent No. 1 vide his order dated 29.6.1983 directed the Vigilance Officer to lodge an FIR against the petitioner alone, under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
However, FIR No. 381 had already been lodged on 1-6-1983 at the Police Station, Panipat but no incriminating material was found during the investigation and it was dropped as untraced.
3.
A notice dated 6-9-1983 was served on the petitioner vide letter dated 12.9.1983. copy Annexure P/1.
The notice contains the allegations of plots purchased by the petitioner in the name of his wife; his wife had given an amount of Rs. 5000/- as loan to one Shri MP Jain and had deposited an amount of Rs. 18,000/- in the fixed deposits etc.
It is further mentioned that in the annual report for the year 1980-81, allegedly conveyed to the petitioner on 13-1-1982, his integrity for honesty was doubted.
He was directed by the notice, to show cause within a period of 21 days as to why proposed action of retiring the petitioner from Government service and to grant him retiring pension, should not be taken.
It was further mentioned in the notice that in case no reply is received within 21 days, he would be presumed to have nothing to submit and action would be taken accordingly.
Petitioner did submit his reply on 31-10-1983.
On 2831984, by an order annexure P/2, the petitioner was directed to hand over the charge of his office to one Shri VP Behl and report to the IB Head Office at Chandigarh.
The petitioner complied with the order on 8-5-1984 but was not given charge uptil 2241985.
4.
The petitioner has alleged that in this way, he was kept compulsory waiting for about a year from 9-5-1984 to 21-4-1985 without payment of any salary.
Thereafter, he was sent on deputation to the Haryana State Minor Irrigation (Tubewells) Corporation (HSMITC).
During this period, respondent No. 1 referred the case to Haryana Public Service Commission seeking approval for initiating disciplinary action against the Petitioner for his compulsory retirement from service.
This was duly approved by the Commission vide letter dated 8-2-1985, copy annexure R/11.
By the letter of May, 1985 (forwarded to Commissioner and Secretary to Government on 29-5-1985), copy R/12, the Government approved the proposal of the department.
The impugned order was passed on 30-5-1985 (copy annexure P/3).
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner has been harassed and has been punished without enquiry.
Nothing could be found against him in the criminal case and a short-cut has been found out by invoking the provisions of compulsory retirement.
He has further argued that no enquiry was carried out against the petitioner.
The petitioner was subjected to harassment because of the suspension, for the period of which he was not given any pay and thereafter also he was shifted from place to place.
without any pay being given.
6.
Here in the present case.
It is not in dispute that after the vigilance report, it was directed to lodge an FIR against him, though the FIR had already been lodged before that date.
In the investigation the police did not find any substance to rely upon and therefore, the FIR was dropped.
7.
The first point argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that when a departmental action was to be contemplated after a preliminary enquiry, the petitioner should have been given a charge sheet and a short cut method adopted by the respondents cannot be sustained.
He has further argued that because of a single report of integrity doubtful, the petitioner cannot be retired compulsorily.
Learned counsel has relied on the case of S Ramchandra Raju v. State of Orissa, 1994(4) SCT 430 (SC) : reported as 1994(5) SLR 199 : (AIR 1995 SC 111).
It has been held by the Supreme Court in that case that the order of compulsory retirement on the basis of a solitary adverse report was arbitrary.
The Supreme Court quashed the order.
8.
Learned counsel has further relied on the case of Ram Ekbal Sharma v. State of Bihar, 1993(3) SCT 621 (SC) : reported as AIR 1990 SC 1368 : (1990 Lab IC 1188).
The Supreme Court has observed in that case that the Court in appropriate cases can lift the veil to find out whether the order is based on any misconduct of the Government servant concerned or the order has been made bona fide and not with any oblique or extraneous purposes.
It has been further held that mere form of the order in such cases cannot deter the Court from delving into the basis of the order if the order in question is challenged by the concerned Government servant.
It was held by the Supreme Court in that case that there were clear and specific averments made by the respondent-State that the impugned order has been made to compulsorily retire the appellant from service because he was found to have committed grave financial irregularities leading to financial loss to the State and, therefore, the order could not have been made by way of punishment and it contravened the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
9.
It has been stated in paragraph No. 8 of the written statement that in both the enquiries by the Vigilance officers of Irrigation department, sufficient material was found against the petitioner, on the basis of which the Government decided to get two criminal cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act, registered against the petitioner.
Moreover, notice of compulsory retirement, annexure P/1, dated 6-9-1983 contains allegations against the petitioner regarding purchasing property without giving intimation to the Government, under-valuing the property; investing money in the name of his wife, without informing the Government, not taking prior permission in respect of purchase of land, construction of house, construction of building, his integrity being doubtful etc.
Therefore, the notice contains the allegations against him which are of serious nature.
10.
In the case of High Court of Punjab and Haryana through RG v. Ishwar Chand Jain, 1999(2) SCT 353 (SC) : reported as 1999(2) RSJ 713. : (1999 Lab IC 1823) the Supreme Court found that the action of the High Court in retiring the judicial officer was based on the allegation of misconduct which subject matter of enquiry before the Judge of the High Court.
It was further observed that there was substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the judicial officer that the High Court found a short-cut by compulsorily retiring him when the order of retirement was based on charges of misconduct.
It was further observed by the Supreme Court that the impugned order compulsorily retiring the judicial officer though innocuously worded was in fact an order of his removal from service and cannot be sustained and High Court on the judicial side was correct in setting aside the order of compulsory retirement.
11.
In addition to this, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that not only the compulsory retirement was a short-cut but the petitioner was subjected to a lot of harassment.
He was suspended from 4-9-1981 to 23-10-1981 though no departmental enquiry was ordered.
For this period, he was not given the pay but he was given only subsistence allowance.
However, according to annexure P/5, the order of reinstatement, it was clear that the departmental enquiry was contemplated.
Moreover, after reinstatement the petitioner was only permitted to treat the period as leave of the kind due.
Thereafter from 9-5-1984 to 21-4-1985 he was not given any posting after he was directed by letter dated 28-3-1984, to hand over the charge.
The petitioner has contended in para No. 10 of the petition that for no fault of his, he was kept compulsory waiting from 9-5-1984 to 21-4-1985 without payment of any salary.
In this connection, it has been stated in the written statement as under :  "10.
It is wrong and denied that the petitioner was kept under compulsory waiting for about a year from 9-3-1984 to 21-4-1985 for no fault of his as alleged.
It is however admitted that in pursuance of his transfer order Annexure P-2, he was relieved in Irrigation Branch Head Office.
But he did not report his arrival in Irrigation Branch Head Office, Chandigarh.
Thereafter he was posted in Hathnikund Barrage Sub Division, Jagadhri vide Government orders dated 17- 12-1984.
The petitioner did not join in Hathnikund Barrage Sub Division, Jagadhri.
Again he was posted in Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewells Corporation vide orders dated 27-2-1985, where he reported his arrival on 22-4-1985.
12.
The allegation, therefore, remains unclarified because it is answered by a vague reply.
Moreover, the allegation that the petitioner did not join is not substantiated.
13.
It was not proper for the respondents not to pay the salary to the petitioner for the suspension period because the imposing of suspension without the report of preliminary enquiry in the present case, was uncalled for.
Moreover, if the suspension was correctly imposed, then no reason is shown as to why it was abruptly withdrawn.
The abrupt withdrawal of the suspension shows that the imposition of the same was wrong.
The petitioner was entitled to full pay for the said period in view of the above reasons.
(It is not the case that the suspension was withdrawn because the enquiry against him failed).
Moreover, the period of waiting from 9-5-1984 to 21-4-1985 has not been properly explained by the respondent.
No notice is shown to have been given to the petitioner for not joining at the places, where he was directed to join.
The non-payment of salary for the said period also amounts to harassment.
14.
Because of the above reasons also, the action of compulsory retirement is clouded by motive of harassment.
No reason is coming forth as to why in spite of the fact that the report of the Vigilance Officer was available when letter dated 29-6-1983 was written, no departmental enquiry was made against the petitioner.
As mentioned above, the notice of compulsory retirement itself is full of allegations, which were required to be investigated during the departmental enquiry.
The order of compulsory retirement, in this case, is not an order simpliciter.
It is to be seen that the Vigilance enquiry was ordered.
FIR was ordered to be lodged, the petitioner was suspended, but thereafter the respondent chose to adopt a short-cut which in view of the Judgment of the Supreme Court in Ishar Chand Jain's case, 1999 Lab IC 1823) (supra) cannot be accepted.
It is true that no charge sheet was given to the petitioner for departmental enquiry.
However, the acts of the respondents were in the direction of instituting departmental enquiry in view of the above position.
When this is so, no reason is given as to why the intention was dropped.
It can, even be seen from Annexure R/5 that the respondents contemplated departmental enquiry against the petitioner.
In view of the above reasons, I do not go to consider the other arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner for challenging the compulsory retirement.
15.
In view of this, the order of compulsory retirement cannot be sustained.
The order of treating the suspension period as leave of the kind due, also cannot be upheld.
The petitioner also prayed for directions to consider him for promotion.
However, he has not prayed for the relief of quashing the adverse remarks against him.
Therefore, this relief as prayed for cannot be granted to him.
16.
As a result, this writ petition is partly allowed.
The order of compulsory retirement, Annexure P/3 and the order treating the suspension period as leave of the kind due, Annexure R/10, are quashed.
The petitioner having crossed the age of superannuation and having died thereafter, the question of reinstatement does not arise.
However, the heirs of the petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits of quashing of orders, Annexure P/3 and P/10 including salary for the period upto superannuation and consequential increase in the retiral benefits.
Petition partly allowed.