Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, petitioner prays for quashing of the charge sheet dated 3072001.
2.
The petitioner who is serving in the Food Corporation of India as Technical Assistant Grade-I was served a charge sheet on 3072001 on the ground that on 1781990 a rice special train which was loaded ex-Ajitwal District Faridkot to Avadi Tamilnadu contained sub-standard rice.
The petitioner committed breach of his duties and acted negligently.
This resulted in a financial loss of Rs. 19,38,667.64.
According to the petitioner there is inordinate unexplained delay of nearly 12 years in serving the charge sheet as the incident relates to 17/29.8.1990 while charge sheet have been served upon the petitioner on 3072001.
Petitioner submitted reply to the charge sheet.
Enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct enquiry into the matter.
Petitioner moved an application for production of certain documents etc. on which appropriate orders were passed by the Enquiry Officer on 282002, which shows that enquiry has progressed considerably and statement of PW1 was being recorded.
Enquiry Officer has asked the department to produce certain records and consequences for non-production of all such record was also specified and enquiry was fixed on 1892002.
In these circumstances on behalf of the petitioner, it is contended that inordinate delay has vested the petitioner with serious prejudice in his defence before Enquiry Officer and as such the charge sheet should be quashed.
Denial of joint inspection and non-production of record according to the petitioner has virtually rendered him defenceless.
3.
As far as the question of quashing the charge sheet as a result of delay, we are unable to accept the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
It is not necessary for us to discuss this contention in greater length in view of judgment pronounced on the same day in Civil Writ Petition No. 15874 of 2002, Jagbir Singh v. Food Corporation of India and others, 2002(4) S.C.T.
943.
In that judgment we have at great length dealt with this question of law.
4.
With regard to question of prejudice, we are again not satisfied that any serious prejudice has been caused to the interest of the petitioner.
Petitioner was served with the charge sheet on 30th July, 2001 to which he filed reply and participated in all the proceedings for the considerable time.
The application of the petitioner for production of record has been fairly dealt with by the Enquiry Officer vide his order dated 282002.
What documents are available and what will be the effect of non-production of documents directed to be produced, is primarily for the Enquiry Officer and Disciplinary Authority to examine.
Especially at the first instance all these matters normally would fall in the domain of the authorities concerned and Court would be reluctant to examine such matters.
We are of the considered view, it may not be very appropriate for the Court to substitute its opinion for that of the Enquiry Officer or that of the Disciplinary Authority particularly at this stage of the proceedings.
We have already noticed that appropriate order has been passed by the Enquiry Officer.
Learned Counsel contended that Enquiry Officer/Disciplinary Authority are incapable in passing any order in this regard.
We see no merit in this contention.
If the documents are not produced and it is not possible to conduct the joint inspection as alleged, if permissible, we have no doubt, in our mind, that authorities concerned shall deal with the matter in accordance with law.
In fact the order passed by the Enquiry Officer dated 282002 fairly indicates that enquiry is being conducted in a just and proper manner.
We see no reason to interfere.
For the reasons aforestated, we dismiss this petition in limine.
Petitioner will be at liberty to raise all these matters before the concerned authorities and any observation made in this judgment would not be to the prejudice of the petitioner.
Petition dismissed.