SS Saron, J - The petitioner joined the respondent-department in the year 1976 and is working as Safai Karmachari/Sweeper with respondent No. 3 Municipal Council Jagadhri.
During the course of service case FIR No. 313 dated 1131997 under Section 34 of the Police Act was registered against him at Police Station City Jagadhri.
He was acquitted in the said case by the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jagadhri, vide judgment dated 2282000 (Annexure P1).
The grievance of the petitioner is that despite his acquittal, he is being proceeded against by way of a departmental enquiry and has been charge-sheeted in pursuance of the impugned charge-sheet dated 14.3.2001 (Annexure P4).
This is termed as illegal, unlawful, erroneous and against Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Besides, the petitioner claims that he is not being paid his full salary and the balance amount of suspension period is also not paid.
He also claims that his basic salary is Rs. 4600/- which has not been paid since 1131990.
The department is to pay him more than Rs. 1,30,000/- as balance salary.
He further claims that he is being paid 50% of his salary.
2.
Notice was issued to the respondents.
Written statement has been filed by the Executive Officer, Municipal Council, Jagadhri.
It is pleaded that the writ petition is not maintainable as the petitioner has not exhausted the alternative remedy available to him under the provisions of Haryana Municipal Safai Mazdoor Service Rules, 1976 (hereinafter to be referred as the `1976 Rules') and the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973.
It is contended that as per Rule 27 of the 1976 Rules, the petitioner has a remedy before the Deputy Commissioner which has not been availed of.
It is further averred that the charge-sheet has been framed against the petitioner which is to be enquired into by the respondent-department keeping in view his service record.
The petitioner is stated to be a drug addict and his service record is very bad and blemished.
It has been stated that the petitioner came to the office of the Municipal Committee, Jagadhri, in a drunken condition on 7111997 at 900 A.M.
He abused and misbehaved with the officials and officers of the Municipal Committee.
The matter was reported to the police and the petitioner was ordered to be placed under suspension vide order dated 24111997.
It is further stated that on 811998 the petitioner presented an application before the Executive Officer of respondent No. 3 Municipal Council in which he admitted the above facts.
He pleaded that he admits his guilt.
Further he gave an undertaking and promised that in future he would not do so.
The said application and undertaking are appended as Annexure R-3/1 with the written statement.
It is in this view of the matter that taking a lenient view, the petitioner was reinstated on 331998.
He was warned not to commit such like acts in future otherwise strict disciplinary action would be taken against him.
3.
Despite this, the petitioner again on 1031998 at 445 PM i.e. just after one week of his reinstatement, took liquor and under the influence of liquor in drunken condition came to the office of respondent No. 3 and started abusing and misbehaving with the officers/officials.
He obstructed the working of the council.
The matter was reported to the police for taking action against him.
The police registered a case under Section 34 of the Police Act.
It has further been averred that the petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated 1231998.
Besides, it is stated that the petitioner did not join his duties on 2282000 i.e. on the date he was acquitted.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is entitled to the balance amount of suspension allowance after completion of the enquiry, if found innocent.
It is also denied that the basic salary of the petitioner comes to Rs. 4600/- or that the petitioner is not being paid his salary since 1131990.
It has been specifically denied that Rs. 1,30,000/- are due to the petitioner from respondent No. 3.
The petitioner is being paid his salary as per rules and no salary of the petitioner has been withheld.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
Primarily, the case of the petitioner is that in respect of the occurrence which took place on 1031998, a case under Section 34 of the Police Act was registered and he was acquitted of the same by the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jagadhri vide judgment dated 2282000 (Annexure P1).
In these circumstances, it is claimed that he cannot be tried in respect of the same allegation by way of departmental enquiry.
6.
The learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana, and learned counsel for respondent No. 3, however, contend that the standard of proof in a departmental enquiry and a criminal trial is entirely different and, therefore, there is no bar to the initiation of departmental enquiry with respect to the same allegation.
Counsel for respondent No. 4 further contends nothing is due from the Municipal Council towards the petitioner.
7.
We may first consider the preliminary objection of respondent which is that the petitioner has a right of appeal in accordance with Rule 27 of the 1976 Rules.
Therefore, he is liable to be non-suited and relegated to the alternative remedy provided under the said Rules.
Rules 27 of the 1976 Rules reads as under :-  "Right of appeal :- The members of the Service upon whom any penalty has been imposed by the authority specified on column 3 of Appendix III shall be entitled to make an appeal to the authority specified in column 4 of the Appendix against the authority in column 3 thereof.
8.
Service has been defined in Rule 2(of the 1976 Rules as follows :-  "Service" means the Municipal Safai Mazdoor Service of a Committee.
9.
A perusal of the above rules show that a member of service i.e. Municipal Safai Mazdoor Service of Committee upon whom any penalty has been imposed by the authority specified in column 3 of the Appendix II is entitled to make an appeal to the authority specified in column 4 of the Appendix against the authority in column 3 thereof.
The right of appeal is, therefore, maintainable only in the event of the penalty being imposed.
In the present case no penalty has been imposed and only a charge-sheet has been issued.
The penalties have been specified in column 2 of Appendix III of the 1976 Rules which are removal, dismissal, suspension, stoppage of increment and other punishments.
The petitioner is only assailing his charge-sheet and is claiming for grant of full salary.
In these circumstances the petition is not liable to be dismissed on the sole ground of alternative remedy being available.
The preliminary objection as raised by the respondents is without any substance and is accordingly rejected.
10.
The charge-sheet dated 14.3.2001 Annexure P4 has been served upon the petitioner on the allegation that on 1031998 at 445 PM he came in the office of the Municipal Council in an inebriated state and started abusing the employees and the officer and made Halla-gulla (revelry) and obstructed working of the office.
Even after consolation by Chief Sanitary Inspector, he did not stop.
Thus, in short, the allegations are that the petitioner under the influence of liquor started abusing the employees and officer.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was tried for the said offence and was acquitted vide order dated 2282000 Annexure P1 passed by the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jagadhri.
The said order shows that prosecution in order to substantiate its case examined PW-1 ASI Ajit Kumar and PW-2 Dr. DP Singh Medical Officer.
Thereafter the prosecution despite availing numerous opportunities including last opportunity, failed to produce its entire evidence.
The cse had become old and finding no justification, the learned trial Magistrate closed the prosecution evidence.
The statement of the petitioner was recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and he denied the allegations.
The learned Magistrate found that the prosecution version was not substantiated by independent corroboration.
The evidence in ASI Ajit Kumar was held to be that of mere hearsay evidence.
Besides, Dr. DP Singh PW-2 had stated that he conducted medico-legal examination of the petitioner and in his opinion the patient had consumed alcohol and to that effect his detailed report was Ex. PC.
The learned trial Magistrate observed that the perusal of the report reveals that the patient had denied to give urine and blood samples whereas no such specific denial was mentioned in the report Ex. PC.
Therefore, it was in these circumstances that the trial Magistrate came to the conclusion that it cannot be conclusively proved that the petitioner had consumed alcohol.
Accordingly, the petitioner was acquitted.
11.
In the case in hand, the charge-sheet dated 14.3.2001 (Annexure P4) gives the list of witnesses against the petitioner.
Two witnesses, namely, Chief Sanitary Inspector Nachhatar Singh and Antu Ram Saini Assistant Municipal Council, Jagadhri have been cited as witnesses.
Therefore, the witnesses who saw the occurrence or otherwise are in the knowledge of it are to be examined.
Besides, it may be noted that the standard of proof in a criminal case and in a departmental proceedings is entirely different.
In a criminal case the prosecution is liable to establish and prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
Thus, the standard of proof of prosecution to prove the guilt beyond any reasonable doubt belongs to criminal jurisprudence.
However, in a departmental proceedings, the liability can be made out on preponderance of probabilities.
A disciplinary enquiry which is contemplated against the petitioner is not be placed on the pedestal of a criminal trial.
The standard of proof that is required is preponderance of probabilities and not the proof beyond reasonable doubt.
Besides, technical rules of evidence are not applicable in a departmental enquiry.
In other words preponderance of probabilities and conclusions drawn as a reasonable man would draw from the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose of departmental enquiry.
Therefore, we are of the view that the charge-sheet served upon the petitioner is not be quashed or dropped merely on the ground that the petitioner has been acquitted in the criminal case.
Respondent No. 3 Municipal Council is entitled to conduct the enquiry and establish the charge against the petitioner.
At the same time, the petitioner is also entitled to participate in the enquiry, defend himself and prove his innocence.
12.
The other relief by the petitioner is with regard to payment of full salary.
It has been pleaded by him that he has not been getting full salary and the balance amount of subsistence allowance for the suspension period is not being paid as he has been acquitted.
He also stated that his basic salary comes to Rs. 4600/- and that he has not been paid his salary since 1131990.
In this manner, the department is to pay him Rs. 1,30,000/- as balance salary.
13.
The allegations in this regard have been denied.
It is stated in the written statement that the petitioner is entitled to the balance amount of suspension allowance after completion of enquiry if he is found innocent.
Besides, it has been specifically denied that the balance salary of the petitioner comes to Rs. 4600/-.
It also denied that he is not being paid his salary since 1131990 and that an amount of Rs. 1,30,000/- is due to him from the Municipal Council.
In view of the disputed questions of facts, we are of the view that this Court is not to go into these matters.
It would be in the fitness of things that the petitioner makes a representation to the respondents with regard to his claims and the respondents thereafter pass a speaking order on the said representation with regard to his dues as may be claimed.
If such a representation is made, the respondents would consider the same and dispose it of within four months of its receipt.
14.
Consequently, the writ petition is disposed of and is dismissed insofar as the prayer of the petitioner for quashing the charge sheet dated 14.3.2001 Annexure P4 is concerned and with regard to other relief of payment of subsistence allowance and full salary, the petitioner may make a representation and if such a representation is made, the respondents would dispose of the same by passing a speaking order within a period of four months for the date of its receipt.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.