Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working on different posts like Lecturers, Masters, Head Masters, Physical Training Instructors and Language Masters.
They have approached this Court with the prayer that a writ in the nature of Mandamus be issued "directing the respondents to grant 2/3 advance increments on acquiring Post Graduate qualification.........".
This claim has been made on the basis of the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated September 1, 1960.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been submitted by way of a preliminary objection that the advance increments for a Post Graduate qualification were admissible prior to February 19, 1979.
Relying upon the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in State of Punjab and others v. Joga Singh and others, L.P.A. No. 374 of 1994 decided on February 20, 1996, the respondents claim that the petitioners are not entitled to the benefit of increments as claimed by them.
3.
The petitioners have not filed any replication to controvert the stand taken by the respondents.
4.
Mr. Arora, learned Counsel for the petitioners, contends that under the instructions issued by the State Government on September 1, 1960 the benefit of advance increments was admissible to Masters and Teachers who improved their qualifications.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. DV Sharma, learned Counsel for the respondents, has pointed out that the conditions of service governing the petitioners are laid down in the Rules called `the Punjab State Education Class III (School Cadre) Services Rules, 1978' Rule 12 fixes the pay scales.
The petitioners cannot seek any benefit contrary to the provisions of the statutory rules.
6.
The members of the Class-III service were originally governed by the provisions of the Punjab Education Service Class-III Rules, 1955.
These rules had been published vide notification dated May 30, 1957.
The pay scales etc. were laid down in Appendix `A'.
The rules contained a provision that Masters with a Post Graduation qualification will be entitled to a higher start of Rs. 126/- in the pay scale of Rs. 110-8-190/10-250.
No such benefit was admissible to the Teachers.
This position had continued till the year 1978 when the new set of rules were notified.
By the 1978 Rules the provisions of the 1955 Rules were repealed.
So far as pay is concerned, specific provision was made in Rule 2.
It provides as under :-  "12.
Members of the service shall be entitled to such scales of pay as may be authorised by Government from time to time.
The scales of pay at present in force are specified in Appendix `A' to these rules against each post."
In Appendix `A' the posts and the scales have been specified.
There is no provision for the grant of a higher start for a Post Graduate Degree.
Thus, on and from the promulgation of the 1978 Rules, the benefit of increments on account of a higher qualification is not admissible.
7.
Mr. Arora contends that the instructions of 1960 have not been repealed.
Thus, the benefit is admissible even today.
Is it so ?
It would be apt to extract the relevant portion of the instructions issued vide letter dated September 1, 1960.
It reads as under :-  "Sanction of the Government of Punjab is accorded to the grant of advance increment to the masters/teachers working in the Punjab Education Department who improved their educational qualifications in the manner detailed below :- Category Personnel Nature of improved qualifications Extent of advance increments Masters (110-8-190/10-250) M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
(3rd Division) 2 Increments Ist or IInd Division 3 Increments.
2.
The advantage will be enjoyed only once and not for doing any subsequent M.A.
It will not be available to those who were given higher start on entry for being M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
3.
These orders will take effect from the date of issue."
8.
A perusal of the above shows that the Masters were in the scale of Rs. 110-250.
Two increments were to be given to a person who acquired a Post Graduate qualification in the IIIrd Division.
Three increments were admissible to those was passed in the Ist or IInd Division.
The benefit was to be given only to the persons who were in the scale of Rs. 110-250.
Not to the Teachers who were working in a lower scale of pay.
This was in complete conformity with the provisions of the 1955 Rules wherein Rule 10 provided that "members of the service will be entitled to such scales of pay as may be authorised by Government from time to time.
The scales of pay at present in force are specified in Appendix `A' against each post."
9.
In Appendix `A' the scales of pay for different categories of posts are specified.
In respect of the posts of Masters etc. which were in the scale of Rs. 110-250, the following entry appeared :-  "495 22 Rs. 110-8-190/10-250 (with a start of Rs. 126 to M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
(III) BT and Rs. 150 to M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
(II) BT and Rs. 150 to M.A./M.Sc./M.Ed.
(II) BT Second Masters, Masters, Physical Training Masters, Assistant District Inspector of Schools, Agriculture Masters and Clerical and Commercial Masters and Science Masters."
A perusal of the above shows that benefit of increments was given to the persons possessing a Post Graduate degree.
The number of increments varied from 2 to 5.
However, vide letter dated September 1, 1960 it was restricted to 2 and 3 increments.
The Rules of 1955 having been repealed by the 1978 Rules, the instructions which had been issued vide letter dated September 1, 1960 and were referable to Rule 10 cannot be said to survive.
Still further, these instructions do not refer to the pay scale of Teachers.
Thus, the claim that even Teachers who are not in the pay scale of Rs. 110-250 are entitled to the benefit of increments cannot be sustained.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.