GS Singhvi, ACJ.
- Having failed to persuade Chandigarh Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal (for short, the Tribunal) to entertain his prayer for quashing the appointment of respondent No. 4-Naseeb Singh (respondent No. 3 before the Tribunal as Extra Departmental Branch Postmaster (for short, EDBPM) for Village Babain, District Kurukshetra, the petitioner has invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has prayed for quashing of order dated 15.10.2001 passed for quashing of order dated 15.10.2001 passed by the Tribunal in OA No. 413-HR-2001 as well as the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4.
2.
For the purpose of deciding whether or not the impugned order is vitiated by an error of law warranting interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, we may briefly notice the relevant facts.
3.
Petitioner-Karam Singh and respondent No. 4-Naseeb Singh and others applied for appointment as EDBPM, Babain in pursuance of the requisition sent by the Employment Exchange.
After considering the candidature of eligible persons, the competent authority prepared a select list.
On the basis of his placement at No. 1, respondent No. 4 was appointed as EDBPM.
The petitioner represented against the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 but failed to evoke favourable response.
Therefore, he filed an application before the Tribunal and prayed for quashing of the appointment of respondent No. 4 on the following grounds :  (i) As on the last date fixed for receipt of application, i.e., 732000, respondent No. 4 was not eligible to be considered for selection because he did not possess suitable accommodation for Post Office.
(ii) The Selection Committee had recommended his name for appointment, but he was not appointed with an oblique motive of giving the post to respondent No. 4 due to extraneous reasons.
4.
The official respondents contested the application filed by the petitioner.
They averred that in view of the objection raised by the petitioner to the eligibility of respondent No. 4, the competent authority gave opportunity to the said respondent to produce evidence regarding the availability of the accommodation for Post Office and appointed him after fully satisfying itself.
They further averred that the candidates selected on the basis of merit determined as per the marks secured in the Matriculation examination could be called upon to produce proof regarding availability of space only after finalisation of the selection.
5.
After examining the pleadings and hearing the learned counsel, the Tribunal dismissed the application by recording the following observations :  "After examining the pleadings and the facts brought to our notice through production of relevant file, firstly, we are of the opinion that it is not a case where there was any cut off date fixed on which all candidates must be possessed of requisite conditions for actual appointment.
Secondly, the rules for recruitment of EDBPMs and as accepted by the Courts in number of cases provide that selection for the post of Ed Sub Postmaster and EDBPMs has to be based on marks obtained in matriculation or equivalent examination.
Admittedly, respondent No. 3 had the highest marks out of 19 candidates considered in section 4 of Swamy's compilation for EDAs under item No. 3 in the chapter of "Method of Recruitment" it has been mentioned that selection comes first considering their merits and other conditions.
Requirement thereafter is that the persons selected for the post must be able to offer space to serve such agency premises for the postal operations.
Being possessed of such premises on the date of application or on the date of approval of the name of most meritorious persons is not a condition precedent.
Grievance of the applicant that for some extraneous reasons appointment was delayed and respondent No. 3 was given time and opportunity for making the arrangement of premises for the post office has no legal basis.
Opinion of the Supervisory Authority was sought on this aspect who had clarified that an opportunity has to be given under the rules to the most meritorious candidate.
It is admitted case of the applicant himself that respondent No. 3 was able to show availability of premises with him for the post office in October/November, 2000.
In our opinion, this fell within the meaning of "reasonable period" and cannot be said to be an unduly delayed.
On this point, we are reminded of a judgment by Madras Bench of CAT in the case of Shunmuga Sundari v Union of India and others, reported in 2000(2) ATJ page 329, wherein in para 6 relying upon a judgment rendered by an Ernakulam Bench of CAT reported in 1993(2) ATJ Page 182, it has been clarified that the selected candidate is expected to offer office space to serve as Agency Premises only after he is selected for the post.
They have also considered para 3 under "Method of Recruitment" to stress that such selected candidate must be able to show that he is able to offer office space to serve as agency premises for postal operations."
6.
Shri KL Arora argued that eligibility of the candidates with reference to academic qualification and availability of space had to be determined with reference to the cut-off date fixed for receipt of applications and subsequent acquisition of property by any candidate could not be taken into consideration for the purpose of selection.
He further argued that the exercise undertaken by the Supervisory Authority to create evidence in favour of respondent No. 4 should have been treated sufficient by the Tribunal to quash the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4.
Shri Arora also laid emphasis on the assertion contained in the application that name of the petitioner had been placed at the top of the merit list and, therefore, he was entitled to be appointed as EDBPM in preference to respondent No. 4.
7.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the arguments of the learned counsel and we do not find any error in the order of the Tribunal which may justify reversal of the finding that respondent No. 4 had been appointed on the basis of his placement in the merit list at No. 1.
It is not in dispute that respondent No. 4 had secured more marks than the petitioner in Marticualtion examination and that the basic criteria for selection is the academic attainments in the Matriculation examination.
Therefore, the petitioner's plea that he was more meritorious than respondent No. 4 and was placed at No. 1 in the select list is liable to be rejected.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner could not draw our attention to any statutory rule which lays down the availability of accommodation on the last date fixed for receipt of applications as a condition precedent to the consideration of the candidature of an otherwise eligible person.
In the absence of any such statutory provision, the competent authority did not commit any illegality be giving an opportunity to respondent No. 4 to produce proof regarding availability of accommodation for Post Office.
The executive instructions, if any, issued by the department on the issue of availability of accommodation for Post Office do not have the effect of amending the recruitment rules.
Therefore, the candidature of respondent No. 4 could not have been ignored on the ground that as on the date of application, he did not have accommodation for Post Office.
In view of the above, we hold that the selection of respondent No. 4 on the basis of the higher marks secured by him in the Matriculation examination cannot be termed as arbitrary or violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, as claimed by the petitioner.
Hence, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.