Vijender Jain, J. (Oral) - This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner aggrieved by the order of the respondent dated 12793 vide which the petitioner was awarded major penalty of reducing him to initial stage in time scale of MMGS-II.
2.
Mr. R Venkata Ramani, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on 3890 for making some contradictory statement before the enquiry authority.
The petitioner submitted his reply and on 25191, Dy.
General Manager (P) expressed his displeasure and cautioned the petitioner on the aforesaid misconduct.
3.
It was contended that on 11.11.91, the petitioner received a letter from the Regional Manager along with letter dated 9.10.91 inter alia, stating that the Executive Director had reviewed the order dated 25191 and article of charge and statement of allegations were issued against the petitioner.
4.
It was contended by the counsel for the petitioner that the Executive Director has no power to review the order of Dy.
General Manager (Personnel) dated 8191, as per the regulations of the respondent bank as Executive Director is not the reviewing authority and even otherwise he could review the same within a period of six months of the final order.
5.
Next limb of the arguments advanced by the counsel for the petitioner was that there were four other officers including Kartar Singh Waraich, who were all proved guilty of the same charge for having made contradictory statement but said Mr. Kartar Singh Waraich was exonerated vide order dated 10.6.93 passed by Sh. KS Bains, Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the respondent bank.
6.
It was further contended by counsel for the petitioner that the reviewing authority ought to have issued show cause notice to the petitioner if reviewing authority had come at a different finding than that of the disciplinary authority.
7.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that on the aforesaid basis, the order of reviewing authority dated 13391 is illegal in view of the Regulation 18 of the Punjab and Sind Bank Officer Employees (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1981 and, therefore, same was liable to be quashed.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner further contends that the order of the review passed by the Executive Director be quashed and the petitioner is entitled to get the original pay when the final order dated 12th July, 1993 was passed by the Dy.
General Manager (Personnel).
9.
On the other hand counsel for the respondent has contended that the reliance placed by the petitioner on the regulations with regard to the period of six months is misconceived as the record of the case has to be called for within six months from the date of final order.
It was contended that record of the case was called within a period of six months.
It is contended by the counsel for the respondent that the order was reviewed within a period of six months as the order of the Executive Director was dated 11391.
Counsel for the respondent further controverted the stand of the petitioner that four other officers were exonerated except the petitioner and stated that same is not correct as other officers including the petitioner were given punishment except one Kartar Singh Waraich who was exonerated in view of his past record and various other duties.
10.
I have given my careful consideration to the arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties.
The order passed on 11391 has taken into account :  "From the perusal of the file the reply given by all the employees were on the same line".
11.
As a matter of fact the Executive Director has recorded that formal charge-sheets be issued against them then why Kartar Singh Waraich was left out.
There is a note at page No. 52 of the paper books emanating from Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Kartar Singh Bains which makes interesting reading.
The highest officer of the respondent bank has taken into consideration the following facts :  "First the review undertaken by the ED under Section 18 of the PSB Officers (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations is assumed to be based on the 'final order'.
A 'final order' is supposed to be issued only when disciplinary proceedings have concluded.
In this case the disciplinary authority chose to 'caution' the officer on the basis of his reply dated 191190 to his show cause notice dated 3890.
Thirdly, the enquiry authority on page 10 of his report has clearly mentioned that he accepts that CSO's submission that the letter dated 13784 was written under pressure, coercion or inducement, which plea the CSO has taken.
It cannot be ruled out that the officer did give contradictory statement.
It is a serious matter that in his statement he blamed a senior officer.
It cannot be ruled out that this charge against him may be found correct.
However, at the same time, the procedural and factual defects pointed out above do weaken our case.
In the ultimate analysis proceedings may be not sustainable in a court of law.
This order will not be treated as a precedent in other similar cases.
OB 12.
One fails to understand that when all the aforesaid factors having been found against the said Kartar Singh Waraich, his case was akin and similar to other persons and same charges were labelled against him as were labelled against other four persons and simply because he met Chairman-cum-Managing Director on his tour to Bhatinda, the Chairman-cum-Managing Director ordered that Kartar Singh Waraich has suffered tension on account of enquiry the disciplinary proceedings should be stayed against him at whatever stage they were and he stood exonerated of the charges.
This kind of order passed in favour of one person who was similarly situated with other four persons offends Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
If the Chairman-cum-Managing Director has decided for the reasons best known to him to exonerate Kartar Singh Wariach who was implicated of the same charges as other four persons then continuing the proceedings against the four other officers amounted to discrimination per se.
13.
After having held that the review undertaken by the Executive Director is assumed to be based on final order and a final order was supposed to be issued only when disciplinary proceedings were concluded and the disciplinary authority having given caution to the officer but there was no final order and conscious of the fact that the procedural and factual defects weaken the case of the department and, therefore, ultimate analysis proceedings may not be sustainable in a court of law exonerating Kartar Singh Waraich and leaving other similarly situated persons including the petitioner is arbitrary and colourable exercise of the powers vested with the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the respondent bank.
14.
Therefore, I quash the order dated 11391 by issuing a writ of certiorari and further issue a writ of mandamus to give the same pay scale to the petitioner as he was entitled to from 12793.
Rule is made absolute.
Petition allowed.