TS Doabia, J - "This criticism is mere a reflection on the examiners than on the system itself.
If there can be manipulation or dishonesty in allotting marks at interviews, there can equally be manipulation in the matter of awarding marks in the written examinations.
In the ultimate analysis whatever method is adopted its success depends on the moral standards of the members constituting the selection committee and their sense of objectivity and devotion to duty."
2.
The above quote is from one of the earliest decisions of Supreme Court of India reported as Chitralekha v. State of Mysore, AIR 1994 SC 1833 at page 1831.
3.
The further observations made are reproduced below :  "But learned counsel for the appellants raised a larger question that selection by interview is inherently repugnant to doctrine of equality embodied in Art. 14 of the Constitution for whatever may be the objective tests laid down in the final analysis the awarding of marks is left to the subjective satisfaction of the selection committee and therefore, it gives ample room for discrimination and manipulation.
We cannot accept such a wide contention and condemn one of the well accepted mode of selection in educational institutions.
James Hart in his "An Introduction to Administrative Law" observed at page 180 thus :  "A test or examination to be competitive must employ an objective standard of measure.
Where the standard or measure is wholly subjective to the examiners, it differs in effect in no respect from an uncontrolled opinion of the examiners and cannot be termed competitive."
"In the field of education there are divergent views as regards the mode of testing the capacity and calibre of students in the matter of admission to Colleges.
Orthodox educations stand by the marks obtained by a student in the annual examination.
The modern trend of opinion insists upon other additional tests such as interview, performance in extra curricular activities, personality test, psychiatric tests etc."  4.
In the light of the above observation this case be examined.
5The petitioner sought appointment to the post of Lecturer in the discipline of Commerce.
On 17th of Dec 1993 Advertisement notification for the post of Lecturer in the discipline of Commerce was issued by the Public Service Commission.
The petitioner applied for the said post.
He was not successful.
He has approached this court.
It is submitted :  (i) that the questions which were put to him had no relevancy to the subject regarding which he was supposed to teach.
(ii) that he had answered all the questions correctly.
(iii) that the private respondents who came to be selected have lower merit.
6.
The respondents have filed objections.
The stand taken by them is that the claims of the petitioner were considered.
He was found to be lower in merit; he was not selected.
7.
After having heard learned counsels for the parties, I am of the opinion that the only right which is vested in citizen is a right of consideration.
The petitioner's claim was considered.
The argument that some of the questions which were asked to him had no relevance to the subject regarding which he was supposed to teach is an argument which cannot be accepted.
What is to be seen is not only whether right answer was given but the manner in which answer was given is relevant.
Ability of a candidate to react and alterness which is displayed is relevant.
This is a matter on which opinion has to be expressed by the Selecting authority.
Even if all these assertions made by the petitioner are taken as correct still it is not possible to grant any relief to the petitioner.
This is a matter on whcih decision has to be taken by the respondents and this decision cannot be subjected to any judicial review.
Petition is found to be without merit.
Disposed of as such.
Petition dismissed.