Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Does Regulation 26 of the Panjab University Calendar, Volume II, debar a Graduate in Science from offering Music as an additional subject ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this petition.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
In September 1999, the petitioner qualified the Bachelor of Science examination from the Panjab University, Chandigarh.
He applied for permission to appear in the additional subject of Music.
He was allowed to take the BA Part I examination under R.No.
14193.
His result was declared on July 23, 2001.
The petitioner secured 71 marks out of 80 in theory and 93 marks out of 120 in practical.
Thus, he secured 164 marks out of 200 in Music (Vocal).
Thereafter, the petitioner applied for permission to appear in the Part II examination.
The permission was declined.
He represented.
Having failed to persuade the University to accept his contention, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner prays that the order dated March 11, 2002 by which his request for admission to the Part II examination was rejected be set aside and that the Respondent- University be directed to permit him to appear in the Part II and III examinations.
3.
A reply has been filed on behalf of the Respondent-University by its Registrar.
It has been admitted that the petitioner had taken BA Part I examination in the additional subject of Music (Vocal) in April 2001.
He had passed.
However, the respondent states that "this was a sheer mistake on the part of the office."
According to the respondent, "Music (Vocal) was an additional subject which could only have been opted with the Arts stream and not with the BSc.
stream since it is covered under the faculty of Arts."
On this basis, the respondent maintains that the petitioner is not entitled to appear for the additional subject of Music (Vocal).
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been contended that the Regulation as it existed at the time he petitioner had joined for BA Part-I (Music), did not place any restriction as is now sought to be imposed by the University.
On the other hand, Mr. Raina contends that Regulation 26 does not permit a science student to appear in the subject of Music.
Is it so ?
5.
Regulation 26 as amended in the year 2000 provides as under :-  "A candidate who has passed BA or BSc.
examination from this University may appear at any subsequent BA or BSc.
annual examination in any one or more subjects prescribed for the examination except the subjects in which he has already passed the said examination.
A candidate seeking permission on the basis of 26 above shall be allowed only if he is resident of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh or Union Territory of Chandigarh."
6.
A perusal of the above regulation shows that a candidate who has qualified BA or BSc.
examination can appear "in any one or more subjects."
He can offer additional subject/s "except the subjects in which he has already passed the examination."
He can do so at "any subsequent BA or BSc.
annual examination."
The plain language of the Regulation suggests that the candidate is at liberty to quality in an additional subject or subjects at a subsequent examination.
Nothing more.
7.
Mr. Raina submits that a person who has passed BA examination can opt for only Arts subjects and a person who has passed BSc.
examination can opt for science subjects.
In other words, the contention is that a Graduate in Science cannot opt for any Arts subjects and vice versa.
8.
A reading of the rules as it exists does not admit of such a restricted meaning.
The regulation does not say that a Graduate in Arts shall be entitled to opt for one or more subjects in Arts only or that a Graduate in Science shall be entitled to opt for additional subjects in the field of science alone.
9.
In any case, there appears to be no good reason for reading such a restriction into the provision.
The aim of education is to discipline the human mind.
Every system of education is calculated to ensure a harmonious development of personality.
Inter-disciplinary studies are not barred under Regulation 26.
The plain language of the Rule does not suggest that a Graduate in science cannot study Music as an additional subject.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It is the admitted position that after having passed the BSc.
examination, the petitioner had applied for permission to appear in the additional subject of Music.
The University had entertained his request.
It had issued a Roll Number.
The petitioner had taken the examination.
His result was duly declared on July 23, 2001.
He had passed the examination.
The University having allowed the petitioner to take the BA Part I examination in Music there appears to be no justification for cutting short his effort and debarring him from appearing in Parts II and III.
Still further, it deserves notice that the petitioner has done well in his examination.
He has admittedly secured 164 marks out of 200 in BA Part I.
It appears that the petitioner has a genuine interest in Music (Vocal).
He is not trying to remain on the rolls of the University for mere fun.
He is actually interested in the subject and he is wanting to qualify at least as a Graduate in Music.
Even otherwise, music is the gift of God.
In today's world, a melody can be the remedy for many a malady.
Singers lend sound to simple words.
We find no reason to exclude students of science from the study of `sound'.
11.
In view of the above, we answer the question as posed at the outset in favour of the petitioner and hold that Regulation 26 of the Panjab University Calendar Volume II does not debar a Graduate in science from offering Music as an additional subject.
12.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram points out that in pursuance to an interim order passed by a Bench of this Court, the petitioner has already appeared in BA Parts II and III examinations.
Mr. Raina accepts this position.
13.
In view of our conclusion on the basic issue, it is directed that the petitioner's result shall be declared within one week.
14.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
No costs.
Petition allowed.