VK Bali, J - Challenge herein is to the notification dated March 7, 2001 (Annexure P-9) and letter dated March 21, 2001 (Annexure P-18).
In consequence of setting aside notification (Annexure P-9) vide which the petitioner has been expelled from the Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, respondent No. 1 (herein-after referred to as 'the Institute') with immediate effect on a complaint of misconduct alleged against him, the petitioner further prays for a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to readmit him to the Sixth Semester, IIIrd Year Course of BE of the Institute and allow him to complete his course.
2.
Brief facts, on which reliefs as asked for above, as projected in the writ, reveal that the petitioner joined the Institute in the BE Course of Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering.
He was admitted against the Non-Resident Indian (NRI) quota seats.
He passed his Fourth Semester examination and completed his 2nd year also.
It is the case of the petitioner that during his studies in the college, he became friendly and intimate with Ms. Sandeep Kaur and used to go out together from the college.
Ms. Sandeep Kaur later, however, became inimical towards him and threatened to take revenge.
With a view to achieve her object, Ms. Sandeep Kaur filed a complaint to the Dean Student Affairs alleging therein that the petitioner had been harassing her for the past two years.
It is also stated that even though the petitioner had apologised but he had persisted in troubling her.
On the basis of the complaint aforesaid (Annexure P-1), the petitioner was suspended from the Institute.
On September 8, 2000, Dean Students Affairs and Chairman Discipline Committee issued a notice to the petitioner indicating that proceedings would be held against him before the Students Discipline Committee.
The list of students, who were to appear before the Committee was also indicated.
The petitioner was asked to file his reply.
He was also informed that he could cross-examine the witnesses.
On September 13, 2000, petitioner received yet another letter from the Chairman, Student Discipline Committee, informing him that 7 students had appeared before the Committee on September 6, 2000.
Two students also appeared on September 13, 2000.
The petitioner was also informed that certain documents could not be supplied to him.
Time for filing reply by the petitioner was, however, extended and the next date of the meeting of the Committee was also informed to the petitioner.
It is further the case of the petitioner that with a view to put a quietus to the matter and on the asking of the Committee, he submitted a written apology but was yet punished by imposition of fine of Rs. 1500/-.
Besides, it was also ordered that he would not be allowed to stay in the hostel.
The Girls Hostel was made out of bounds for him and he was also to give written undertaking counter-signed by his parents that he will not misbehave with any girl student in future and also not indulge in any act of indiscipline.
In obedience to the orders aforesaid, the petitioner furnished the necessary undertaking, which was counter-signed by his parents as well.
The suspension of the petitioner was revoked vide order dated September 29, 2000 and he was allowed to attend the classes.
However, on March 6, 2001, Ms. Sandeep Kaur forwarded yet another complaint against the petitioner as she felt that in the earlier action the petitioner had got away very lightly.
It is stated that copy of the complaint aforesaid was not supplied to the petitioner and the same was supplied after his expulsion with letter dated March 16, 2001.
On the very next date, i.e. March 7, 2001, on the basis of the complaint, the petitioner was expelled from the college without enquiry, without show cause notice and without asking for his reply, which was in violation of principles of natural justice, as also the Regulations of the Institute framed for dealing with the students discipline.
On the very day, Ms. Sandeep Kaur too was rusticated from the current semester, i.e., Second Semester of the academic session 2001.
It was indicated that action had been taken against her for adopting undesirable means in influencing the decision making process of the Institute on her complaint dated March 6, 2001.
This was indicated to amount to an act of gross indiscipline.
She was debarred from attending the classes and was also asked to vacate the hostel by March 8, 2001 However, later, the action, as evidenced vide order (Annexure P-10) against Ms. Sandeep Kaur, was revoked even though the petitioner was not given similar treatment by withdrawing order (Annexure P-9).
On March 14, 2001, father of the petitioner addressed a letter to the Director of the Institute for withdrawal of the punitive action against the petitioner.
The petitioner also made an application for supplying him complete records of the case to enable him to file an appeal before the competent authority.
Father of the petitioner was informed on March 16, 2001 that action was taken against the petitioner by the Director after discussions and deliberations and as per the powers vested in him vide Clause 38 (vi) of the Rules of the Institute.
It is the case of the petitioner that Rule 38 (vi) merely envisages powers relating to proper maintenance and discipline in the Institute, which vest in the Director and the procedure to be followed for punishment is indicated in General Regulations of the Institute, which procedure was not followed.
On March 19, 2001, the petitioner received letter dated March 16, 2001 from the Dean Students Affairs, in which he was informed that complaint was read out to him and he has given his version of the incident and the matter was reported to the Director.
It is the case of the petitioner that in fact that complaint was never read out to him nor his version had been asked for about the incident.
The intimation received by the petitioner on March 19, 2001, was only an attempt to cover up the glaring lapse on the part of the respondents in expelling him.
Even otherwise copy of complaint, statement of imputations of allegations and the documents in support thereof were liable to be supplied to the petitioner in accordance with the principles of natural justice as also the provisions of general regulations of the respondent Institute.
However, copy of the complaint dated March 6, 2001, was supplied to the petitioner at this stage.
Besides, statements of two students dated March 6, 2001, were also supplied to him on March 19, 2001.
In the meantime, petitioner had filed his appeal in which he stated that he was not given copy of the complaint nor charge sheet was served upon him, no reply in respect of complaint has been sought from him.
It was further stated that the mother of the petitioner went to meet the Director on March 7, 2001 but no hearing was given to her.
He was innocent and had no ill-will against the complainant.
He tendered apology previously also to settle the matter so that he could carry on with his studies with a free mind.
He also submitted that it was a matter of fact that he had improved in his studies since the last decision in respect of the complaint in September, 2000 and the complainant had falsely implicated him and no incident occurred in the college.
On March 21, 2001, the impugned letter rejecting his appeal was received by the petitioner.
The letter contained parawise comments to the appeal.
The petitioner, however, denied receipt of copy of the complaint and other documents, which he stated were never served upon him.
3.
Pursuant to the notice issued by this court, respondents 1 to 4 have entered defence and opposed the cause of the petitioner.
In the written statement, that has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 4, it has, inter-alia, been pleaded that the petitioner has misstated and concealed the facts from his Court.
It has been alleged by him in the writ petition that he has been expelled vide Notification (Annexure P-10) dated March 7, 2001, without giving any opportunity of hearing which is violative of principles of natural justice.
In this regard, it is pleaded that in the second week of May 1999, a verbal complaint against the petitioner was made by Ms. Sandeep Kaur to the Warden, Girls Hostel, who was also studying in the respondent Institute.
It was alleged by Ms. Sandeep Kaur that the petitioner along with his sister came to the hostel to see her and the petitioner is harassing her for quite some time.
The Warden of the Girls Hostel sat with them and advised the petitioner not to disturb her in future in any manner to which the petitioner agreed.
This matter was also informed to the Dean, Student Affairs.
Thereafter, Ms. Sandeep Kaur again informed the Warden, Girls' Hostel that the petitioner came to her with a written letter to her.
This matter along with earlier incident was again informed to the Dean, Student Affairs, by sending a note dated May 28, 1999 and it was requested to call the petitioner and advise him.
A copy of the said note has been annexed as Annexure R-1/1 to the written statement.
Consequently, a written message was sent to the petitioner on May 28, 1999 itself by the Dean, Student Affairs to meet him in his office.
The petitioner met Dean, Student Affairs, in his office on the same date and at that time Warden, Girls Hostel, was also present.
Dr. Sharda, Dean, Student Affairs, talked to the mother of the petitioner in Delhi on telephone and appraised her of the situation and requested to counsel her son.
Mother of the petitioner assured that this will not be repeated in future and her son will not disturb Ms. Sandeep Kaur in any manner.
Minutes of the meeting held in this regard on May 28, 1999, have been annexed as Annexure R1/2 with the written statement.
On September 30, 1999, Ms. Sandeep Kaur once again made verbal complaint to the Dean, Student Affairs, that the petitioner is again harassing her and, therefore, the petitioner was called by the Dean, Student Affairs.
The petitioner gave a written undertaking dated September 30, 1999, that he will never try to approach that girl in any manner.
Copy of the said undertaking has been annexed as Annexure R1/3 with the written statement.
On the said undertaking itself, the Dean, Student Affairs, mentioned that mother of the petitioner had also been informed on telephone with regard to the complaint against the petitioner from Ms. Sandeep Kaur and requested his parents that they should come and meet him but due to some family problem, they expressed their inability to meet him but, however, they assured that in near future they would come to Patiala and meet the authorities.
Thereafter, a written complaint dated August 16, 2000 was filed by Ms. Sandeep Kaur against the petitioner to the Dean, Student Affairs (Annexure P-1).
In the complaint, Ms. Sandeep Kaur alleged that the petitioner was harassing her for the past two years and all warnings given to him had fallen on deaf ears.
She also requested to take some strict action against the petitioner so that she is saved from the torture meted out to her.
In view of the complaint aforesaid, the petitioner was suspended from the respondent Institute vide order dated August 16, 2000 with immediate effect.
He was also debarred from attending the classes pending enquiry by the disciplinary authority.
After the written complaint, the case was put up before the Students Disciplinary Committee and in the mean time, another written complaint was filed by Ms. Sandeep Kaur on August 21, 2000 alleging that on August 19 2000, the petitioner was roaming in front of her house.
A copy of the complaint aforesaid has been annexed as Annexure R-1/4 to the written statement.
The petitioner was informed about the meeting of the Students Disciplinary Committee to be held on August 24, 2000 vide letter dated August 21, 2000.
Thereafter, meeting of the Students Disciplinary Committee was held on August 24, 2000 and statements of the petitioner as well as the complainant were recorded.
Copy of the minutes of meeting held on August 24, 2000 have been placed as Annexure R-1/5.
The next date fixed by the Students Disciplinary Committee was September 6, 2000.
On that date, seven witnesses appeared and gave their statements in favour of Ms. Sandeep Kaur and against the petitioner.
Copy of the minutes of the meeting held on September 6, 2000 has been annexed as Annexure R1/6 with the written statement.
On September 6, 2000, the petitioner, however, did not appear before the Students Disciplinary Committee.
Thereafter a letter dated September 8,2000 was written to the petitioner giving the details of the proceedings and he was asked to give his defence on the next date of hearing, i.e., September 13, 2000.
Thereafter, the petitioner addressed two letters dated September 11, 2000 for extension of time for filing reply and also requested for photocopies of some documents.
On September 13, 2000, the Students Disciplinary Committee in the meeting referred to the letters of the petitioner dated September 11, 2000 and it was decided not to give photocopies of the documents, whereas the petitioner was asked/allowed to inspect the records.
In the said meeting, two more witnesses came and gave statements.
A copy of the minutes of the meeting held on September 13, 2000, has been annexed as Annexure R-1/7.
Thereafter, letter dated September 14, 2000 was written to the petitioner giving details of the proceedings held on September 13, 2000 and he was asked to inspect the record.
It was also mentioned in the letter aforesaid that time has also been extended for filing reply upto September 21, 2000 and the next date of the meeting would be September 22, 2000.
The petitioner gave his reply on September 21, 2000 and denied the allegations.
Thereafter, a meeting of the Students Disciplinary Committee was held on September 22, 2000 and the petitioner cross-examined the witnesses.
In the end of the meeting, the petitioner gave written apology.
A copy containing his apology has been annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-1/8.
The petitioner thereafter gave another unconditional apology dated September 26, 2000 (Annexure R-1/9).
In this unconditional apology, he averred that he had realised that he might have made few mistakes in past which might have hurt the feelings of Ms. Sandeep Kaur and he really feels sorry for that and if the sentiments of anyone have been hurt due to his behaviour, he regrets for the same.
He further stated that such type of behaviour shall not be repeated in future.
Thereafter a meeting of the Students Disciplinary Committee was held on September 26, 2000 and in view of the apology dated September 26, 2000, it was decided by the Students Disciplinary Committee that although the petitioner was guilty of causing mental harassment to Ms. Sandeep Kaur but in view of the apology, the Committee imposed a fine of Rs. 1500/- upon the petitioner.
It was also ordered that he will not be allowed hostel seat in any of the hostels during the remaining part of his study and the girls hostel area be made out of bounds for him.
It was further ordered that he will give a written undertaking counter-signed by his parents that he will not misbehave with any girl student in future and not indulge in any act of indiscipline.
It was also ordered that his suspension be revoked as soon as fine has been deposited and written undertaking is received from him duly counter-signed by his parents.
A copy of the minutes of the meeting held on September 26, 2000, has been annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-1/10.
Thereafter, a Notification to this effect was also issued on September 27, 2000.
In compliance of the decision dated September 27, 2000, the petitioner deposited the fine of Rs. 1500/- on September 28, 2000 and also gave an undertaking duly counter-signed by his parents that he will not misbehave with any girl in future and will not indulge in any indiscipline.
In view of the order dated September 27, 2000 and in view of the submission of written undertaking, Notification dated September 29, 2000 was issued and the petitioner was allowed to attend the classes with immediate effect.
Thereafter, Ms. Sandeep Kaur made yet another verbal complaint to the Head of the Department on January 25, 2001 that the petitioner had started teasing her and followed her upto the hostel and also rang her up in her hostel.
This incident was brought by the Head of the Department to the notice of the Dean, Student Affairs, on telephone and it was decided by the latter to contact the parents of the petitioner.
Thereafter, Dean, Student Affairs, telephoned the parents of the petitioner, who were not available at their residence.
Sister of the petitioner, who was available, was told about the incident and was asked to inform her father to contact the Dean, Student Affairs, on telephone.
These facts were recorded in the note (Annexure R1/11).
Mother of the petitioner telephoned the Dean, Student Affairs, on January 25, 2001 itself and the facts were conveyed to her.
Thereafter mother of the petitioner came to see the Dean, Student Affairs on January 30, 2001.
She was appraised of the complaint of Ms. Sandeep Kaur.
However, the petitioner denied the charges but her mother requested that one more chance be given to her son and he will be more careful in future.
The petitioner was also warned that strict action would be taken against him if he repeats such act.
These facts were recorded in the note (Annexure R-1/11).
The petitioner once again misbehaved and harassed Ms. Sandeep Kaur, who filed written complaint on March 6, 2001 (Annexure R-1/12).
On the complaint of Ms. Sandeep Kaur, mother of the petitioner was informed about the incident and was asked to meet the Dean, Student Affairs.
Mother of the petitioner contacted the Dean Student Affairs on March 6, 2001 at 1115 am She was also asked to see the Head of the Department and requested to bring her son to the office of the Dean, Student Affairs.
At 130 pm mother of the petitioner along with the petitioner came to the office of Dean Student Affairs and the Head of the Department Smt. Bhanot was also present there.
Statements of two witnesses in favour of Sandeep Kaur were also recorded.
The complaint as well as the statements of the witnesses were read over to the petitioner and his mother.
Thereafter, the matter was referred to the Director.
The Director asked for the record and it was shown to him.
After seeing the record, the Director fixed the meeting of all Deans, Head Counselling and Wardens, Girls Hostel on March 7, 2001 at 1000 am On the date aforesaid, Dean DRPG, Dean RSP, Dean Academic Affairs, Dean Students Affairs, Head Counselling, Warden Girls Hostel and Director were present and it was decided to expel the petitioner with immediate effect on the complaint of misconduct alleged by Ms. Sandeep Kaur and Notification to this effect was also issued on March 7, 2001 (Annexure P-9).
4.
The detailed written statement filed on behalf of the respondents reveals continuous misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
He has indulged in harassment to a lady student and persisted with it despite requests, warnings and punishments.
By authentic documentary evidence, the misconduct indulged by him stands proved.
The plea that in ultimate analysis, when he was expelled, he was not given a hearing in the matter, thus, violating the principles of natural justice, in the context of the facts and circumstances of this case, can not sustain.
It is too well established on records of the case that proper procedure had been initiated by ensuring full participation of the petitioner, which ultimately culminated into punishment to the petitioner by way of fine and other punishments, as mentioned above.
The punishment was light, commensurate to the serious misconduct indulged by him as at that time he had given an unconditional apology on September 26, 2000, Annexure R-1/9 wherein he had clearly stated that such type of behaviour shall not be repeated, by him in future.
The ultimate order expelling him is sequel to the light punishment given to him and did not, therefore, involve holding of enquiry de novo.
The light punishment given to him was conditional of his proper behaviour in future.
The violation of his undertaking did not require any procedure to be followed and yet it is in the meeting of the Deans, i.e., Dean DRPG, Dean RSP, Dean Academic Affairs, Dean, Students Affairs, Head Counselling, Warden Girls Hostel and Director, that a decision was taken to expel him.
If, against this kind of behaviour of petitioner, no action was to be taken, it would have polluted the entire atmosphere in the university campus as it would have certain encouraged mischief mongers to follow the dirty example set by the petitioner.
No fault at all can be found with the notification, Annexure P-9, expelling the petitioner.
Insofar as complaint of petitioner pertaining to taking no action against Ms. Sandeep Kaur is concerned, suffice it to say that her anxiety, faced with the situation that she was in, that petitioner is punished can not be lost sight of.
She was victim of harassment for a long time.
In her anxiety, if she approached some one concerned to take action against the petitioner, for which she later even apologised, she deserved to be let off and that is what has precisely happened.
Finding no merit in this petition we dismiss the same, leaving, however, the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.