Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the letter dated 282001 (Annexure P/5) issued by respondent No. 2 vide which his claim for medical reimbursement was rejected.
He has further prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to reimburse the expenses of Hemo-dialysis and other expenses being undertaken by the petitioner on account of advice by the post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the "PGI").
2.
The brief facts of the case are as under :  The petitioner retired as Senior Draftsman-cum-Modeller from the Haryana Government service after working with the department of Architecture, Haryana till date of superannuation i.e. 3062000.
He was a regular employee of the Department of Architecture, Haryana and was posted at Chandigarh in the office of Chief Architect, Haryana (respondent No. 2).
It is further averred that the petitioner used to have his medical bills reimbursed from respondent No. 2 and was governed by Punjab Services Medical Attendance Rules, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules of 1940").
He further stated that PGI is one of the Government Hospitals and also as per section 29 of the PGI Act, the Haryana Government employees are entitled to free treatment.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that he fell ill in the month of May, 2001 and on diagnoses from the PGI, the doctor found that the petitioner is suffering from Diabetic Nephropathy, IInd Stage Renal Disease.
He was admitted in the PGI on 23.5.2001 and discharged from there on 262001.
Copy of the discharge card is at Annexure P/1.
After discharge, he was advised to go Hemo Maintenance Dialysis outside PGI A certificate to this effect (copy at Annexure P/2) was issued by the PGI  4.
The petitioner has further averred that he submitted bills for an amount of Rs. 12,000/- for the expenses incurred by him while being admitted as an indoor patient in the PGI but no payment was released to the petitioner.
He further submitted that three more bills dated 2762001, 782001 and 882001 for reimbursement of medical expenses were submitted but nothing was paid to him.
The petitioner received a letter dated 1482001 (copy at annexure P/3) from the department that a sum of Rs. 10,000/- out of total bill of Rs. 12,000/- is being recommended for reimbursement but even after recommendation by the department, nothing was paid to him.
5.
It is further averred that the wife of the petitioner made a request to respondent No. 2 for immediate release of payment vide letter dated 3172001 (copy annexure P/4).
The petitioner received a communication (copy at Annexure P/5) from the respondent-department intimating that the bills submitted by the petitioner have been rejected on the ground that the petitioner is receiving Fixed Medical Allowance and, therefore, payment with respect to outdoor treatment is not being made.
The petitioner then wrote back to the department that the payment of Fixed Medical Allowance be immediately stopped because the instructions for payment of Fixed Medical Allowance have already been struck down and further that the petitioner is suffering from a chronic disease.
Copy of said letter is at Annexure P/6.
6.
Notice of motion was issued.
Written statement on behalf of the respondents was filed.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the petitioner Haryana Government employee is governed by the Rules of 1940 and as per rule 3 of these rules, a Government employee shall be entitled to free of charge treatment in a Hospital in the place where he falls ill. Rules 3 and 4 of the Rules of 1940 are reproduced as under :  "Rule 3 :- (A Government employee shall be entitled free of charge to treatment in a Hospital in the place where he falls ill and in the absence of a Hospital there, in the nearest Hospital, within the State.)
1.
(Medical attendance includes attendance at the Hospital or at Residence of the Government employee or at the consulting room of the Authorised Medical Attendant, by arrangement with him.
(These concessions will, however, not be admissible to the families of Government servants in so far as attendance at the residence of the Government Servant and the consulting room of the Authorised Medical Attendant is concerned).
When the patient is treated at a Hospital at place other than that where he falls ill he will not be entitled to travelling allowance for the journey to such Hospital.
If, however, the patient is sent to the nearest specialist or other Medical Officer in the province by whom in the opinion of the Director of Health Services medical attendance is required for the patient, he will be entitled to travelling allowance to the Headquarters or the Specialist or other Medical Officer and back.
Rule 4 provides as under :  (1) Where according to the Rules of the Hospital, in which Government employee receives treatment, separate charges are made for medical, surgical and nursing treatment and for board, the charge for the former shall be defrayed by Govt. and the charges for board will be met by the officer himself.
(2) Where the Hospital charges is an inclusive charge, the charges for board shall be levied from the Government employee under treatment, at the rates given in Appendix XXIV of Punjab Medical Manual for each category of diet scale and the remaining hospital charges, shall be regarded as the charges for medical, surgical and nursing treatment."
7.
It is clear from the above rules that the Government employee is entitled to full reimbursement of the medical treatment taken by him except for the charges of boarding.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated that a Government employee is entitled to free indoor treatment from PGI or any Government hospital.
He has further stated that as per certificate Annexure P/2., the Issuing Authority has not mentioned that the facility of hemodialysis is not available in the PGI Learned State counsel has stated that an amount of Rs. 10150/- was paid to the person authorised by the petitioner vide receipts at Annexures R/1 and R/2.
He has further stated that bills relating to the treatment as indoor patient duly recommended by the doctor of the PGI are under process.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to the judgments of this court at Annexure P/7 and P/8.
In the judgment dated 17.12.1998 in C.W.P.
No. 15765 of 1998, titled Madan Jaspal v. State of Punjab and others (copy of annexure P/7), a Division Bench of this Court was dealing with the instructions drawing a distinction under which full payment of medical expenses had been denied to outdoor patients suffering from chronic diseases, whereas full reimbursement was made permissible for indoor patients.
It was held in that case, which was a case of renal failure (chronic disease) that the petitioner would be entitled to full reimbursement of the expenses incurred by him.
It was also held that the petitioner who had taken treatment from Chandigarh Medical Centre, a private institution, after communication had been issued by the PGI itself that it was unable to provide dialysis facilities to the patient for certain reasons, was entitled to get full amount of expenses incurred by the petitioner on getting treatment from Chandigarh Medical Centre.
The present case is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgment Annexure P7 as the petitioner herein also has been issued certificate by the PGI that the petitioner would have to undergo Hemo Dialysis twice a week outside PGI and that the PGI authorities do not provide facilities for Hemo Maintenance Dialysis to outdoor patients, and after availing the aforesaid facilities from outside and having made payment, the petitioner is entitled to full reimbursement of the amount of the said treatment as per the law laid down in the aforesaid judgment.
In the judgment Annexure P7 an objection was raised that the petitioner had accepted fixed medical allowance earlier.
It was held that the instructions drew a distinction as referred to above.
In the present case the petitioner vide letter Annexure P-6 had requested the authorities to stop the fixed medical allowance as he was suffering from chronic disease, treatment of which was very costly, and as such the petitioner be paid actual medical expenses incurred by him.
9.
In view of the above, the petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to pay the petitioner full amount of expenses incurred by him in getting treatment as an outdoor patient after adjusting the amount, if any, already paid to the petitioner, within a period of two months from today, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date of realisation till the date of payment.
Petition allowed.