MH Eqbal, J - Heard Mr. NN Tiwari learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mrs. Reetu Kumar, learned JC to Govt. Advocate.
2.
In this writ application, petitioner has prayed for quashing the order dated 3151999 issued by Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Health Medical Education and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of Bihar, whereby petitioner's representation regarding his confirmation on the post of Principal of Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College and Hospital, Bhagalpur has been rejected and further for issuance of an order confirming and regularising the petitioner on the post of Principal on substantive basis, and for payment of consequential benefits.
3.
Petitioner's case in brief is that he was appointed as Civil Assistant Surgeon in 1957 and thereafter posted as Research Officer, and was then transferred as Civil Assistant Surgeon from Medical Officer and then again transferred as Demonstrator in Physiology, Rajendra Medical College and Hospital, Ranchi in 1960.
In the year 1965, petitioner was promoted to the post of Lecturer and remained as such in the Rajendra Medical College and Hospital, Ranchi till 1974.
It is contended by the petitioner that being senior-most Professor, he was made Principal of Bhagalpur Medical College by notification dated 731989 and took over charge of the Principal of the said college as such.
It is stated that the petitioner satisfactorily discharged the duty and responsibility of the Principal of Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College, Bhagalpur till date.
He was superannuated on 3131991.
Being eligible for promotions to the post of Principal of the Medical College his consent was sought by the Government and he had given his consent for promotion to the post of Principal but he was not confirmed as such despite several representations filed by him.
Petitioner then moved this Court by filing CWJW No. 1525/97R, seeking relief for confirmation of the petitioner as Principal of Jawahar Lal Nehru Medical College, Bhagalpur from 121989 to 3131991.
The said writ application was disposed of on 27.4.1998 with a direction to the petitioner to file representation before respondent No. 2, who shall consider the representation and dispose of the same in accordance with law.
Petitioner accordingly filed representation and the same was disposed of by the impugned order dated 29.5.1999.
Hence this writ application.
4.
A counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondents stating inter alia that during the relevant period that is from 121989 to 3131991 petitioner worked under working arrangement to discharge current charge of the Principal in addition to his own duty that is Professor and head of Department.
Pathology being the senior most Professor in that very medical college.
It is contended that the claim of the petitioner has been thoroughly examined and has been disposed of by a speaking order rejecting the claim of the petitioner.
Respondent's further case is that petitioner retired from the post of Professor and not from the post of Principal as he discharged the routine work under working arrangement of the post of Principal.
As regards the claim of the petitioner that other doctors were promoted with retrospective effect it is contended by the respondents that two Professors namely Dr. Raghaw Sharan and Dr. RK Sharma were given promotion to the post of Principal on 1051991 that is much after the retirement of the petitioner and that was given since vacancy occurred and other formalities were completed.
5.
Mr. NN Tiwary, learned counsel for the petitioner assailed the impugned order by which petitioner's representation was rejected as being illegal, arbitrary and critic.
It is contended that petitioner cannot be deprived of his legal benefits of his service on the ground of his retirement from service.
Learned counsel submitted that when the similar benefits have been given to other similarly situated persons and even juniors to the petitioner then such benefits cannot be denied to the petitioner on the ground of his superannuation.
According to learned counsel petitioner being senior-most Professor held the post of Principal and worked during the relevant period, he is entitled to confirmation to the post of Principal to substantive basis and also to get all consequential benefits.
In this connection learned counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Dr. Amar Nath Chakravatry v. State of Bihar and others (C.W.JC No. 1098/90R)  6.
On the other hand Mrs. Reetu Kumar learned State Counsel has drawn my attention of Annexure-1 to the writ application which is notification dated 731989 and submitted that petitioner was made incharge to the post of Principal for discharging routine work and by the said notification petitioner was not made full-fledged Principal of the said college.
According to learned counsel as per the working arrangement petitioner was only authorised to be incharge of the post of Principal and it was not a promotion either regular or ad hoc, which would have been given right to the petitioner for confirmation on the said post.
7.
After having heard learned counsel appearing for the parties, the only question falls for consideration is as to whether petitioner is entitled to confirmation to the post of Principal of the college with effect from 121989 till date of superannuation that is 3131991 and consequently he is entitled to get all monetary benefits.
As noticed above admittedly in 1989 petitioner was authorised to discharge the routine work of the post of Principal of the college under working arrangement made by the Government.
Petitioner being Professor and Head of Department of Pathology in the college was directed to discharge the routine work of the Principal of the college.
During this period petitioner in addition to his substantive post as Professor and Head of Department only discharged the routine work of the Principal of the college.
Basically, therefore, petitioner was holding post of Professor and Head of Department of Pathology in the said Bhagalpur Medical College and he was not discharging the duty of the Principal on the basis of ad hoc promotion or otherwise.
In that view of the matter, I fully agree with the submission made by the learned counsel for the State that no right accrued to the petitioner claiming confirmation on the post of Principal from the date when he took over the charge of the Principal till the date of his retirement.
Admitted during the relevant period no one was promoted and confirmed to the post of Principal of the college.
It is not a case where person junior to the petitioner was given promotion ignoring the case of the petitioner who was the senior most Professor of the college.
In my opinion, therefore, the decision relied upon by the petitioner in the case of Dr. Amar Nath Chakravarty does not at all apply in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
As noticed above the other two Professors namely Dr. Raghaw Sharan and Dr. RK Sharma were appointed respectively as Principal, Rajendra Medical College and Hospital, Ranchi and MG Medical College, Jamshedpur on the basis of ad hoc promotion given with effect from the date of joining.
Admittedly petitioner was retired on 3131991, so he was not available for promotion when the other persons junior to the petitioner were considered for promotion.
In that view of the matter claim of the petitioner is not justified.
8.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, no relief can be granted to the petitioner in this writ application, which is accordingly dismissed.
Application dismissed.