Jasbir Singh, J (Oral) - Application for early hearing of the writ petition is allowed.
With the consent of counsel for the parties, main case is taken up for hearing today.
2.
Petitioner, who was a Constable with the Punjab Police, has filed present writ petition for issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash order dated May 7, 1997 (Annexure P-1) vide which his services were terminated and order dated July 2, 1997 (Annexure P-2) dismissing his appeal and also order dated August 20, 1998 (Annexure P-3) dismissing his revision petition.
3.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was enrolled in General Railway Police on January 25, 1989.
Thereafter, he was transferred and posted in Police Lines at Patiala.
On December 31, 1994, he was found absent from duty.
He reported for duty only on April 3, 1995.
Departmental proceedings were initiated against him for his absence of 93 days without any intimation to the department.
Enquiry Officer was appointed, who submitted his report on December 29, 1995, in which a finding was given that the petitioner was ill but since he failed to inform the department, he was found guilty of wilful absence.
After receipt of the enquiry report, show cause notice was issued to the petitioner for termination of his services, to which he filed a reply.
Punishing authority after perusing the enquiry report and reply filed by the petitioner did not feel satisfied and ordered on May 7, 1997, that he be terminated from service.
Petitioner then filed an appeal against the order Annexure P-1, which was dismissed by the Inspector General of Police, Punjab, at Patiala, vide order dated July 2, 1997 (Annexure P-2).
He then tried before the Inspector General of Police, Punjab, at Patiala by filing a revision, which was also dismissed vide order dated August 20, 1998 (Annexure P-3).
Hence present writ petition has been filed.
4.
Upon notice, respondents have appeared and filed written-statement, controverting the allegations levelled by the petitioner.
5.
Counsel for the parties heard.
Mr. AS Jattana, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioner, has vehemently contended that absence of the petitioner was not wilful.
In fact he was sick and this has even been admitted by the Enquiry Officer in his report dated December 29, 1995.
He further submitted that the respondents while passing the orders Annexures P-1 to P-3 had failed to take note of the finding of the Enquiry Officer to that effect, which clearly amounts to non-application of mind and as such, orders deserve to be quashed.
As against this, Shri Vikas Cuccria, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for the respondents has drawn attention of the Court towards the enquiry report (Annexure R-14), evidence recorded by the Enquiry Officer especially of DW1 Dr. BS Sharma and DW2 Balwinder Singh and also to the certificate Annexure P-8 brought on record by the petitioner, to contend that the petitioner had committed a gross misconduct and his deliberate absence is proved.
Even the certificate Annexure P-8 nowhere mentions that he was not in a position to move and send application for leave to the department.
6.
No doubt, Enquiry Officer has given a finding that the petitioner was in fact sick and while giving that finding, Enquiry Officer has relied upon evidence of DW1 Dr. BS Sharma and DW2 Balwinder Singh.
Testimony of these witnesses, as is apparent from the enquiry report itself, reads as under :-  "DW1 Dr. BS Sharma, MBBS, DO Ex. PCMS, Banga Road near Sabzi Mandi was recorded.
He stated : "I have a clinic for a long time.
Surjit Kumar, who is along with you, had come to me on 311294 for getting treatment for pain in his right leg and backside.
I used to give him medicine after checking and he remained under my treatment from 31121994 to 241995.
I gave him medical certificate on his demand.
The medical certificate which you have shown to me attached with the enquiry file, has been released by me.
My signatures are on it."
DW2 Balwinder Singh r/o H. No. 262-B Gali No. 2, Mohalla Bhagatpura, Phagwara was recorded.
In his statement he stated : "I am resident of Mohalla Bhagatpura, Phagwara and I am compounder in Civil Hospital, Phagwara.
Surjit Kumar, who is along with you and is serving in GRP department, was living in my house from the month of August, 1994, to the month of August, 1995 as a paying guest.
He remained ill from December 1994, to April, 1995.
His one leg and backside were painful.
I used to pick up him on my scooter for seeking treatment of Dr. BS Sharma, MBBS, Banga Road, Phagwara and returned him back at home.
At that time he was not able to walk."
A reading of the above evidence nowhere indicates that illness of the petitioner was such that he was not in a position to move out of his house and send application for leave to the department.
It has only been mentioned that the petitioner had some pain in his right leg and backache.
It has nowhere been stated by the witnesses and found by the Enquiry Officer that the petitioner was incapacitated by his illness and his condition was such that he could not go out of his house.
To the same effect is the certificate Annexure P-8 brought on record by the petitioner, which reads as under :-  "Certified that Mr. Surjit Kumar remained under the treatment of this clinic from 31121994 to 241995 and was suffering from pain in right leg, backache and was advised rest for these days after which he was declared fit to resume his duty."
7.
This certificate only states that the petitioner was suffering from pain in the right leg and backache and he was advised rest from December 31, 1994, to April 2, 1995.
No doubt, the petitioner has been in a position to prove that he was ill and this fact has even been admitted by the Enquiry Officer but this cannot be a ground to remain absent.
Petitioner could have informed the department and applied for leave as per law.
Furthermore, this plea of the petitioner has already been taken note of and rejected by the competent authorities while deciding his appeal and revision vide orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 respectively.
From the reading of written-statement and the impugned orders, one more fact emerges, which clearly indicates that the petitioner is a person who does not deserve to remain in police force.
Respondents have brought on record various orders, i.e., Annexures R-1 to R-13 showing that at different times, different punishments were awarded to the petitioner.
Whether such a person deserves to be retained in disciplined force ?
Answer is no.
Nothing has been brought to the notice of this Court which necessitates any interference in the well reasoned orders passed by the competent authorities.
No other point was argued.
In view of the above, writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.