RL Anand, J - By this order I dispose of two applications - Nos. 21801-CII of 2001 and 2405-CII of 2002, filed by the respondents.
2.
In C.M.
No. 21801-CII of 2001 it has been prayed that the order dated 2772001 passed by the Hon'ble Arbitrator may be modified.
Vide C.M.
No. 2405-CII of 2002 it has been prayed that the Arbitrator may be changed and the matter may be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal consisting of three members.
3.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner:-  Shri Hira Lal Goyal filed Civil Revision No. 876 of 2000.
During the course of proceedings, the matter was referred to Arbitrator Hon'ble Mr. Justice DV Sehgal (Retd.
), who showed his disinclination to decide the controversy for some valid reasons, as a result of which Hon'ble Mr. Justice AL Bahri (Retd.)
was appointed as Arbitrator in place of Justice Sehgal with all the observations made in the order dated 1192000.
While appointing Justice Sehgal as Arbitrator, this Court fixed the tentative fee of Rs. 20,000/- for the Hon'ble Arbitrator.
4.
Both the parties appeared before Justice Bahri and his Lordship was pleased to pass the following order on 2772001 :-  "Counsel for both the parties have come present.
In short, the following procedure will be followed.
Along with the statement of claim necessary documents and affidavit in support thereof would be filed by the claimant after serving copies thereof on counsel for the opposite party within three weeks and thereafter the defendants would file their reply supported by documents and affidavit within three weeks.
The case would be taken up for framing disputed questions and admitting into evidence the affidavits and the documents.
Opportunity of cross-examining the parties would be allowed, if asked for, the evidence of other witness, if necessary would also be allowed on affidavits/oral evidence.
Let the claimant file his statement of claim and necessary documents/affidavit as referred to above within three weeks after serving copy thereof on the counsel opposite, who will file their reply within three weeks and the case will be taken up on September 15, 2001 at Panchayat Bhawan, Sector 18, Chandigarh at 1100 AM.
Rs. 20,000/- tentatively fixed by the High Court will be towards preparation of the Award.
Arbitration fee will be Rs. 10,000/- per date of hearing.
The fee would be paid by the parties in advance.
The amount would be shared by both the parties equally.
Apart from the above, both the parties would share secretarial expenses of Rs. 550/- per date of hearing."
5.
Thereafter, the case was adjourned to 382001, 2192001, 9102001 and 9112001.
The statement of claim on behalf of Shri Hira Lal Goyal was filed on 19102001.
6.
It is averred in the application that the firm M/s Monika India is not having any business and its affairs are in shambles and huge liabilities have arisen against the firm payable to Income Tax Department and Customs and the amount of Rs. 5,000/- per hearing plus Rs. 550/- as secretarial expenses is a huge amount for M/s Monika India as well as the respondents to pay and in view of the fact that numbers of hearings can be unlimited it shall not be financially workable in the long run and due to lack of funds the proceedings may have to be abandoned.
Moreover in the order dated 2772001 the maximum number of hearings have not been fixed as well as whether every date of hearing shall be counted as date of hearing of payment of fee or not.
It has also been prayed by the applicant that the order dated 2772001 may be modified and fresh order be passed directing the parties to pay a reasonable amount in lumpsum as entire fee of the Arbitrator.
It has been further prayed in the alternative by the applicant that in case the High Court comes to this conclusion that fee should be paid on each date of hearing then a reasonable sum to be paid for each date should be fixed and it may also be clarified as to which date shall be considered as date of hearing for payment of fees.
7.
One more application bearing No. 2405-CII of 2002 has been made by Shri Sanjeev Goyal praying that the Hon'ble Arbitrator may kindly be changed and the matter may be referred to the fresh Arbitral Tribunal.
Notice of this application was given to the respondent and his stand is common with regard to both the applications.
It is pleaded by the respondent that there is no provision for the change of the Arbitrator once appointed.
The Arbitrator has the right to fix his fee under Section 31(8) of the Arbitration Act.
The opposite party never made request to the Arbitrator for reducing his fees.
Rather, it was promised to the Arbitrator that hey would pay the fees fixed by him on the next date of hearing.
Moreover, the Arbitrator has already entertained the statement of claim of the respondent.
No counter-claim has been filed by the opposite party.
The evidence has also been taken on record.
Now the Arbitrator was only to give the award which has been stayed by the Court and this Court has no jurisdiction to stay the award.
The remedy available with the opposite party is after its pronouncement.
It has been also pleaded by the respondent, that the applicant had waived his right, if any, to challenge the order dated 2772001.
It has been further pleaded that the Court has no jurisdiction to interfere in the arbitration proceedings at this stage.
8.
I have heard Mr. Vikram K Chaudhary, Advocate on behalf of the applicant, Mr. Sumet Mahajan, Advocate on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
9.
So far as the application No. 2405-CII of 2002 is concerned, the same is hereby declined as this Court has no intention at all to change the Arbitrator.
Once the parties have resorted to the arbitration proceeding, they must respect it.
10.
With regard to modification of the order 2772001 passed by the Hon'ble Arbitrator, after hearing the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that application No. 21801-CII of 2001 can be disposed of by making some observations though the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that this Court has no jurisdiction at this stage to modify that order.
11.
Section 31(8) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) runs as follows :-  "Unless otherwise agreed by the parties - (a) the costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal; (b) the arbitral tribunal shall specify - (i) the party entitled to costs, (ii) the party who shall pay the costs, (iii) the amount of costs or method of determining that amount, and (iv) the manner in which the costs shall be paid.
Explanation - For the purpose of clause (a), "costs" means reasonable costs relating to - (i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses, (ii) legal fees and expenses, (iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and (iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings and the arbitral award."
12.
My attention has been invited to Section 9, which lays down that a party may, before or during arbitral proceeding or at any time after the making of arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, apply to a court for an interim measure of protection in respect of such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the court to be just and convenient.
My attention has also been invited by the learned counsel for the petitioner to Section 4, which lays down that a party who knows that any provision of this part from which the parties may derogate, or any requirement under the arbitration agreement, has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without stating his objection to such non-compliance without undue delay or, if a time limit is provided for stating that objection, within that period of (sic), shall be deemed to have waived his right to so object.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also invites my attendtion to Section 13 which prescribed the procedure in order to challenge the arbitration proceedings and submits that if the respondent was not satisfied with the order dated 2772001, it was open to them to make a request to the Hon'ble Arbitrator to review his order.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Union of India v. Popular Construction Co, 2002(1) RCR(Civil) 124 (SC) : (2001) 8 Supreme Court Cases 470.
13.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this matter has unnecessarily been referred to the High Court and that it could be disposed of by the Hon'ble Arbitrator.
Be that as it may, since the matter has come to me, therefore, I have to dispose of the application seeking modification of the order dated 2772001.
A reading of the order dated 1192000 would show that Rs. 20,000/- were fixed as tentative fee of the Arbitrator.
If the Arbitrator was of the view that his fee is inadequate it was always open to him to make a request to the High Court for enhancement of his fee and the request of the Hon'ble Arbitrator could always be considered keeping in view the work done by him.
Since the respondent (petitioner of he main civil revision) has already paid a sum of Rs. 50,000/- to the Arbitrator including the share of the applicants, therefore, I order the applicants to pay a sum of Rs. 25,000/- to the opposite party within 15 from today, failing which application No. 21801 of 2001 all be deemed to have been dismissed.
The judgment relied by the learned counsel for the respondent in Union on India v. Popular Construction Co (supra) is not helpful to him.
14.
Nothing prevents this Court from exercising its inherent jurisdiction if the directions to be given are just and equitable in the interest of both the parties.
The statement of claim has already been filed by the respondent (petitioner) but no counter-claim has been filed by the applicants.
They are directed to file the same in all eventualities within three weeks from today with advance copy to the counsel opposite.
I also make a request to the Hon'ble Arbitrator that reasonable opportunity be given to both the parties so that they may be able to conclude the evidence within two months from the date of filing of the counter-claim.
The Arbitrator, Hon'ble Mr. Justice AL Bahri, is further requested to pronounce the award as early as possible, and at his convenience.
I further allay the fear of the Hon'ble Arbitrator by making a mention that if his Lordship's fees of Rs. 50,000/- is still inadequate, it will always be open to him to make a reference to this Court which shall be considered according to law and procedure.
But he should not insist for the further deposit of the amount by any of the parties.
Rather, the Arbitrator should make the award according to law and directions of this Court.
15.
The parties are directed to appear before the Arbitrator on 242002.
16.
Copy Dasti.
Order accordingly.