Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The short point that arises in the present regular second appeal is, whether a break of three years can be condoned as per Rule 423(2) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, and his services be counted regularly from the date of his initial appointment.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the respondent was appointed as a Patwari by the Land Acquisition Officer, P.W.D.
B&R Branch on 2531960 and he joined service on 1141960.
In October, 1964, the respondent submitted his resignation from the post which was duly accepted and he was relieved from duty on 111965,.
Subsequently, after a gap of three years the respondent made a request for being taken back in service again.
Accordingly, the matter was examined and respondent's prayer was accepted and he was taken back in service on 141968.
3.
The respondent filed a representation before the authorities that the three years period for which he was absent, as he had resigned from the post, be condoned and his service be counted regularly from the date of his initial appointment i.e. from 1141960.
The representation was declined and hence the respondent filed a suit for declaration that the order of the Superintending Engineer dated 27121984 rejecting his prayer for condonation of break in service was wholly illegal and the same was liable to be set aside.
The respondent-respondent prayed that according to the provisions of Rule 423(2) of the Punjab CSR Rules, Vol. II, the break of three years was liable to be condoned and his services were liable to be continued from 1141960.
4.
The trial Court dismissed the suit and held that the aforesaid Rule was applicable for pensionary benefits after retirement and the same was not applicable to the facts of the present case.
5.
Against the judgment of Senior Sub Judge, Jalandhar, the respondent- plaintiff filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, who vide order dated 28.1.1988 allowed the appeal and held that Rule 423(2) of the Punjab CSR Rules would be fully applicable to the respondent's claim.
It was also held that as the case of the plaintiff was not sent to the Government for orders, therefore, the order of rejection and non-condonation of break in service passed by the Superintending Engineer was wholly illegal.
Accordingly, the respondent was held entitled to be in continuous service and was granted all consequential benefits.
6.
In the present regular second appeal learned AAG appearing on behalf of State of Punjab has contended that Rule 423 of the Punjab CSR Rules, Vol. II is wholly inapplicable because the said rule is applicable to the pensionary benefits granted after retirement.
According to the learned State Counsel, no condonation of break in service can be granted to a re-employed employee under this Rule.
7.
Mr. RK Aggarwal, learned Counsel for the respondent has reiterated the arguments raised before the Additional District Judge and has contended that the case of the plaintiff-respondent is squarely covered under Rule 423 of the Punjab CSR Rules.
8.
Rule 423 of the aforesaid Rules is re-produced as under :-  "423.
Interruption in service (either between two spells of permanent or temporary service or between a spell of temporary service and permanent service or vice-versa in the case of an officer retiring on or after the 5th January, 1961, may be condoned, subject to the following conditions, namely :-  (1) The interruption should have been caused by reasons beyond the control of Government employee concerned.
(2) Service preceding the interruption should not be less than five years duration.
In cases where there are two or more interruptions, the total service, pensionary benefits in respect of which shall be lost if the interruptions are not condoned should not be less than five years.
(3) The interruption should not be of more than one year's duration.
In cases where there are two or more interruptions, the total period of all interruptions to be condoned should not exceed one year."
From the perusal of the aforesaid Rule it is abundantly clear that it relates to break in service of an officer retiring on or after 511961.
In other words, an officer, who retires after the due date can ask for condonation of period of absence which he had spent during his temporary service or permanent service or vice-versa.
Thus, it is clear that condonation of interruptions and deficiencies under this Rule is applicable only after an officer retires, and not while he is serving.
In the present case, the plaintiff cannot be given the benefit of the aforesaid Rule as the said Rule relates to pensionary benefits granted after retirement.
The plaintiff was still serving at the time when he claimed the benefit of Rule 423 of the Punjab CSR Rules.
Apart from this, the plaintiff was appointed as work-charge Patwari on purely temporary basis.
While he was again taken back in service as a work-charge Inspector vide order Exhibit D2, he was duly informed vide letter Exhibit D3 that his previous service shall not be counted.
The representations filed by the plaintiff had also been rejected by the higher authorities.
Thus, the service of the plaintiff prior to the resignation cannot be counted and he cannot get the benefit of the same.
9.
In my view, the findings of the learned Additional District Judge are wholly incorrect and the Rule has not been appreciated in its true perspective.
10.
In view of the above, I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar dated 28.1.1988 and restore that of the trial Court.
The order of the Superintending Engineer dated 27121984 is upheld and it is further held that the plaintiff-respondent was not entitled to any condonation of break in service under Rule 423(2) of the Punjab CSR Rules, Vol. II.
The service books of the respondent-plaintiff be returned to the quarter concerned, forthwith.
Appeal allowed.