RL Anand, J - Smt. Nirmala Devi filed the present writ petition as far back as in the year 1993 under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against respondents and it was prayed by the petitioner that directions be given to the respondents to give employment to the petitioner on compassionate grounds as Class-IV employee in the department.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that her husband late Shri Kamal Dev was employed by the respondents as Class-IV employee in the work-charge capacity w.e.f.
2471985 and he died on 181990 while performing duty under the respondents.
Her husband had completed more than 5 years continuous service.
After the death of her husband, the petitioner immediately approached respondent No. 2 for giving her employment on compassionate grounds.
So much so, she even requested the Finance Minister of Punjab on 16101992 who recommended the case of the petitioner.
3.
The case of the petitioner further is that respondents had decided in principle, copy of which was endorsed to all concerned vide letter No. 17894/18974/ ENG-7(1)109 dated 331980 that employment may also be given to the dependents of the Board's work-charged employees who die while in service on Priority Scheme.
It is Annexure P-2.
Since the husband of the petitioner had completed five years of service in the Board as a work-charged employee, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for compassionate appointment.
Instead of giving employment to the petitioner, respondent No. 2 sought some clarification from other offices.
Some information was also sought from the petitioner.
The petitioner supplied the information.
Since the petitioner did not get employment on compassionate grounds, therefore, she served a legal notice through her counsel dated 781993.
Although the petitioner had submitted entire papers and documents, but no action is being taken from the side of respondent No. 2.
Hence, the present writ petition.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The writ petition was contested mainly by the Board i.e. respondent No. 2 and the stand taken up by this respondent is that the husband of the petitioner namely, late Shri Kamal Dev was employed as work-charged T-mate on 2691986 and he had only 3 years 7 months and 7 days of service to his credit at the time of his death, which took place on 181990.
Thus, he had less than 5 years service.
The case for providing employment to the petitioner was received in the concerned branch.
It was incomplete at that time.
Her application for employment was also received through the Finance Minister.
Since the case of the petitioner was not covered under the policy of the Board, accordingly the Private Secretary of the Finance Minister was apprised of the position vide letter dated 3041993.
It was also submitted that ordinarily, the Board follows instructions of the Punjab Government in such matters and as per the Punjab Government's policy, there is no provision for providing employment on priority basis to the dependent member of the deceased work-charged government employee.
As per the Punjab Government's policy, only employment on priority basis to a dependent member of the family of the deceased regular Punjab Government employee is considered.
The board while adopting the said policy has also decided vide Memo dated 331980 (Annexure P-2 supra) that for the purpose of providing employment under the priority scheme, officials having worked for five years in the work-charged capacity, shall be considered at par with regular establishment for giving the benefit of employment to the dependents in case such an employee dies in the service of the Board.
Since Shri Kamal Dev husband of the petitioner had less than five years service at the time of his death in the work-charged capacity, as already stated, hence her case is not covered under the policy of the Board (Annexure P-2).
After receipt of documents, the case of the petitioner was considered in the light of Annexure P-2 and it was rejected.
With this background, the respondents pray for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
The petitioner filed a rejoinder in which it was reiterated by the petitioner that her husband had completed more than five years' service in the respondent Board.
It was further pleaded that the State of Punjab had issued instructions dated 24.4.1986 and these instructions (Annexure P-7) were adopted by the Punjab State Electricity Board and according to Priority Number 4, a member of the family of the deceased government employee, or of a government employer who is retired from service on medical grounds is also entitled to be considered for employment on compassionate grounds.
Moreover, the distinction between regular and work-charged employee had been done away with.
This point was considered by the Hon'ble Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 13385 of 1991 and the matter was decided in favour of the petitioner of that writ petition.
6.
A reply to the rejoinder was filed by respondent No. 2 and it was, inter alia, pleaded that the petitioner wants to confuse the things.
Her husband had completed 3 years 7 months and 7 days of service.
The deceased husband of the petitioner was made as work-charged T. Mate on 2691986.
The instructions dated 2141986 issued by State of Punjab, Annexure P-7 was never adopted by the Punjab State Electricity Board for work-charged employees.
This letter pertained to the regular employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board and not to the work-charged employees.
The regular employee is borne on the Punjab State Electricity Board Cadre as a whole against pensionable posts, whereas work-charged employees are employed against the requirement of a specific work as and when required.
Hence they are not to be treated at par with regular employees of the Board.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner Shri SP Thukral., Nobody has appeared from the side of the respondents.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, I am of the opinion that this petition is totally devoid of any merit.
8.
Let us examine, what was the pleaded case of the petitioner which is mentioned in paragraph 5 of the writ petition and, at the cost of repetition, it will be appropriate for me to say that petitioner was basing her claim on the Policy dated 3rd March, 1990 (Annexure P-2), vide which the benefit of compassionate appointment can be granted to the dependent member of the deceased if the deceased has been a work-charged employee and had further completed five years' service on the day of his death.
In this regard, it will be appropriate for me to refer to the Policy Annexure P-2 dated 3rd March, 1980, which runs as follows :  Copy of Secretary, P.S.E.B.
Patiala Circular Memo No. 17894/18974/ENG-7 (1) 109 dated 331980.
Sub : Employment to the dependents of Board's work-charged employees who die while in service under the priority scheme.
-------  Reference this office memo No. 30141/30900/ENG/C-197/LC-674 dated 2.4.1979 vide which the Board adopted the policy of Punjab Govt. in the matter of providing employment to certain categories under the priority scheme.
2.
The question of providing such benefits to the dependents of work-charged employees has been under consideration of the Board and it has now been decided by the Board that for the purpose of providing employment under the priority scheme, officials having worked 5 years in as work-charged capacity shall be considered at par with regular establishment for giving the benefit of employment to the dependents in case such an employee dies if the service of the Board.
A reading of the above would show that it was decided by the Board that for the purpose of providing employment under Priority Scheme, officials must have five years service to their credit in the work-charged capacity and such employees shall be considered at par with the regular establishment.
The husband of the petitioner was appointed on daily wage basis.
He became work- charged employee somewhere in the year 1986, as pleaded and proved by the respondents.
On the day of his death, the husband of the petitioner did not complete five years service in the work-charged capacity.
Rather, he worked for only 3 years.
7 months and 7 days and, therefore, the petitioner cannot take the benefit of the Policy Annexure P-2.
8.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner then switched over his case to the Policy dated 24.4.1986 Annexure P-7 and submitted that as per this policy which has been adopted by the Board, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for compassionate appointment.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner referred to a judgment passed in C.W.P.
No. 13385 of 1991 (Surinder Kaur v. State of Punjab and another) decided on 24101991 by the Division Bench consisting of Hon'ble MR Agnihotri, J and Hon'ble B.S.
Nehra, J This judgment, in my opinion is not again helpful to the petitioner and it will be appropriate for me to reproduce the judgment in verbatim in order to appreciate the alternative case set up by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It runs as under :  "After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner we find that the writ petition deserves to be allowed, as the petitioner is entitled to be appointed as Peon on regular basis in view of the Punjab Govt. Circular letter No. 18/14/86-5PP (17035964 dated 24.4.1986, on priority basis, as her husband late Shri Mohinder Singh, had worked under the Central Workshop Sub Division.
Ropar, Thermal Plant, Punjab State Electricity Board from 1984 to 1989.
In the matter of employment on compassionate grounds, the nature of appointment of the deceased has not to be taken into consideration as the exercise of discretion of the employer and deceased employee can not be fettered by the nature of tenure of service of the deceased.
In other words, if the employer has decided to provide employment on priority basis to the dependents of its deceased employee, then the mere fact that the deceased was not a permanent or regular employee but was working only as a temporary, work-charged or adhoc employee or daily age basis, is no ground to deprive the dependents of the deceased employee of the benefit flowing from the decision of the employer.
Consequently, we allow this petitioner and direct, the respondents to provide employment to the petitioner as a peon forthwith.
No order as to costs.
Sd/- M.R.
Agnihotri, J 24101991  Sd/- B.S.
Nehra, J The reading of the said judgment would show that the Hon'ble Division Bench was interpreting the policy circular dated 24.4.1986.
The instructions dated 24.4.1986 (Annexure P-7) read as follows :  Circuited vide Secy.
P.S.E.B.
patiala Endst.No.
104305/4815 Reg.
ADP-66 dated 1061986 in continuation of endst.
No. 30141/3097/3097/ENG/G- 197/LC-674 dated 241974 - published in First supplement to the Manual of Instruction on Service matter Vol. II (1.1.1985 to 31.12.1989) at page 160 onwards.
Copy of Punjab Govt. circular letter No. 18/14/86-SPP/(1703)5964 dated 24th April, 1986, from the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, addressed to all Heads of Departments etc. etc.  Sub : Priority list for various services - rehabilitation of Disabled ex- servicemen and widows/dependents of the deceased Government employees and Defence Services Personnel killed or disabled severely in action etc. etc.
I am directed to invite your attention to Punjab Government Circular letter No. 80(GOIO-SII(3)-73/12092 dated the 18th April, 1973 on the subject noted above and to say that keeping in view the fact that the instructions contained therein were issued long ago and many changes have taken place since then, in relation to the matter of absorption in State Services of various categories of persons placed in difficult/unfortunate circumstances such as surplus employees, disabled ex-servicemen, members of family of deceased Government employees, Defence Services Personnel killed or severely disabled in service, physically handicapped persons, members of family of a person killed as a result of terrorist action in the State and members of a family who lost their bread winner in riots in Delhi and other places in India between October 31 to November 7, 1984, it has become necessary to outline the up-to-date position in connection therewith.
Being considerate to the need for providing relief of such persons and also for giving higher priority in respect of the families where the bread winner has been killed as a result of terrorist action or due to riots in Delhi and other places in India and with a view to expediting the process of rehabilitation of such families, Government have considered this matter in the light the broad policy followed by the Government of India in this regard and have decided that the following priority list be adopted for recruitment to the State Services of Class III and IV.
Priority Number Categories.
1.
A member of the family of a person killed as a result of terrorist action in the State and a member of a family who lost their bread winner in riots in Delhi and other places, in India between October 31 to November 7, 1981 (both inclusive).
2.
.. .. ... .... ...  3.
.. .. .... .... ...  4.
A member of the family of the deceased government employee, or of a government employee who is retired from service on medical grounds.
5.
.. .. .. .. ... ....  6.
.. .. .. .. .... .....
The reading of the circular would show that the Government of Punjab wanted to extend the benefit on priority basis to certain categories of a family who lost their bread winner in riots in Delhi and other places in India between October 31 to November 7, 1984.
The case of the petitioner is not covered under this policy.
The category on which the counsel for the petitioner relies on is follows :  A member of the family of the deceased government employee, or of a government employee who is retired from service on medical grounds.
9.
Again the case of the husband of the petitioner is not covered under this clause.
It is a case of the respondent authorities that the instructions dated 24.4.1986 were never adopted by the Board.
Assuming for the sake of arguments that it was adopted, this Court still hold that these instructions are not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
It is the stand of the respondents that this letter pertains to regular employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board and not to the work-charged employees.
The husband of the petitioner was not a regular employee.
He was earlier working on daily wage basis and then he started working on work-charged basis.
No relief can be granted to an individual whose case is not covered by the policy of the State Government or by the Board.
Every policy has to be interpreted and applied within the four corner of the particular department.
As the husband of the petitioner did not complete five years of service as work-charged employee, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of the Policy Annexure P-2.
Similarly, her case is not covered order the Policy Annexure P-7.
10.
Even otherwise, would it be appropriate on the part of this court to give any direction to the respondents at this stage.
At it is the admitted case of the petitioner that her husband died on 181990, the object of compassionate appointment is to tide over the financial position which occurred in the family of the deceased on account of untimely death.
The petitioner had survived even after 12 years after the death of her husband.
The compassionate appointments are not bounty employment.
These are considered by every department as per its own policy on seniority basis to the ensure that there should not be financial vacuum in the family of the deceased on account of untimely death of the earning hand.
Be that as it may, it is established on record that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief for the reasons given above.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Since nobody has appeared from the side of the respondents, I do not want to burden the petitioner with costs which are made easy in this case.
Petition dismissed.