Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Clerk from the date the juniors in merit to the petitioner were appointed by the respondent-State.
The necessary facts are that the Staff Selection Commissioner, Haryana, vide its advertisement No. 1 of 2000 invited applications for the post of Clerk in response to which the petitioner applied and was selected.
The name of the petitioner appeared at Sr. No. 3610 in the merit list.
The petitioner claims to be from the Scheduled Castes Category and according to him the person at merit No. 3780 in the same category has been appointed while ignoring the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Clerk.
The petitioner submitted various representations dated 282000, 8.1.2001, 2622001, 1552001 and 15.7.2001, but of no result, thus, compelling the petitioner to file this petition.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed written statement.
The facts are not disputed.
It is stated that name of the petitioner was recommended by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana, for appointment as Clerk vide letter dated 2591999.
The petitioner was offered the appointment vide letter dated 1101999 Annexure R-2/II by the respondents.
The appointment letter sent to the petitioner at his home address returned with the postal remarks, "addressee lives out of village and family members do not know his address."
As the petitioner was not traceable, thus, the appointment was offered to respondent No. 4 who was the next person in the merit list and he was appointed vide letter dated 1332000.
The respondent No. 4 assumed the charge of his post on 27.3.2000 and since then has been working on the said post.
Resultantly, the respondents pray for dismissal of the writ petition.
3.
Other respondents have also filed written statement taking the same stand.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner while relying upon a Division Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Roshni Devi v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) SCT 337 contending that the vacancies should be filled in accordance with the existing rules and after giving a fair chance to the petitioner.
During the course of hearing we had also directed that original records be produced in Court, which were produced.
A bare perusal of the records shows that letter of appointment was sent to the petitioner.
The said envelope was returned with the remarks, "Prapatkarta Bahar Rehta Hai.
Ghar Walon Ko Uske Pate Ka Pata Nahin Hai Isliye Vapis."
5.
We may notice that on the very first visit the remarks were recorded by the postal authority.
Patently, the remarks seem to be unwarranted as the petitioner was very much residing at that address.
He has filed an affidavit and also produced on record copy of the ration card as well as the identity card issued by the Election Commission of India.
The ration card itself was issued on 1571999.
Thus, it is not possible for us to believe that the petitioner was not available on that address and in any case the remarks of the postal authority do not inspire any confidence.
In the normal event a person who is looking for a job in the present days of unemployment would not take chance of not even telling his family members at home as to where is he going even if he is temporarily going out.
The family members are none other than the parents and wife of the applicant.
6.
Being aware of such situation and circumstances, the Government itself issued instructions dated 891972 Annexure P/9 to the petition relating to appointment of candidates from the waiting list prepared by the Commission or the Board.
The relevant portion of the instructions reads as under :-  "Further it has been decided that when the department has to reject the candidature of any candidate among the candidates sent by the Commission/Board that he has not assumed the charge within the prescribed period and in view of that need arises to appoint a candidate from these five extra names before missing appointment letters to such new candidates, the department shall send the case to the Chief Secretary, General Services-I Branch.
The appointment letter shall be issued only after the permission by the Chief Secretary.
The Chief Secretary, General Service-I Branch shall ensure that the department had provided ample opportunity for joining the duties to a candidate.
And the action has not been taken in haste."
7.
The above instructions have been issued to avoid the possible mal- practices of the present kind.
The State has imposed obligation upon the concerned authorities to ensure that a fair chance is given to a selected candidate to join his duties and his entire effort is not frustrated as a result of some mal-functioning/practice.
The spirit of these instructions is intended to achieve a public interest and ensure grant of employment to the person of higher merit.
The instructions are required to be implemented to achieve their object and any effort to circumvent the effect of such instructions should be discouraged.
8.
From the above facts and in view of the instructions of the Government Annexure P/9 to the petition, we are of the considered view that the petitioner has been denied fair deal by the respondents in regard to the appointment to the post of Clerk.
In view of the instructions it was expected of the respondents to send a warning or at least a reminder to the petitioner that in the event of default or in the event of his not joining by a particular date, the vacancy shall be filled from the candidates from the waiting list.
In fact they had made an enquiry from the Board and the respondents were informed that they have the same address of the petitioner with them.
After confirmation of address from the Board they should have atleast written a letter to the petitioner.
This would be in consonance with the concept of reasonable and fair administrative approach on the part of the respondents.
Admittedly respondent No. 4 was in the waiting list and was much below in merit than the petitioner.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to give appointment to the petitioner in furtherance to the letter of appointment dated 1101999.
We further observe that appointment of the petitioner should be offered preferably without dislodging respondent No. 4 if permissible and possible in accordance with law and rules.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.