RL Anand, J - S/Shri Sohan Lal, Nafe Singh and Mahavir Singh have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against Kurukshetra University, its Executive Engineer and three private respondents S/Shri Ravinder Kumar, Bharat Bhushan and Rajan Kumar and it has been prayed that a writ of certiorari be issued quashing the appointments of respondents No. 3 to 5 and further a mandate be issued to respondents No. 1 and 2 to regularise the services of the petitioners w.e.f.
121996.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is as follows :-  According to petitioner No. 1 Sohan Lal, he joined as Beldar on 561989 though he is working as Assistant Pump Driver.
Petitioner No. 2 Nafe Singh alleges that he joined on 341989 as Beldar and he was asked to work as Assistant Pump Driver.
Similarly, respondent No. 3 Mahavir Singh states that he too joined as Beldar on 7.12.1988 though he is discharging the duties of Asstt.
Pump Driver.
Since 1995 they are also getting the salaries of Asstt.
Pump Driver though on daily wage basis.
It is the common case of the petitioners that they represented to the University for regularisation of their services and that their case for regularisation was recommended by the Junior Engineer, yet their services have not been regularised by respondents No. 1 and 2 as per the policy of the Haryana Government which has been adopted by the University.
It is also the allegation of the petitioner that it is the stand of respondents No. 1 and 2 that since there were no posts of Beldars, therefore, their services could not be regularised.
This, according to the petitioners, is not a correct plea because respondents No. 3 to 5 were appointed as Beldars somewhere in the year 1999.
In short, the case set up by the petitioners is that their services are entitled to be regularised on account of the adoption of the policy of regularisation issued by the Haryana Government.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It has been contested by respondent No. 1.
As per the stand of respondent No. 1, the petitioners themselves offered their services to work as Beldars as casual labourers on muster rolls.
They were never appointed through employment exchange nor their posts were advertised.
They were engaged on muster rolls basis as a stop-gap arrangement by the University.
It was also maintained by respondent No. 1 that at present no regular post of Beldar is vacant.
However, one post of Assistant Pump Driver had fallen vacant on the retirement of Shri Satya Bhushan and the same will be filled up after adopting proper procedure.
In the absence of regular posts, petitioners No. 2 and 3 could not be considered for regularisation.
On merits, it is the stand of respondent No. 1 that the petitioners do not fall within the provisions of the scheme issued by the Haryana Government and adopted by the University as there was a gap in the services of the petitioners and, therefore, their services could not be regularised as per the policy of the State Government.
4.
A re-joinder was filed by the petitioners to the written statement of respondent No. 1 in which they denied the allegations of respondent No. 1 and reiterated the averments of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard Shri S.P.
Laler, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners, Shri Gurinder Pal Singh, Advocate on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
On 7.3.1996 the Government of Haryana issued policy Annexure P-8 in which it was stated that the casual and daily rated employees who have completed five years service on 3111996 and were in service on 3111996, shall be regularised provided they have worked for a minimum period of 240 days in each year and the break in service in any year is not more than one month at a time.
Such employees who have worked on different posts having different designations in the same department shall also be regularised if they fulfil other conditions.
It was further provided that on regularisation, they shall be put in the time scale of pay applicable to the lowest Group `D' cadre in the Government and they would be entitled to all other allowances and benefits available to regular Government servants of the corresponding grade.
This policy was further amended vide document Annexure P-9 dated 1931996 vide which the period of 5 years was reduced to 3 years as on 3111996.
7.
Now it is to be seen whether the policy which has been issued by the Government and adopted by the University is applicable to the petitioners or not.
It is the case of the petitioners that they joined as Beldars somewhere in the year 1988/89 but their services were removed in the month of April, 1994.
They were re-engaged in the month of July, 1994 by giving a gap of three months.
It is the admitted case of the parties that as on 3111996 all the three petitioners were in service.
8.
The learned Counsel for respondents No. 1 and 2 has two-fold contention.
Firstly, it is not proved that the University adopted the instructions of the State Government.
The submission of the learned Counsel for respondents No. 1 and 2 is not acceptable to this Court for the sample reason that in para No. 9 of the writ petition there was a specific averment that the policy of the Haryana Government was adopted by the University and there is no denial to that effect.
Rather, the simple stand of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 was that the instructions of the State Government are not applicable to the casual labourers.
This stand is covered by para No. 1 of the policy under which the benefit has been extended to the casual and daily rated employees who have completed three years service on 3111996 and they must be in service on that day.
It is the common case of the parties that on the cut-off date all the three petitioners were in service.
9.
Now only the short point which further survives for determination is whether three years are to be counted immediately preceding 3111996 or any three years prior to 1996.
This point came up for hearing before the Hon'ble Division Bench in Kavita Gandhi v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(4) RSJ 760 and this very policy was being considered by the Hon'ble Judges and in para 10 of the judgment their Lordships were pleased to answer as follows after relying upon the judgment of Hon'ble Full Bench in Jagdish Lal and others v. State of Punjab, 1988(2) PLR 43 :-  "In view of the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in Jagdish Lal and others (supra) it is abundantly clear that in order to become eligible for consideration for regularisation of the service under a particular notification of the State Government the prescribed years of completed service with reference to the cut-off date mentioned in the notification applies to such employees also who have completed those number of years of service prior to the cut-off date and not necessarily, immediately preceding the said date.
In other words, if the employee has completed, with reference to the notification dated 731996/ 1831996, three years of completed service and was in service on cut-off date i.e. 3111996, he would become entitled for regularisation of service provided he fulfilled the other conditions mentioned in the notification.
It is not necessary that the period of three years should be taken immediately preceding the cut-off date i.e. 3111996.
If the case of the petitioner is examined from this angle, she rendered more than three years completed service without any break prior to 3111996 and she was in service on the said date.
The break of 48 days in service of the petitioner in the year 1994 would, thus, be not relevant to be considered for regularisation of her service.
Resultantly, the petition is allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P4 is quashed and the respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of production of the copy of this order.
No order as to costs."
10.
The observations of the Hon'ble Full Bench in Jagdish Lal's case (supra) are also relevant and are reproduced as follows :-  "The very object of deciding to regularise the service of ad hoc employees, as seen from some of the earlier order was :  "Whereas by continuation of the ad hoc appointments made as above as an administrative necessity, the ad hoc employees have acquired necessary experience and their ouster after a considerable period of service would entail hardship to ad hoc employees as a whole and accentuate the problem of unemployment the President of India is pleased to decide....."  If this was the very object of regularising the service, we are unable to find any reason as to why we should take in that the continuous service of one year immediately preceding April 1, 1985, was alone to be taken into account."
11.
Even otherwise, the object of the policy is to give relief to the employees who had completed three years service on the cut-off date i.e. 3111996.
If the contention of the learned Counsel for respondents No. 1 and 2 is accepted that three years should be immediately preceding the cut-off date, the very purpose of the policy will go into frustration.
The policy was issued by the Haryana Government to give relief and succour to the employees who were serving the departments for the last several years, but there was no security of their services.
The services of the petitioners were terminated only for few months and that too in the year 1994.
They were serving since 1988/89.
They were re-employed by the University.
The termination was not at the instance of the petitioners and they could not be held responsible for that gap of three months which occurred only on account of the action of the respondent-University.
Be that as it may, the petitioners were working as Beldars on 3111996.
They had already completed three years service prior to the cut-off date.
Therefore, they were supposed to be considered for regularisation as per the policy of the State Government adopted by the University.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed against respondents No. 1 and 2 and directions are given to the University to consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation against the posts of Beldars in terms of the policy issued by the State Government.
Needful shall be done by the University within four months from the receipt of copy of the order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.