RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Shri Sumer Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of the certiorari be issued and order Annexure P-2 dated 26th June, 1996 and order Annexure P-4 dated 29th August, 1996 be quashed and directions be given to the respondents to reinstate the petitioner into service on the post of Security Incharge by giving the benefit of continuity of service and full back wages.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed on the post of Security Incharge in the pay scale of Rs. 300-790 in the Distillery Unit of Panipat Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited (hereinafter called the `Sugar Mill').
He joined the post on 921990.
He was drawing salary of Rs. 306828 in June, 1996.
He had been working with the full satisfaction of the authorities.
The case pleaded by the petitioner is that he was appointed as Security Incharge.
His duty was supervisory in nature in the Distillery Unit of the Sugar Mill.
Therefore, he is not a workman within the meaning of the Section 2(S) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
It was also pleaded by the petitioner that his post which was sanctioned by the Board of Directors has never been abolished.
Since he was performing supervisory work in the Sugar Mill where the work of Distillery Unit is going on, therefore, his services could not be terminated.
It was also pleaded by the petitioner that the Government of Haryana introduced total prohibition in the State with effect from 1st July, 1996 vide which the manufacture of liquor was not made permissible.
The management decided to retrench the service of the workmen by resorting to the provisions of Section 25(O) of the Act, as a result of which his services were terminated and this action on the part of the respondent authorities is illegal.
3.
In the short the case set up by the petitioner is that since he was not a workman within the meaning of Sections 2(S) of the Act; that the post was not abolished; that he was holding the supervisory post and that the activities of manufacture of liquor is still going on in the Distillery Unit, therefore, the impugned actions are illegal.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and the reply of the respondents is that the petitioner was issued a notice dated 30.8.1991/3.9.1991 asking his explanation as he was found guilty of violating the instructions issued by the management.
After receipt of the reply, the management took a lenient view and issued a warning to the petitioner vide Memo.
dated 25.9.1991, and thus, it cannot be said that the petitioner was having a good record of service.
It was also pleaded by the respondent that the petitioner was appointed as Security Incharge and not the incharge of Sweepers or Chowkidars.
He was the incharge of the Security Guards and the petitioner was under the direct control of the security officer.
The petitioner was a workman and he was drawing the clerical third grade as per the wages recommended by the Sugar Wages Board.
In view of the Police (Policy ?)
decision of the Haryana Government introducing total prohibition in the State, the manufacture of liquor had to be stopped and accordingly the staff of the Distillery Unit dealing with the manufacture of liquor had to be retrenched.
This action was adopted by the respondents in order to reduce the expenditure of the Sugar Mill as the Distillery Unit had suffered huge losses during the past years.
The petitioner was offered the full and final retrenchment benefits amounting to Rs. 37,32780 but he refused to receive the cheque as reported by the Peon who was deputed to deliver the same to the petitioner.
Thereafter the cheque was sent by registered post on 19111996 but the same has been returned with the report of postal authorities that the addressee had refused to receive the same.
With this broad defence, it has been prayed by respondent No. 1 for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard Ms. Abha Rathore Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Shri CB Goel Advocate, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner vehemently reiterated her arguments in the light of the pleadings of the petitioner and submitted that since the petitioner was not a workman and as the post had not been abolished so far by the Board of Directors and further, it was submitted that the petitioner was holding supervisory post and moreover the activities of the Distillery Unit had been going on and despite the fact that the policy of prohibition was introduced, therefore, the impugned action cannot be passed.
7.
There is no merit in the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner irrespective of the fact whether the petitioner was a workman or not.
It was within the competence of the management to reduce the staff by giving retrenchment compensation.
This Court has to see whether the action on the part of the authorities in the reduction of the staff whether workman or supervisory is mala fide.
There is not an iota of evidence that the action of the respondent authorities was male fide because this action had to be taken by the management in view of the policy then introduced by the Haryana Government when it totally banned the activities of liquor in the State of Haryana.
In this situation, it was but natural on the part of the management of reduce its staff.
Resultantly, the only obligation on the part of the management was to comply with the provisions of Section 25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act which have been done in the present case.
Therefore, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
8.
At this stage, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that while issuing retrenchment notice/orders, it was the policy of the management that in case the Sugar Mill starts its alcoholic activities, the offer will be given to the retrenched employees on the basis of seniority.
The petitioner was offered the job but he has refused to do so for the reasons best known to him.
Be that as it may, while dismissing the writ petition, I give directions to respondent No. 1 to accept the joining report of the petitioner who shall submit his joining report before the management on 1st June, 2002.
This Court hopes and expects that on reporting for duty on 1st June, 2002, he shall not be visited any harassment and the management shall accept him on duty with a smile.
Petition dismissed.