RL Anand, J - Smt. Raj Rani petitioner, an Assistant, working in the Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (hereinafter referred to as `HAFED') has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India with the prayer that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the agenda item No. 25 which relates to the promotion of respondent No. 3 Shri Vidhya Sagar Sethi be quashed and a mandate be issued to the remaining respondents to promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Secretary in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200/- and to further promote to the post of Private Secretary in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500/- + Rs. 200/- special pay.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she joined the job of Clerk in HAFED on 22.2.1969 and was promoted as Assistant on 16.9.1974 and as such, she has rendered more than 25-1/2 years service on the post of Assistant and despite having rendered service of 25 years as Assistant, she has not been promoted to the next higher post because of non-availability of promotional post.
Otherwise, her service record is quite satisfactory and she is eligible for promotion to the next post of Assistant Secretary.
3.
It is the grievance of the petitioner that private respondent Shri Vidhya Sagar Sethi, who joined HAFED at Stenographer on 2.11.1973, promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer on 691977 and further promoted as PA on 391985, is being tipped for the post of Assistant Secretary.
4.
It is also the grievance of the petitioner that HAFED earlier created a post of Private Secretary in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500/- and there was a proposal to promote private respondent as Private Secretary but the private respondent persuaded the Management to keep the post of Private Secretary as vacant till he is promoted as Assistant Secretary in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200/-.
It is the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 is misusing his position as being PA to the senior officer.
Earlier, the PAs.
got themselves included in the category of eligible employees for promotion to the post of Assistant Secretary by mis-using their position being working with the higher officers.
This position was again mis-utilized by persuading the Management for preparing a joint Seniority list of PAs.
with Selection Grade Assistants.
It was so done because there was no promotional avenues for PAs.
because there was no post of Private Secretary.
Now two posts of Private Secretary have been created in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500/- + Rs. 200/- special pay, and after creation of these posts, the private respondent had exercised his influence upon the Management to get these posts vacant.
Respondent No. 3 wanted to take the benefit of the post of Assistant Secretary at the first instance and then of the post of Private Secretary.
The fact is that if respondent No. 3 is promoted as Private Secretary, the petitioner get a chance to be promoted to the post of Assistant Secretary and if respondent No. 3 is promoted as Assistant Secretary, then the petitioner will be deprived of the chance of getting promotion to the post of Assistant Secretary.
5.
In short, the grievance of the petitioner is that she is senior to the private respondent Mr. Sethi to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Secretary.
Therefore, the Agenda Item No. 25 vide which the private respondent has been promoted to the post of Assistant Secretary is illegal.
The petitioner maintains that she became Assistant on 16.9.1974 while private respondent Shri VS Sethi became Steno-typist on 2.11.1973.
He was promoted to the post of Senior Scale Stenographer on 691977.
He became Personal Assistant by virtue of promotion on 391985.
Therefore, by virtue of the rules of Seniority-cum-Merit, she has a prior right to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Secretary but in order to ignore the case of the petitioner a meeting of the Board was called on 2421999 and a proposal was made to promote respondent No. 3 Shri VS Sethi as Assistant Secretary.
This action on the part of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is illegal.
The petitioner even cannot become Private Secretary because this channel of promotion is only open to the PAs.
and not to Assistants.
On this background the petitioner has approached this Court by way of the present writ petition.
6.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
The stand of these respondents is that the Board of Administrators in its meeting held on 2421999 promoted respondent No. 3 to the post of Assistant Secretary vide order dated 5.3.1999 subject to the decision of civil writ petition No. 2965 of 1994.
Therefore, the present writ petition is not maintainable.
Also it was maintained that the petitioner has been promoted to the post of Assistant Secretary vide order dated 29102001, therefore, the writ petition should be dismissed.
7.
Respondent No. 3 filed separate written statement and he also denied the averments made in the writ petition.
Through his written statement respondent No. 3 wants to show that the post of PA to which he belongs was a higher post than that of the Assistant and Senior Scale Stenographer.
Therefore, he had the prior right for promotion to the post of Assistant Secretary.
It will be useful for me if reproduce the contents of para No. 6 of the written statement filed by respondent No. 3, which run as follows :  From above, it is clear that various categories of service, the strength and pay scale of each category have been specified vide Annexure-I The rules further show that posts detailed in category 7 are to be filled up from category 8 and posts of category 6 are to be filled up from category-7.
A perusal of the category 6 show that posts of Assistants (Selection Grade) and Personal Assistants were of the same equivalence and in same category enjoying same scale of pay and post of Assistant Secretary was required to be filled up by way of promotion from Category 6 of Annexure-1.
This categorisation further leave no room for doubt that post of PAs.
(category to which answering respondent belong) was a higher post than those of Assistant and Senior Scale Stenographer.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted and, in my opinion rightly, that for the post of Assistant Secretary there were three feeding cadres which were required to be considered.
As per Regulation 16 of the Haryana State Supply and Marketing Cooperative Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1988, which are relevant rules at the relevant time for the post of Assistant Secretary, three categories of employees are eligible, firstly Assistant, secondly PA and thirdly, Senior Scale Stenographer working in HAFED and each category of employee must have 8 years experience before he or she could be considered for promotion.
In other words, one employee may be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Secretary - either he or she should be Assistant or Personal Assistant or Senior Scale Stenographer with eight years experience each.
There is no artificial distinction with regard to scale of pay.
This had been done purposely so as to accommodate the Assistants also to be considered to the post of Assistant Secretary because the Personal Assistant or the Senior Scale Stenographer has further right to be considered for promotion to the post of Private Secretary.
There is no channel of promotion to the post of Private Secretary open to the Assistants.
Regulation 13 further lays down that as per the channel of promotion, the post of Assistant Secretary is to be filled up out of Assistants/PAs./Senior Scale Stenographers on the basis of Seniority-cum-Merit.
10.
Now in these circumstances, we have to see the position of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 3 in his parent cadre i.e. Assistant/PA It is conceded case before this Court that petitioner was promoted as Assistant on 16.9.1974.
Shri VS Sethi, respondent No. 3 became steno-typist on 2.11.1973 but he was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer on 691977 and he further became Personal Assistant on 391985.
If the case of respondent No. 3 is taken from the angle of Senior Scale Stenographer or from the angle of Assistant Secretary in both the aspects his date of promotion is subsequent to the date when the petitioner was promoted as Assistant on 16.9.1974.
Since the criteria of Seniority-cum-merit is to be examined, prima facie the petitioner had better claim as compared to private respondent on account of his earlier date of promotion.
Therefore, the recommendation of the Board promoting respondent No. 3 to the post of Assistant Secretary was against the rules, irrespective of the fact that respondent No. 3 may be enjoying better grade.
As per the petitioner, the enjoyment of better grade is not the consideration for the purpose of promotional rules.
Only the Seniority-cum- Merit is the consideration when three categories were ranked as Assistant/PA/Senior Scale Stenographer.
There is no merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents and the present writ petition is not legally maintainable or that the petitioner ought to have adopted the remedy of revision.
Since the petitioner is challenging the action of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 on the ground of jurisdiction, therefore, she has a right to do so in the present writ petition irrespective of the fact that the petitioner has been promoted to the post of Assistant Secretary vide order dated 29th October, 2001, still she has the right to be considered for promotion from the date when respondent No. 3 was ordered to be promoted.
11.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision taken by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 vide Agenda item No. 25 vide which respondent No. 3 Shri VS Sethi was promoted stands quashed.
Consequently, the promotion of respondent No. 3 as Assistant Secretary also stands quashed.
Let respondent Nos. 1 and 2 take a fresh decision within three months from the receipt of copy of this order considering the case of the petitioner for promotion from the date when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
It is also made clear that in the event of promotion of the petitioner from back date, it will not become her absolute right to get the salary of that interregnum period upto 29th October, 2001 as she did not work on the promotional post of Assistant Secretary.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.