Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has filed this Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certioriari for quashing order dated 442002, Annexure P3, passed by respondent No. 2 to the extent it declines the benefit of arrears of salary to him.
2.
The petitioner has averred that he was initially appointed as s Science- cum-Math Master on adhoc basis with effect from 11.10.1973.
His services were regularised with effect from 111980.
He belongs to Sunar (Goldsmith) caste.
This caste has been declared as a backward class by the Haryana Government.
3.
The promotion order of a number of employees including the petitioner was issued on 11.1.1990 (Annexure P1).
In view of promotion order, the petitioner was promoted as a Lecturer in Economics with effect from 11.1.1990.
After the promotion of the petitioner as Lecturer in Economics, a tentative seniority list of Lecturers (School Cadre) was prepared and circulated by the department in the year 1996.
In this seniority list, the name of the petitioner was not given.
The petitioner made a representation to the department.
4.
The department circulated another provisional seniority list of Lecturers as it stood on 141998 in which the petitioner was shown at serial No. 1131 but the name of one Avtar singh who was appointed as a Master on 16.9.1982 i.e. much later then the petitioner was shown at serial No. 681 and was further shown to have been promoted from 791987.
Avtar Singh was also from backward category.
5.
Another representation was submitted by the petitioner to the authorities (Annexure P2).
The case of the petitioner was considered and vide order dated 442000 (Copy at Annexure P3), he was promoted with effect from 791987.
In this promotion order, it was stated that the petitioner shall not be entitled for arrears of salary arising out of retrospective promotion.
The impugned order, Annexure P3, denied the arrears of salary with effect from 791987 till 442000, which is the date of passing order, Annexure P3.
6.
Notice of motion was issued.
7.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
In the written statement, the respondents have not denied that the petitioner was promoted from the date his junior Avtar Singh was promoted i.e. with effect from 791987.
It has been averred that the petitioner has been allowed the benefit of notional pay fixation and seniority from the date his junior Avtar singh was promoted.
It has been further averred that the petitioner was not entitled to arrears of pay on account of his retrospective promotion because he did not work on the post of Lecturer with effect from 791987 to 2411990.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
9.
Counsel for the respondent has argued that as notional pay fixation and seniority has been given to the petitioner with effect form 791987, as per Annexure P3, when his junior Avtar Singh was promoted, no grievance survives to him.
10.
Counsel for the petitioner has argued that it was the fault of the department for not having offered the post of which the petitioner was entitled to and as such the respondents are liable to pay him all the arrears.
11.
We agree with the contention of counsel for the petitioner.
It was not the fault of the petitioner but squarely the fault of the respondent- department for not promoting the petitioner to the senior post and not taking work from him for the senior post to which he was to be promoted.
The counsel for the petitioner has drawn out attention to a judgment of this Court reported in Vidya Parkash Harnal v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SCT page 785 wherein while allowing the Letters Patent Appeal, it has been held as under :  "Similarly, the argument that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of emoluments on the principle of `No work, No pay' is apparently mis- conceived and based upon wrong notions of law.
If a civil servant is not offered the work to which he was legally entitled, he cannot be deprived of the wages for the post to which he subsequently is held entitled to.
Permitting such a course to be adopted would be encouraging the imposition of double penalty, that is, firstly by declining the civil servant his right of promotion and secondly by depriving him of the emoluments to which he would have been entitled to upon promotion which subsequently is considered in his favour.
Deprivation to work against the post to which a civil servant is entitled on promotion is always at the risk and responsibility of the State and cannot be made a basis for depriving such a civil servant of the emoluments to which he was entitled, had he been promoted in accordance with the rules at the time when he became eligible for such promotion.
The Courts cannot ignore the magnitude of the sufferings and the pains to which a civil servant is subjected on account of deprivation of the monetary benefits particularly in this age of skyrocketing prices and non-availability of essential requirements of livelihood.
The Court cannot shut its eyes and forget the holocust of economic deprivation to the petitioner and his defendants.
Such a deprivation might have upset the career of the defendants, depriving the society of the services of such youth and budding defendants or children of the petitioner.
The executive once being satisfied that a civil servant was entitled to the promotion with retrospective effect cannot deprive him of the benefits of salary accruing on account of such promotion from an early date without assigning valid, cogent and specific reasons.
The order impugned in this case by which the petitioner/appellant was deprived of this right to claim back wages is admittedly non-speaking without assigning any justification or cogent and specific reasons."
12.
The judgment reported in Vidya Parkash Harnal's case (supra) squarely covers the case in hand.
13.
In the light of above discussion, only the observations made by the Director Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh (Respondent No. 2) to the effect "However, nothing will be paid to him beyond the benefit of pay fixation and seniority" in the impugned order dated 442000.
Annexure P3, are quashed.
The respondents are directed to pay the arrears of salary to the petitioner from the date he was retrospectively promoted to the post of Lecturer in Economics i.e. with effect from 791987.
14.
With the above diction, this writ petition is allowed.
Petiton allowed.