Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners at some length.
2.
It is contended that the workman was a daily wager and, therefore, his services could be dispensed with at any time.
On this premises impugned award dated 382001 is being challenged in this writ petition.
3.
This argument need not detain us any further in view of the findings recorded by the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur, which reads as under :-  "....As per the written statement filed by the resptd.
the workman was admittedly appointed on 20.6.1994 and he has continued to work upto 161999.
As per averments made by the MW1 witness of the resptd, wages for some period could not be paid to the workman for want of sanction of funds by the State Government.
So from this statement of MW1, it is clearly proved on record that the workman remained in service of the resptd.
from 20.6.1994 to 161999 and has clearly completed continuous service of 240 days in a Calender year.
As regards the contention of the AR of the resptd.
that after 161999 the workman voluntarily left the job, the same is devoid of any merit because no evidence whatsoever to approve the abandonment of the job by the workman has been proved by the resptd.
MW1 has admitted in the cross exam.
that after 31.5.1999 the presence of the workman has not been marked.
He has further admitted in the cross exam.
that at the time of termination of services of the workman, no charge sheet was given to him nor any retrenchment compensation was paid to him.
So from this admission of MW1 and from the statement made by the workman as MW 1 which has remained unchallenged on the file.
It is clearly proved on record that the workman has worked with the resptd.
on daily wages basis from 20.6.1994 to 31.5.1999 and his services were illegally and wrongfully terminated on 16199 in violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
4.
From the bare reading of the above findings, it is clear that the case of the management was not so pleaded, as has been sought to be argued before this court now.
Once a workman has completed 240 days and has worked continuously nearly for five years, the petitioner was obliged to comply with the provisions of section 25(f) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are not even ready to accept the contention that the workman had abandoned the job.
5.
We see no error of jurisdiction or otherwise in the impugned award.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.