Amar Bir Singh Gill, J - The petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution for issuance of writ of certiorari quashing the result of the entrance test for Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)
Course for the year 2001-2002, Annexure P6, since the question paper for the test was in violation of the terms of the Hand Book of Information/Prospectus.
They further seek issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-University to conduct the entrance test for the B.Ed.
course afresh in accordance with the provisions of the Hand Book of Information.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the respondent-University issued a Hand Book of Information (HBI) for admission through entrance test for Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)
course in the colleges affiliated to the University for the year 2001-2002.
The last date for receipt of application forms for entrance test was 25.4.2001 and the test was conducted on 362001.
All the seats were reserved for candidates who were bonafide residents of Haryana.
The candidates were to be selected on the basis of their merit/marks obtained in the entrance test subject to their fulfilling the minimum eligibility condition of having pased BA/B.Sc.
degree with atleast 50% and 45% marks respectively.
The total numbers of seats were declared as 1160.
In condition No. 40 of Hand Book of Information it was provided that in case two or more candidates in merit list have equal marks, one who is senior in age will be admitted.
If the age in such cases is also equal, the admission will be given to the candidate having consistently better academic record.
50% of the total seats were reserved for students from Science and Maths disciplines.
Remaining 50% seats were reserved for students from the discipline of Arts and Commerce including Music and Home Science as elective subjects.
It was also provided in the prospectus that the question paper will be set both in English and Hindi languages except language Proficiency Test in Hindi.
The candidates were supposed to attempt either Hindi or English part of the question paper according to the medium of instruction.
As per instruction No. 8 of the prospectus, the test booklet and OMR sheet (answer sheet) of the entrance test was to be handed over to the supervisor/invigilator by the candidate before leaving the examination hall.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 and 2 who were eligible having passed BA and petitioners No. 3 & 4 having passed MA Hindi and Music (Vocal) respectively, applied for admission to the B.Ed.
course and took the entrance test on 362001.
The petitioners opted Hindi as medium of instruction.
They found that a major part of the Hindi portion of the question paper i.e. its first two sections of General Mental Ability Test and General Awareness Test, was in English.
The questions asked in the test were in English.
Besides, the entire paragraph which had to form the basis to reponde to the questions given at its end, was also in English language.
The petitioners objected to the questionnaire and also made a representation to the University, copy Annexure P1.
the petitioners also brought it to the notices of the invigilators as well.
The respondent-University did not take any action.
The result of the entrance test was announced on 1862001 and the candidates were called for counselling from 2962001 to 572001.
As per the prospectus, merit of all those candidates securing equal marks was to be determined on the basis of their date of birth.
The candidate elder in age was to be given higher rank.
The date of birth of petitioner No. 1 is 1761973 as shown in his matriculation certificate.
The gazette wherein the result of the entrance test was published mentioned date of birth of petitioner No. 1 as 1781976.
He had secured 138 marks in the test.
On account of mistake in the date of birth, petitioner No. 1 has been shown lower in rank to many other candidates which has materially affected the chance of his admission.
Petitioner No. 1 represented to the University in respect of his in-correct age in the gazette.
The petitioners, thus, assail the result of the entrance test mainly on two grounds.
Firstly, the question paper was partly in English and as such it was against the spirit of the prospectus and secondly the age of petitioner No. 1 was wrongly shown in the gazette which materially affected his rank in the merit list.
4.
In the written statement, the respondents have denied the case of the petitioners.
Preliminary objections have been taken.
The petition is belated one.
The examination was held on 362001.
The counselling started on 972001.
Petitioner-Vijay Kumar was in general category.
He had to his credit 138 marks and the last candidate admitted to the course was having 145 marks to his credit.
In between the last candidate admitted and petitioner-Vijay Kumar, there were 459 candidates.
He being down below in merit, could not be admitted to the course.
He did not make any grievance that the paper was not translated in Hindi either at the time of examination or otherwise.
It is only after the declaration of the result that the present writ petition has been filed.
Petitioner No. 2 belongs to BCB category.
He obtained 119 marks.
The last person admitted to the course in the said category obtained 137 marks.
In between petitioner No. 2 and the last candidate admitted, there were 483 candidates.
He being down below in the merit in the said category could not be admitted to the course.
Petitioner No. 3 belongs to handicapped category and he obtained 126 marks.
The last candidate admitted to the course was having 130 marks.
In between petitioner No. 3 and the last candidate admitted, there were 15 candidates.
None of these petitioners raised any objection at the time of examination.
The petitioners attempted all the questions.
The OMRS (answer sheets) of the petitioners show that they attempted all the questions.
No prejudice has been caused to them in not translating part I of the paper into Hindi.
Moreso, the petitioners are Graduate and English is the compulsory subject at Graduation level.
Admissions have been made entirely on merit.
No such representation, as claimed, was ever received in the office of the respondents.
5.
On merit, it is explained that as many as 17755 candidates appeared in the entrance test for 1032 seats.
873 seats have been filled up.
29 seats of Scheduled Casts (Science) category were lying vacant due to non-availability of the scheduled caste candidates.
Since the candidates in the reserve category were not available, these seats were converted into scheduled caste (Arts) category.
28 NRI seats were lying vacant.
The procedure for filling up the vacant post was under process.
130 seats were subject to approval of NCTE for which approval has not been granted.
The respondents further claimed that if the passage had been given in English, no prejudice was caused to the petitioners since the question paper was got printed in English as well as in Hindi.
They further claimed that the petitioners have attempted the question paper of the said part as well.
The question paper was set as per syllabus prescribed by the respondent-University.
There was nothing to show that any of the questions was out of syllabus.
The question paper was set accordingly to the syllabus and the examination was got conducted by the respondents through a secret agency and the entrance test was conducted on 362001 and the result was received from the agency within two weeks which was declared on 1862001 The respondents further stated that error in the date of birth of petitioner No. 1 had no relevancy since the same was to be corrected, if at all, at the time of counselling by verifying the original documents.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
The petitioners have placed on record Hand Book of Information for the admission through Entrance Test to Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)
course in the collages affiliated to the University for the year 2001-2002.
The first and the main contention to assail the admissions by the petitioners is that they had opted for Hindi medium and a portion of the first part of the question paper of General Mental Ability and General Awareness had come in English and as such it affected their result.
The petitioners also placed on record and relied on the same Annexure P2, the solved question paper of B.Ed.
entrance test for the year 2000-2001 and claimed that the question paper for the entrance test was on identical pattern.
Chapter VI of Hand Book of Information pertains to Syllabus and Scheme of Examination for Entrance Test.
A reference to Section IV of Chapter VI pertains to language Proficiency Test in English or Hindi.
Specific notes have been appended therein.
Note No. (iii) mentions that question papers will be set both in English and Hindi languages only except Language Proficiency Test in Hindi.
The Hand Book of Information in no where prescribed that for the Hindi medium candidates, entire question paper will be in Hindi language and for English medium candidates, the question paper will be in English.
The above specific condition i.e. note No. (iii) fully mentions that the question papers will be set both in English and Hindi languages only except Language Proficiency Test in Hindi.
As such, the petitioners cannot claim that they could not successfully attempt the question paper because it was partly in English language.
Now a reference to Annexure P2 which, according to the petitioners, is identical question paper as was attempted by them in the entrance test that they took, shows that the heading of questions is in Hindi though the words and the questions are in English.
The passage is in English.
However, the question which is in Hindi mentions that the answer which the petitioners were to give, was to be in the medium of their choice.
The taking of medium indicates the writing of answers in a language of the choice of a candidate.
It does not mean that the question paper should also be in the same very language.
It is not disputed before us that the petitioners took the entrance test on the basis of their basic qualification of graduation and English is one of the compulsory subjects in the Graduation examination.
If the petitioners attempted the question paper which was similar to Annexure P2 which was the entrance test paper for the year 2000-2001 course, they cannot now raise any grievance that the similar question paper which they were made to answer was in any manner against the spirit of the prospectus.
No prejudice appears to have been caused to the petitioners on account of the manner and the form of the questions.
Moreso, the respondents produced the OMRS (answer sheets) of the petitioners which we also perused and found that the petitioners attempted all such questions which were duly evaluated by the examiner.
8.
The other plea of the petitioners that the age of petitioner No. 1 which was shown as 17.8.1976 instead of 1761973 and on account of equivalence of marks between the two candidates, the elder in age was to be given preference in merit, which prejudiced his right because of wrong date of birth shown in the gazette notification of the result is not acceptable.
In the Hand Book of Information/Prospectus, a specific note was published at page 15 requiring the candidates to produce all the original documents/certificates before admission committee at the time of counselling and the wrong printing of the date of birth of petitioners No. 1 was immaterial in the circumstances.
The respondents have indicated in their written statement which has not been denied by the petitioners by way of rejoinder, the inter-se position of the merit of the petitioners, as already referred to above that in between the petitioners and the last candidates admitted, there were number of candidates who were senior in merits.
The petitioners have challenged the admission process only after they did not find favourable result and could not seek admission.
It is well settled that a candidate who has submitted to the selection process and has participated and was considred cannot challenge the same if subsequently the result of the selection is not favourable to him.
It has been so held in the decision of Supreme Court in Madan Lal and others v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others, AIR 1995 SC 1088 : 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC) and Mohan Lal Aggarwal and others v. Bhubaneswari Prasad Mishra and others, JT 2001(9) SC 21.
There being no merit in this petition, the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.