Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Claim in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India by the petitioner is that the impugned orders of punishment, Annexures P6 and P8 to this petition, dated 2011998 and 18.6.1998 are illegal, ultra vires, without jurisdiction and liable to be set aside.
In view of the order, we propose to pass on this petition, it may not be really necessary to refer to the facts in detail.
A departmental enquiry was conducted in accordance with law.
The petitioner was given adequate opportunity to defend himself and the Disciplinary Authority while accepting findings of the Enquiry Officer imposed punishment of dismissal upon the petitioner which had subsequently been affirmed in appeal.
The counsel for the petitioner while challenging the impugned orders has mainly relied upon the findings recorded by the first Appellate Authority.
The findings read as under :-  "Therefore, I order to dismiss W/C Mansa Ram No. 2/WC from service with immediate effect and his above absence from service of 43 days 21 hours and 15 minutes in total on three different occasions is treated as without pay for 44 days.
A copy of this order be supplied to the defaulter free of cost and order be booked accordingly."
2.
The counsel for the petitioner then relied upon a judgment of learned Single Judge in the case of Punjab State and others v. Rur Singh, 2001(1) SLR 473 : 2000(2) SCT 60 (P&H) to contend that once the leave was regularised, the charge of unauthorised absence shall automatically fall and cannot be deemed to have been proved against the petitioner.
3.
The unauthorised absence of the petitioner was proved.
Under this Rules, the Disciplinary Authority is required to pass appropriate order for the purposes of regularisation and final payment of dues for the period in question.
If an order of regularisation of unauthorised absence is passed prior to the order of dismissal, then the petitioner may have a contention to raise but where such order is simultaneous to or is after passing of the order of punishment, then it cannot be said that the disciplinary authority intended to regularise the period of unauthorised absence of the employees for dropping the charge.
In view of Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ex. Constable Karamjit Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) Recent Services Judgments page 396, this contention of the petitioner need not detain us any further.
For the reasons stated therein, where same Police Rules were under consideration and after following the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court, the above view was taken.
We consider it unnecessary to deal with this contention in further elucidation and the contention of the petitioner in this behalf is rejected.
4.
The second contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is that while considering the quantum of punishment, the authorities concerned have not taken into consideration the length of services of the petitioner as well as extra-ordinary circumstances stated in the memorandum of appeal and his subsequent representation.
The authorities have also ignored the fact that the petitioner was compelled to remain absent because of the floods where the whole village was under water and the petitioner had to stay on the Tillas along with his family.
The death of his brother has also been specifically pleaded in the representation.
The impugned order, Annexure P8, does not deal with any of these contentions.
We are conscious of the fact that the quantum of punishment primarily falls in the domain of Disciplinary Authority and the Courts would rarely interfere with regard to quantum of punishment but exception to the general rule pre-supposes application of mind by the authorities concerned with regard to each aspect and facet of the matter.
5.
For the reasons afore-stated, we set aside the order limited to the extent of quantum of punishment and remand the matter to the first Appellate Authority to consider the plea of quantum of punishment but this judgment would in no way would be taken to have upset the findings of unauthorised absence and the fact that the petitioner has been found guilty of the articles of charge.
This order would also not ipso-facto entail benefits of reinstatement or payment of back wages to the petitioner.
The final order now passed by the competent authority shall determine the matter in that behalf as well.
The order will be passed within a period of one month from the date the certified copy of this order is brought to the notice of the respondents.
6.
This writ petition is disposed of with the above directions.
7.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.