RL Anand, J. (Oral) - The petitioners have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction of this Court against respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to frame the joint seniority list in terms of Regulation 13 of the Bhakra Beas Management Board Class III and Class IV Employees (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1994 and thereafter acting upon that joint seniority list, consider the case of the petitioners for promotion who have been illegally deprived of their promotion and that juniors to them i.e. respondent Nos. 4 to 10 were considered for promotion in an illegal manner.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners can be described in few lines.
3.
The petitioners are class IV employees working in the Power Wing of the Bhakra Beas Management Board (for short the Board), whereas the private respondents are working in the Irrigation Wing of the Board as class IV employees.
As per Regulation 13 of the aforesaid Regulations, seniority inter se of the members of the service is to be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in the service.
4.
The case set up by the petitioners is that their date of joining is earlier as compared to the private respondents, still the private respondents have been given preference in the matter of their further promotion against the interest of the petitioners.
Therefore, this action on the part of the respondent authorities, is illegal.
Rather, the respondent authorities are obliged to frame a joint seniority list as per Regulations 3 and 13 of the said Regulations and if that joint seniority list is faithfully implemented, the petitioners have preferential claim to be considered for promotion against the private respondents.
5.
The writ petition has been contested by the Board mainly on the ground that the joint seniority could not be implemented and that is the reason that the Board had taken a tentative decision to bifurcate the joint seniority.
In this regard, a proposal has also been sent to the Government of India contemplating that a favourable action will come from the Government, therefore, the petitioners have not been considered for promotion.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case, and am of the considered opinion that the defence taken by the respondents is prospective and speculative.
A per Regulation 3 it is the obligation of the Board to frame a joint seniority list of all the class IV employees.
Admittedly, the date of the joining of the petitioners is earlier than that of the private respondents.
If a joint seniority list is prepared in compliance with Regulation 13, then there is every possibility that the petitioners may become senior to the private respondents giving them the further chance of promotion.
7.
In these circumstances, I allow this writ petition and give directions to the Board to frame a joint seniority list as per Regulations 3 and 13 within six months from today and after framing of the joint seniority list, consider the case of the petitioners for promotion if they are eligible otherwise.
However, it will always be open to the board to bifurcate the joint seniority list if it is framed in pursuance of the directions of this Court, and thereafter, let the Board may consider what should be the channel of promotion for class IV employees who are in the Irrigation Wing.
There shall be no order as to costs in the present writ petition.
Petition allowed.