Swatanter Kumar, J - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
The petitioner was working as Peon in the office of the District Red Cross Society, Bhiwani, since 1951990 and was appointed on ad hoc basis for a period of nine months or till such time regular appointment is made whichever is earlier.
This order was passed on 1951990.
The petitioner's services were transferred to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Bhiwani, where he continued to work till his services were terminated vide order dated 2881991.
This order is impugned in this writ petition.
2.
The respondents have filed a reply and it is stated that the petitioner was not appointed on regular basis.
His appointment was made purely on ad hoc basis and would be liable to be terminated at any time without notice.
3.
In Annexure P-5 order dated 2881991 it is no where stated that the regular incumbent has joined.
In fact, it is stated that consequent on the availability of the regular incumbent on the post of Peon, the services of Dharam Vir are dispensed with.
However, operation of his order was stayed by a Division Bench of this court while issuing notice on this petition and, therefore, the petitioner continues to be in service till date.
4.
The short question that falls for consideration is whether the services of the petitioner, even if appointed on ad hoc basis, though he continued on transfer till date today, can be terminated without notice and for absence of appointment of a regular incumbent.
5.
The petitioner, admittedly, has become over-age for any appointment and that factor cannot be ignored that it is for the act of the State itself.
6.
The records have been produced which shows that the Deputy Commissioner on compassionate ground issued offer of appointment on ad hoc basis to the petitioner.
In somewhat similar circumstances, a single Bench of this Court in the case of Dharma Vir v. State of Haryana and another, 2002(1) SCT 1138 (P&H) CWP No. 10190 of 1992, decided on 7112001, to whom also Annexure P-5 relates, has also set aside the order of termination and granted reinstatement to the petitioner in that case.
For the reasons stated in the said judgment to which I have no reason to differ, this petition is allowed.
The order of termination is arbitrary and is, therefore, set aside.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.