Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - CM No. 6323 of 2002  1.
Application is allowed subject to just exceptions.
Exemption, as prayed for, is granted.
CM stands disposed of.
C.W.P.
No. 3418 of 2002  2.
Notice to show cause why the petition be not admitted.
3.
Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, Deputy Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana accepts notice.
4.
There are two prayers of the petitioners in this petition.
Firstly, during the relevant period, admittedly, the petitioners were placed under suspension though subsequently, they had been reinstated in service.
Thus, the petitioners submit that the departmental enquiry contemplated against them should be completed expeditiously to determine the fate of the petitioners in regard to various benefits which they claim.
Secondly, the petitioners were/are entitled to annual increments and thus, the order of directing the recovery of the amount paid to the petitioners by the department while awarding of the arrears of pay and increments to them is illegal and bad.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
7.
As far as the first prayer is concerned, learned counsel for the State has no objection.
We also find that it is just and fair that the departmental enquiry, which is stated to be pending for a considerable time, must be concluded expeditiously.
Thus, we direct the respondents to conclude the departmental enquiry against the petitioners within a period of one year from today.
It is made clear that no further time would be granted to be department in this regard.
8.
As far as the second prayer is concerned, their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India while disposing of Civil Appeal Nos. 7123-25 of 2001 (arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 175-17600 of 1998 vide order dated October 10, 2001 in the case of State of Haryana and others v. VN Mann and others, have held as under :-  "When the employee in question is allowed subsistence allowance as provided under the rules, it cannot be stated that such a person is on duty and entitled to full pay including increments.
Entitlement to increments will arise only in cases where the period of suspension is treated as one on duty at the termination of inquiry or on an earlier date.
In the present case, there is no such order.
We do not think it would be permissible that the respondents are entitled to increments.
There is force in the submission made on behalf of the appellants.
Therefore, we set aside the order under challenge, allow these appeals and dismiss the writ petitions filed by the respondents herein."
9.
In view of the above clear dictum of the Hon'ble Apex Court, the second prayer cannot be granted to the petitioners at this stage.
10.
With the above observations, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.