NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - By an advertisement issued by the office of the Chief Engineer, P.W.D.
(B & R), Patiala which appeared in the daily Tribune on 10112000 applications were invited from eligible candidates from amongst others for the posts of Junior Engineers.
Two vacancies were reserved for partially blind candidates and one seat was reserved for deaf and dumb candidates.
Petitioner and respondents No. 3 and 4 were amongst the applicants and they were all interviewed by the Selection Committee.
The minimum qualification required for the post was diploma in Civil Engineering with knowledge of Punjabi language upto matric.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioner as well as respondents No. 3 and 4 were eligible for the post and possessed the requisite qualifications.
All candidates were interviewed by the Selection Committee and respondents No. 3 and 4 who were found most suitable were selected.
It is this selection which is now under challenge before us in this petition.
2.
We have heard counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Since the private respondents who have been selected were eligible for the post no fault can be found with their appointments.
Merely because the petitioner possessed a degree in Civil Engineering did not make him more suitable for the post.
It is well settled that the process of selection has to be left to the Selection Committees which consist of experts who can better judge the suitability of the candidates appearing before them.
This court in the exercise of its jurisdiction does not substitute its own opinion nor does it normally interfere with such selections where all candidates have been considered.
The only right which the petitioner had was a right of consideration and admittedly he was considered and interviewed for the post.
Having fought and lost the battle, he cannot now be allowed to challenge the selection of respondents No. 3 and 4.
In this view of the matter, we find no merit in the writ petition, and the same stands dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.