Swatanter Kumar, J - In this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for calling for the records of the respondents and further with a prayer that admission of respondent No. 2 to the degree course in Food Technology be quashed and petitioner be ordered to be admitted to the said course.
2.
Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Sangrur, Punjab, is an institute established by the Government of India to impart technical education and offers the following three degree courses under this scheme:  (a) Certificate Programme.
(b) Diploma Programme.
(c) Degree of Programme.
50% of the seats in the above courses are filled in by direct entry while the remaining 50% are filled by vertical promotion from amongst the diploma holders.
For getting entry through these two channels, there are separate entrance tests provided by the Institute.
The internal candidates i.e. the diploma holders are also entitled to take the entrance test for direct entry.
This has been clearly stipulated in the information brochure copy of which has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/1.
3.
The petitioner appeared for entrance test held for direct entry in Food Technology and attained rank No. 28.
The petitioner was called for counselling on 2072001 and the seats upto rank No. 17 were filled.
Number of other candidates including respondent No. 2 had appeared for the direct entry test and has obtained rank No. 18 to 23 in the internal list and were higher in merit than the petitioner in direct entrance test.
4.
Respondent No. 2 had obtained rank No. 24 in internal list and rank No. 41 in direct entrance test.
Candidate at serial No. 1 of the internal list abandoned her course in Food Technology on 2172001.
According to the petitioner the said seat should have been offered to the candidate at Serial No. 18 of the internal list and the resultant vacancy ought to have come to the share of direct entry seat and as none of the intervening candidates had appeared in the first counselling, the petitioner being at rank No. 28 of the direct entry should have been granted seat in terms of the brochure.
However, the seat was given to respondent No. 2 compelling the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
5.
Upon notice, the respondents filed reply.
The basic facts are not in dispute.
The stand of the respondents is that in terms of the brochure and in accordance with the judgments of the Courts, they cannot convert seats from either of the heads to the other i.e. from internal seat to direct seat or vice-versa.
According to the respondents, the result of the entrance test for direct entry seats was declared on 272001 and the seats were allotted to the candidates in their respective courses.
The result of the vertical entry test was declared on 14.7.2001 and the seats were allotted keeping in view the terms of the prospectus that 50% of the students of diploma course were to be promoted to degree programme in Food Technology.
Thus, the candidates from serial No. 2 to 16 of vertical entry were promoted, as rank No. 1 had already got admission in another discipline in direct entry seat.
When a vertical entry seat fell vacant, none of the candidates of direct entry was given admission and respondent No. 2 who secured rank No. 24 in merit list for vertical promotion, was granted admission in the degree course on 2672001.
According to the respondents, the stand taken by the petitioner is contrary to the judgment of this Court.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
The sole question that falls for consideration in view of the undisputed facts is whether the respondent- Institute was obliged to convert the vertical entry seats into direct entry seats or not ?
7.
This question need not detain us any further in view of a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Jasmeen Kaur v. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal, District Sangrur, C.W.P.
No. 11888 of 2000, decided on 2112000.
In that case the Division Bench was concerned with the interpretation of the same brochure and the question whether inter- changibility of these two categories is permissible or not.
The Hon'ble Division Bench dealt with the following stand of the respondents and held as under:-  "It has been pleaded by the respondent that as the provisions of the prospectus permits the SLIET students not only to seek admission to the vertical entry seat but also to compete for direct entry seat at par with the non-SLIET student and in case such candidate gets admission against the direct entry seat and also against the vertical entry seat in the same specialization of degree course, then it has to be taken that he had consumed the vertical entry seat and the direct entry seat occupied by that candidate would be given to the next candidate in order of merit and not to the petitioner.
Thus, the action of the respondent in denying the admission to the petitioner to the said course was justified."
"Therefore, the only embargo put up by above noted provision of the prospectus is that on 2172000 if a vertical entery seat was available in order of merit to Anju Bala then she could not have been given admission against direct entry seat.
As already noticed no vertical entry seat was available on that day and for that reason she was admitted against the direct entry seat in the said degree course.
Therefore, the action of the respondent in adjusting Miss Anju Bala against one the vertical entry seats so vacated by above noted two candidates in the month of August, 2000. cannot be accepted."
"The petitioner was called for the counselling against the vertical entry seat lying in the said degree course for 3182000 vide letter Annexure P-3 placed on record from the side of the petitioner.
Having admitted availability of vertical entry seats respondents cannot over turn this position by taking a converse stand in denying admission to the petitioner."
8.
With respect, we could adopt the reasoning given by the Hon'ble Division Bench in coming to the above conclusions and which have a direct bearing on the matter in controversy on the present case.
We do not find it necessary to discus this controversy in any further elaboration.
The petitioner, admittedly, has rank No. 28 in the direct entry and he was not a candidate for consideration of allocation of seats in the vertical entry.
Conversion of the seats, as afore-noticed, is per se not permissible and the claim of the petitioner at best can be considered in the direct entry keeping in view his own merit.
On merit the persons upto rank No. 17 have only been given seats under the direct entry.
Thus, seen from any angle the petitioner does not have a sustainable claim.
For the reasons afore-stated we find no merit in this petition.
The same is hereby dismissed, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.