Bakhshish Kaur, J - By invoking the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court, the petitioner prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allocate the year of 1980 instead of 1985 for appointment in Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch).
2.
The Haryana Public Services Commission (hereinafter referred to as `the Commission') issued an advertisement for the recruitment of Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) and other allied Services.
The last date for submission of applications was 10111980.
The division of vacancies of different categories and services was as under :-  Category General  SC BC Military Personnel i) Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) 7 2 2 nil ii) Excise and Taxation Officers 9 3 2 1 iii) Assistant Registrar Coop.
Societies 9 2 1 nil iv) A Class Tehsildars (Apprentices) 2 1 - 1 v) Assistant Employment Officer 12 4 2 1 39 12 7 3 Note : The number of posts for each category is liable to variation.
3.
In the original panel, the total posts for Ex-servicemen were 1, Excise and Taxation Officer 1, A Class Tehsildar 1 and Assistant Employment officer was 1.
4.
The petitioner applied for the Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) in the category of Military Personnel.
The Commission held a competitive examination and the petitioner was declared successful.
He was called for interview as per letter Annexure P-1.
Finally, according to advertisement, 61 posts were recommended to be advertised, but thereafter 68 posts were added to all the posts except post No. 2 i.e. Assistant Registrar (Cooperative Societies) and thus the posts were revised from 61 to 119.
The revised recommendation of H.C.S.
and Allied Services was sent by the Commission.
The category-wise recommendation of 119 posts is as under :-  Category General SC  BC  ESM Total i) Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) 7+9 2+3 2+1 nil 24 ii) Excise and Taxation Officers 9+12 3+3 2+1 1 31 iii) Assistant Registrar Coop.
Societies 9 2 1 nil 12 iv) A Class Tehsildars (Apprentices) 2+3 1+1 nil 1 8 v) Assistant Employment Officer 12+18 4+4 2+2 1+1 44 119 5.
In May, 1983, the recommendation was made for 119 post for H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and Allied Services.
The petitioner was no. 1 among the merit list of Ex-Servicemen category and as per appointment letter dated 23.2.1984 (Annexure P-5) he was appointed as Excise and Taxation Officer.
6.
Petitioner filed representation Annexure P-6 that according to the Government instructions, 5% posts are reserved for Ex-Servicemen and out of 24 posts of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch), at least one post should have been given for Ex-Servicemen category.
As the petitioner was at number 1 in order of merit among the Ex-Servicemen category, therefore, he was entitled to be appointed in H.C.S.
(Executive Branch).
On 17.11.1986, his representation was accepted and he was offered the post of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch).
He had joined as H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) on 10..61987.
7.
The petitioner's claim is that in the revised/amended merit list of the candidates, among the candidates recommended for H.C.S.
(Executive Branch), his name is mentioned at serial No. 16.
The candidates whose names appear at serial No. 17 to 25 were allocated the year 1980 as the year of appointment, whereas the petitioner was allocated the year 1985, therefore, by not assigning him the seniority of 1980 batch, he stands discriminated against the other similarly situated persons.
He claims that he should be treated at par along with other batch mates as he was selected along with them.
He has been discriminated by not allocating him the year 1980 as has been done in the case of his other batch mates, who were junior to him in the merit list.
8.
The respondents have resisted this writ petition by raising a preliminary objection that the petition is bad for non-joinder of Haryana Public Service Commission, who is a necessary party, therefore, it is liable to be dismissed.
9.
On merits, it is averred that no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed which entitles him to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
The factual position, however, stands admitted.
It is admitted that on account of more posts becoming available in the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch), the same were increased from 11 to 25, out of which one post was reserved for Ex- Servicemen category.
The Commission did not recommend any candidate for appointment against the one vacancy reserved for Ex-Servicemen because the competitive examination for the recruitment of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) for the year 1980 against the vacancies notified for the year 1980, had already taken place.
It is, however, admitted and pleaded, inter alia, that subsequently when the Commission was asked to recommend 25 candidates for appointment to HCS (Executive Branch) against the vacancies of year 1980, one vacancy was reserved for Ex-Servicemen.
The Commission, however, recommended 24 candidates and did not recommend any candidate belonging to Ex-Serviceman category previously as the post reserved for Ex-serviceman was not advertised in 1980.
10.
I have heard Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri Sultan Singh, learned Assistant Advocate-Gerneral for the State of Haryana and Shri HN Mehtani, Standing counsel for the Commission.
11.
The main point which needs consideration is whether the action of the respondents of not assigning the petitioner the seniority of year 1980 batch whereas his juniors have been so assigned, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
12.
The Haryana Civil Services are admittedly governed by statutory rules called Punjab Civil Service Rules, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
Rules 18 and 20 being relevant in the case in hand, are reproduced as under :-  "18.
Order of appointment of candidates :- Candidates on the different registers shall ordinarily be appointed to the Service in the order in which they are selected and their names entered in the respective registers."
"19.
Senior of members of service :- (1) The Seniority of members appointed to the service shall be determined in accordance with the rotation prescribed in rule 17, irrespective of the fact whether or not this rotation is actually followed while making appointments :  Provided that the order of merit determined by the Selection Committee or the Public Service Commission, as the case may be in respect of persons appointed from various registers shall not be disturbed."
Proviso added to rule 20, therefore, makes it clear that the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed.
The name of the petitioner in the revised/amended merit list of the candidates recommended for appointment of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) was at serial No. 16.
The names of the other candidates were mentioned at serial Nos. 17 to 25.
The name of Chhajju Ram was at serial no. 15 and Rajbir Singh at serial No. 17 in the revised merit list.
The name of the petitioner as well as the names of aforesaid candidates were recommended by the Commission and in the wake of the recommendations made by the Commission, the revised/amended merit list was prepared which is Annexure P-8.
13.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, contended that according to the reservation policy, 5% posts of H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) are to be filled from the Ex-Serviceman category and according to the vacancies and according to the instructions Annexure P-2, the roster points are 12, 32, 52, 72 and 94.
Thus, out of the 24 posts of HCS (Executive Branch), at least one post falls in the share of Ex-Serviceman category.
When the petitioner was shifted from Excise and Excise and Taxation Officer to HCS (Executive Beach) service, the candidates belonging to Ex-Serviceman category lower in merit to the petitioner, were also shifted from Tehsildar to Excise and Taxation Officer and those from Assistant Employment Officer to Tehsildar, were granted seniority in 1980 batch.
Rohtaksh Singh, who was selected in 1982 batch as Tehsildar and later on appointed as HCS (Executive Branch) on 20.3.1990, was assigned seniority in 1982 batch, as per order Annexure P-17.
Similarly, one RC Verma, who was selected in 1982 batch, at first instance was appointed Tehsildar and later on as HCS (Executive Branch) on 141991 as per order Annexure P-18, was assigned seniority of 1982 batch.
Thus, the petitioner who was selected against the post which as per roster point was existing in 1980 in H.C.S.
(Executive Brach), but was not reserved for Ex- Serviceman category, the petitioner having been adjusted against that post, he should have been assigned the seniority of the year to which the post belonged, as has been done in the case of persons who were junior in the revised merit list placed as they were at serial Nos. 17 to 25.
The candidates of next batch have been made senior to him by assigning the seniority of 1982 batch to them.
This is a clearcut case of violation of the principle of equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
Apart from this, it is contrary to the Rules governing the Haryana Civil Services.
14.
As a logical corrolary to this conclusion, it must be held that the petitioner is entitled to the allocation of seniority of 1980 year in stead of 1985 in the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch).
This writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The petitioner apart form seniority of 1980 year, will be entitled to the consequential benefits, if any, arising from assigning the seniority of 1980.
The arrears, if any, on account of consequential benefits to be granted to the petitioner resulting from re-allocation of seniority, shall, however, be confined to 3 years and 2 months prior to the filing of the writ petition.
Petition allowed.