ML Singhal, J - Mohinder Singh son of Rulia Ram was constable on the rolls of Hoshiarpur District.
His constabulary No. was 525/HPR.
He was enrolled on 161971.
After serving a few days in police lines, Hoshiarpur, he joined Punjab Armed Police Training Centre, Jalandhar Cantt, Distt.
Jalandhar from where he completed the training.
He served in District Hoshiarpur Police at different places on different duties.
He was dealt with departmentally on the allegation that on 2271985 while posted as gun man with Ashok Mahajan of Dasyuya District, he absented and was found in drunken state in front of old Tehsil Dasuya creating nuisance.
As a result of the departmental enquiry, he was punished with the punishment of forfeiture of two years approved service by the Superintendent of Police (Detective) vide order No. 35-39/37 dated 811986.
He went in appeal against that order before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt on 721986.
Instead of accepting this appeal, the Additional Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt vide order dated 1481986 dismissed him from service saying that the punishment of forfeiture of two years approved service was not commensurate with the misconduct imputed to him.
He went in appeal against the order dated 1481986 dismissing him from service before the Director General of Police (Punjab), Chandigarh on 1391986, who vide order dated 2811987 reinstated him into service from the date of dismissal i.e. 1481986 and remanded the case to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range as there were material irregularities in the order dated 1481986.
He was reinstated into service with effect from 1481986 in the wake of the order of the Director General of Police Punjab, Chandigarh dated 2811987.
Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt issued him show cause notice.
He gave reply to that show cause notice.
After considering his reply to the show cause notice, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar dismissed him from service with effect from 2971987.
He went in appeal before the Director General of Police, Punjab, Chandigarh who vide order dated 24111987 dismissed his appeal.
He thus stood dismissed from service with effect from 2971987.
He filed suit for declaration challenging the order dated 2971987 of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt dismissing him from service as being illegal, invalid, null and void, ineffective, in violation of service rules, punitive, arbitrary, non-speaking, contrary to law with all consequential reliefs flowing from the setting aside of the order dated 2971987 dismissing him from service.
It was alleged in the plaint that before holding departmental enquiry, preliminary enquiry was not held nor sanction of the District Magistrate as envisaged in Punjab Police Rule 16, 38(1) was sought as he committed a criminal offence, if any under Section 34 of the Police Act in connection with his official relations with public.
Without obtaining sanction under Rule 1638(1) from the District Magistrate, the entire departmental enquiry is null and void.
On appeal by him against the order of Superintendent of Police (Detective) Hoshiarpur, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt could not enhance his punishment.
He could either reduce the punishment or dismiss his appeal altogether.
No reason was given why the punishment imposed upon him by the punishing authority was required to be enhanced Merely observing that punishment is not comensurating with the gravity of offence is no ground to enhance the punishment.
It was alleged in the plaint that the Director General of Police, Punjab, Chandigarh acted illegally while remanding case to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt, who could not have reviewed his earlier order, Remand of the case by the Director General of Police was absolutely against law and facts.
Fact that he had rendered 15 years of unblemished service was not taken into account by any of these authorities.
2.
Defendant-State of Punjab contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that the provisions of rule 1638(i) of the Punjab Police Rules are not attracted in this case.
It was urged that he order of Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt passed after remand by the Director General of Police, Punjab, Chandigarh was quite in order.
Order of the Director General of Police dismissing the appeal against that order was quite in order.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :  1.
Whether the order of dated 2971987 is illegal and void ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable as alleged ?
OPD 4.
Relief.
Vide order dated 10.3.1992, Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Hoshiarpur decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 2971987 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt ordering his dismissal from service is illegal, null and void and that he is entitled to all the consequential benefits arising on account of his reinstatement into service in view of his finding that the impugned order cannot sustain; the same being not in accordance with the provisions of Rule 16(2)(1) of the Punjab Police Rules in asmuchas while dismissing him from service neither his claim to pension nor the fact whether the conduct imputed to him was suggesting incorrigibility on his part rendering him completely unfit for retention in police service was taken into account.
4.
Not satisfied with the judgment and decree dated 10.3.1992 of Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Hoshiarpur, State of Punjab went in appeal, which was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Hoshiarpur vide order dated 24121993.
5.
Still not satisfied, State of Punjab has come up in further appeal to this Court.
6.
I have heard the learned DAG Punjab for the State of Punjab and the learned counsel for the respondent and have gone through the record.
7.
Charge against the respondent-plaintiff was that on 2271985 when he was attached as gun man with Ashok Maajan of Dasuya, he absented from duty and was found in drunken state while creating nuisance in front of old Tehsil Dasuya and on information percolating through some public man, ASI Massa Singh alongwith his companions came to the spot and found him heavily drunk with bandoleer containing 20 cartridges tied around his waist and when asked where his service rifle was, he could not given any satisfactory reply and his service rifle loaded with 5 cartridges was later on found lying at the shop of Ashok Mahajan.
He acted in a most irresponsible, reprehensible and negligent manner.
Superintendent of Police (Detective) found this charge proved against him and punished him with the forfeiture of two years approved service.
On appeal by him, Deputy Inspector General of Police enhanced the punishment to dismissal from service.
On further appeal by him, Director General of Police Punjab, Chandigarh set aside the order of dismissal passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt and remanded the case to him.
Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt gave him show cause notice.
After taking reply from him to the show cause notice and hearing him, he dismissed him from service.
He went in further appeal, which was dismissed.
8.
It was submitted by the learned DAG Punjab for the State of Punjab that the charge stood proved against him beyond all reasonable doubt and the nature of the charge proved against him warranted his dismissal from service.
It was submitted that any punishment short of dismissal from service would not have met the ends of justice commensurating with the gravity of the charge framed against him.
It was submitted that it was height of misconduct on his part that he left Ashok Mahajan unguarded for whose protection he had been attached as gun-man and got drunk and was moving about in front of old Tehsil Dasuya creating nuisance under the influence of liquor.
9.
It was submitted that the mis-conduct to this extent might have not been sufficient to entail his dismissal from service but the fact that his service rifle duly loaded with 5 cartridges was lying at the shop of Ashok Mahajan and the bandolier containing 20 cartridges was lying tied around his waist and since he had run away while being taken for medical examination for ascertaining whether he had taken liquor, was sufficient to entail the punishment of dismissal.
It was submitted that assuming that there is no conclusive evidence that he was heavily drunk, he was under the influence of liquor.
10.
One thing is certain that he was deputed to work as gun-man with Ashok Mahajan of Dasuya.
Instead of performing the duties of gun-man with him, he absented and was found in front of old Tehsil, Dasuya with the bandolier containing 20 cartridges tied around his waist.
Service rifle loaded with 5 cartridges was found at the shop of Ashok Mahajan.
It was submitted that it was an act of great irresponsibility and recklessness when he left his service rifle loaded with five cartridges at the shop of Ashok Mahajan.
That service rifle could have gene put to use also.
If some body had put that service rifle to use and committed some foul play that would have brought bad name to the police department.
It was submitted that in the year 1985 Punjab was writhing with affliction of terrorism.
If some terrorist had taken away that service rifle loaded with cartridges and mis-used the same, there would have been harassment to the police.
It was submitted that he was a member of the disciplined force.
Discipline is the core of the police department.
No infraction of any sort could be eschewed in this behalf.
11.
On the other hand it was submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent that the enquiry was bad as there was no compliance with the provisions of Rule 1638(1) of the Punjab Police Rules.
Immediate information should have gene given to the District Magistrate by the SP regarding the commission of this dereliction by him, which disclosed the commission of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public so that District Magistrate could decide whether he should be prosecuted criminally or be dealt with departmentally.
It was submitted that the holding of departmental enquiry without any preliminary enquiry as envisaged under Rule 1638(1) of the Punjab Police Rules was illegal and void.
12.
Suffice it say he had not committed any criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public.
If he had committed some offence under the influence of liquor, then the provisions of Section 1638(2) could be said to have been attracted.
In this case, however, his claim to pension should have been considered.
It should have been considered whether dismissal will meet the ends of justice or he should be retired prematurely.
Rule 16.2(1) of the Punjab Police Rules says that the dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall have to be taken to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
In this case none of the authorities dealing with the dereliction of duty on his part adverted to the consideration of his case for this point of view.
13.
In view of what I have said above, this appeal has to be partly allowed and is accordingly partly allowed.
Plaintiff shall be deemed to be in service of the Punjab Police up to 2971987.
He shall be allowed pension and other retiral benefits in proportion to the number of years, he had put in with the Punjab Police up to 2971987.
He shall be allowed arrears of pension and other retiral benefits with interest at the rate of 10% per annum with effect from 2971987 till their disbursement to him.
No order as to costs.
Appeal partly allowed.