RL Anand, J - Shri Devki Nandan Sharma, an unsuccessful candidate, has filed the present writ petition against the respondents, including respondent Nos. 3 and 4 (private respondents) and he has made a prayer that the appointments of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to the posts of Assistant Engineer (Electrical) be quashed.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that an advertisement was issued by respondent No. 2 for two posts of Assistant Engineer (Electrical) in the respondent Department.
One post was reserved for backward class candidate and other was for general category.
The last date for purposes of eligibility was fixed as 16th August, 1996.
The petitioner being fully eligible in all respects, applied for the said post.
The name of the petitioner was recommended by the department for consideration to the post of Assistant Engineer (Electrical).
The petitioner was called for interview on 1st April, 1997.
The interviews were held from 141997 to 441997.
No written was necessary for the said post.
Moreover, no written test was conducted by respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 3 also applied for the post of Assistant Engineer (Electrical).
The grievance of the petitioner is that though he was more meritorious than that of respondent No. 3, yet respondent No. 3 has been appointed as Assistant Engineer (Electrical) and his selection is totally arbitrary and has been conducted by adopting the policy of pick and choose.
It was also the set up case of the petitioner that the entire selection was based on interview.
Only 20% marks were kept for higher qualifications and the remaining 80% marks were reserved for the viva-voce interview which is illegal and which gives arbitrary powers to the Selection Committee of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The Board cannot lay down a criteria for selection by earmarking more than 50% marks for the viva voce.
The process of selection is bad and, therefore, the selection should be set aside.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
One written statement was filed by respondent No. 1 in which the stand of the government is that respondent No. 3 has been given the appointment as Assistant Engineer (Electrical) vide letter dated 6th May, 1998 on selection by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
It was further submitted that in the requisition sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission by respondent No. 2, qualifications and other eligible criteria, such as pay scale, relaxation in age for government employees has been clearly indicated.
There is no infringement of legal and vested right of the petitioner.
4.
Respondent No. 3 Shri Rajesh Ahuja filed the written statement separately in which he has stated that the post in question is governed by the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II P.W.D.
(B&R) Rules, 1965 as applicable to the Haryana State.
In those service rules, no criteria for selection is provided.
In any case, eligibility criteria and selection criteria are two different things.
Selection agency can always evolve a criteria for selection.
The answering respondent has been appointed on the basis of his suitability and performance in the interview.
He was up to the mark and that was the reason that he was issued the appointment letter.
Moreover, the petitioner is estopped from challenging the selection and promotion as he himself participated in the selection.
He has never challenged the process of selection or eligibility of recruitment prior to the interview.
He has appeared without any protest.
Since he was not successful, therefore, he has filed the present writ petition.
Forty-nine candidates in general category were called for interview, including the petitioner and the answering respondents.
Selection criteria was not liable to be disclosed in cases like the present one.
The service rules do not contain the criteria on the basis of which the selection to the posts are made from time to time.
The petitioner could not adjudge his own performance at the time of interview.
The Commission fixed various heads for the purposes of interviews and the marks are to be awarded under each heads.
The petitioner as well as the answering respondent along with others were duly interviewed by the Selection Committee.
There is no mala fide alleged by the petitioner against any member of the Selection Committee.
Since the overall performance has to be seen by the Selection Committee, therefore, the Selection Committee on the basis of that performance recommended the name of the respondent for the said post.
The selection was in a fair and impartial manner.
Article 320 of the Constitution of India does not deprive the Commission from framing the selection criteria on the basis of which the interviews were held for the posts.
With this broad defence, respondent No. 3 prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
Respondent No. 4 also filed the written statement and he supported the case of respondent No. 3.
5.
Before I further proceed into the matter, I would like to make mention of the following interim order which was passed by the Bench on 10th November, 1989 :  "Shri Mehtani has produced four sealed envelopes.
We have opened two of them.
One contains the criteria framed by the Commission and the other contains the sheets on which marks have been awarded to the candidates.
After perusing this record, we direct the Commission to file a detailed reply to the writ petition, which may be done within next four weeks.
The particular points on which the Commission should put forward its view are :- (i) Whether it has jurisdiction to frame criteria for the purpose of making selection for appointment to the public services ?
(ii) Whether the criteria framed by it should be published along with the advertisement so that the candidates may prepare themselves accordingly ?
The envelopes opened in the Court are directed to be re-sealed and handed over to Shri Mehtani.
Put up on 14121998.
Copy of the order be made available to Shri Mehtani by the Bench Secretary after due attestation under her signatures."
I may also make a mention that in pursuance of the aforesaid order the Commission has filed an affidavit in which it has been specifically stated that interviews were held as per the criteria framed by the Commission.
The post is governed by the rules in which no criteria for selection is provided.
It was maintained in this order that in order to assess/adjudge the suitability of the candidates, all the candidates were given sufficient time.
The interviews were held in a fair, just and proper manner and that the assessment was made on the basis of the criteria framed by the Commission.
The framing of criteria is a part of the selection process.
Articles 320 of the Constitution of India does not deprive the Commission from framing the selection criteria on the basis of which the interviews were to be held.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that out of 100 marks, only 20% marks were kept for higher qualifications and 80% marks were kept for viva voce.
For the purpose of viva-voce, there cannot be more than 50% marks.
In other words, only 50% marks can be earmarked out of 100 marks.
In the present case, more than 50% marks have been earmarked, therefore, the entire process of selection is bad.
It was also argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that under Article 320 of the Constitution of India, the Commission cannot frame a criteria for the purpose of selection.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that present is a case of interview and, therefore, in such like cases more than 50% marks can be allocated.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his contention relied upon Dr. Krushan Chandra Sahu and others v. State of Orissa and others, 1995(4) SCT 560 (SC) : JT 1995(7) SC 137 wherein it was observed that in the absence of rules as regards the criteria to be followed to determine the suitability of the candidates, the selection Board determined the suitability on the basis of character rolls of the candidates in their previous jobs, cannot make selection and if such selections are made those will be without authority or jurisdiction.
9.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon Mr. Abid Asghar v. State of Bihar and others, 1993(5) S.L.R.
799 in which it has been held that the principles which govern the allocation of marks for interview in a selection based on written and viva voce test cannot be made applicable to a selection when no written test is held and selection is based on interview only.
It was further observed that allocation of 50% marks for interview and 50% marks for academic performance is just and proper and does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
Present is a case where no written test was taken.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the Selection committee has divided 100 marks into two categories i.e. 20% marks for higher qualification and 80% marks for the interview.
There is one more angle of vision to examine the present case.
The petitioner has participated in the selection.
He has never approached this Court before the interview.
He is not alleged any mala fide against any of the members of the Selection Committee.
Once he has participated in the process of selection, it is not open now for him to say that the selection and appointment of respondent No. 3 is bad.
Article 320 of the Constitution no where bars the selection committee of the Haryana Public Service Commission to formulate a criteria for selection.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.