Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners pray for issuance of a writ of certiorari and quashing the public notice dated 8.12.2001 issued by the State of Punjab being illegal, arbitrary, unjust, unfair and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India, under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution.
On 2832001 the respondents issued advertisement to fill up 128 posts of Art and Craft Teachers (Men) and equal number of posts of Women Art and Craft Teachers.
Amongst others, the petitioners satisfied the academic and professional qualifications prescribed in the advertisement.
They had applied in response to the said advertisement on the prescribed proforma.
On 8112001 the respondent-State issued another public notice informing the applicants that after determining the merit, the candidates with higher merit alone would be issued roll numbers.
The State decided to call the candidates five times of the number of posts advertised.
The criteria fixed by the respondent-State for determining the merit as prescribed in the impugned advertisement reads as under :-  1.
Art and Craft Teacher (Male and Female)  Marks obtained in basic qualifications Marks obtained in Professional qualifications.
------------------x 35 ----------------- x  35+ Marks in Higher Total Marks Total Marks qualification (MA/MSc/MCom.
and BA) Note : Marks for higher qualifications have been awarded as under :- Higher Qualification : First Division in MA/MSc/MCom.
- 2 Marks Second Division in MA/MSc/MCom.
Or First Division in BA - 15 Marks Third Division in MA/MSc/MCom.
Or Second Division in BA - 05 Marks According to the petitioners, providing of the above criteria for determining the merit is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and is an arbitrary Act on the part of the State.
Another contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that as per the policy of the State in cases of employment, due weightage has to be given to the experience which is not being given in the above merit criteria.
Both these contentions are without any merit and substance.
It is a settled principle of law that the State can formulate any policy for choosing the best of the eligible candidates.
The State has adopted a procedure to scrutinize the applications at the very out-set and call limited number of candidates (i.e. five times of the advertised posts) possessing higher merit.
Obviously the experience would be given due weightage by the State out of these candidates while considering them for appointment to the post.
Even if it was not so done, we see no element of arbitrariness in the above criteria formulated by the State for the purposes of determining merit.
In the case of Rajasthan Public Service Commission v. Chanan Ram and another, 1998(2) SCT 504 (SC) : (1998) 4 Supreme Court Cases 202, then Hon'ble Apex court up-held the policy of the State to change the service rules with an intention to pick up more qualified persons of higher merit for recruitment into service.
In view of the above settled position of law, we are of the considered view that this petition has no merit.
The same is hereby dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.