RL Anand, J - By this judgment I dispose of two Civil Writ Petition Nos. 6074 of 2000, Ramesh Kumar son of Sadhu Ram v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(1) SCT 403 (P&H) and 3349 of 2000 (Rakesh Kumar Sapra son of Kuldeep Kumar v. State of Haryana and others) as in the opinion of this Court these can be disposed of by one judgment as common questions of law and facts are involved in both the cases.
The facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 6074 of 2000.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner in this writ petition is that directions be issued to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to appoint the petitioner to the post of Assistant District Attorney.
It is alleged by the petitioner that 74 posts of Assistant District Attorney were published by the Government of Haryana.
Out of it, 43 posts were meant for general category and the rests were for the reserved categories.
The Haryana Public Service Commission conducted a screening test for the said posts.
The petitioner appeared in the screening test.
The result was declared and the name of the petitioner was in the successful list.
The petitioner was called for the interview, but when the result was declared, his name did not find mention in the final list which was published in the newspaper.
In the said publication of the final result, the petitioner was shown to have been recommended to the State Government for appointment as an additional candidate in the waiting list at Serial No. 3.
The petitioner enquired the purpose of additional recommendation from the Commission.
It was informed to him that some additional candidates for appointment as per existing rules and regulations have been recommended.
The petitioner can be granted appointment in two eventualities - firstly, if any of the recommendee candidate does not join and, secondly, if there had arisen some vacancies after the commencement of the selection process and till the expiry of six months after its completion.
All the 74 candidates who were recommended by the Commission joined their duties in various departments within one month from the date of issuance of the appointment letters.
In the month of July 1999 the petitioner made inquiries from the office of respondent No. 2 and it was transpired that 30 posts of Assistant District Attorney in different departments have fallen vacant after the start of the selection process.
On 7th December, 1999 the petitioner made a detailed representation to the official respondents claiming appointment on the said post relying upon the Government circulars dated 2231957 and 26.5.1972 and also on the basis of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Varinder Singh Hooda and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1999(2) SLR 191.
In the month of March 2000, the petitioner came to know that respondent No. 3 who was recommended by the Commission as an additional candidate in Scheduled Caste "A" Category has been given appointment in pursuance of the Government circulars dated 2231957 and 26.5.1972 and also by relying upon the judgment in Varinder Singh Hooda's case (supra).
His case is at par with that of respondent No. 3.
Since 30 posts had fallen vacant after the start of the selection process, therefore, the petitioner deserves to be appointed against one of the posts falling to the handicapped category.
The petitioner should also be treated at par with respondent No. 3.
With this background the petitioners have filed the present writ petitions.
3.
Notice of the Writ Petition was given to the respondents and they filed the reply and denied the allegations.
It was submitted by the respondents that the Chief Secretary had modified the policy i.e. instructions dated 28th October, 1993.
The State Government has further issued the instructions dated 2721997.
According to this letter, appointment out of waiting list is to be made in case the candidate from original list do not join his duty and no other vacancy is to be filled up from the waiting list.
The name of the petitioner was recommended by the Public Service Commission against the waiting list as additional candidate.
Out of 74 candidates recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission, 44 candidates belonging to general category joined their duties against the advertised posts and no other vacancy was available for any candidate against the advertised posts.
Hence the petitioner was not considered for appointment as Assistant District Attorney.
4.
In short, the stand of the respondents is that the instructions relied upon by the petitioner are modified and secondly, the petitioner's name from the waiting list could only be considered for appointment if the selected candidate had not joined the duty.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
6.
The facts in this case are not in dispute.
Seventy-four posts were advertised.
All those posts were filled.
The petitioner's name did not find mention in the merit list.
The case set up by the petitioner is that after the start of the process of the selection and within six months thereof, some posts had fallen vacant and, therefore, he can be adjusted against those vacancies which were reserved or which comes to the general category as the case may be.
It was also the case of the petitioner now that respondent No. 3 has been adjusted in the similar circumstances, therefore, he should not be adjusted.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Seventy-four posts were advertised including the reserved one.
The petitioner's name did not figure in the merit list.
Any further appointment beyond 74 posts will be badbecause of the settled principle of law as there can be no recruitment beyond the advertised posts.
Any further recruitment beyond 74 posts will upset the very advertisement and the very right of those original candidates who would be desirous to compete with the subsequent examinees.
If any encroachment is made from the subsequent posts that will violate the principles of equality under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners were never in the merit list and, therefore, they have no case on merit.
With regard to appointment of respondent No. 3, I am constraint to make any remark as it is assumed for the sake of argument that respondent No. 3 has not been appointed against the advertised post.
It is for the State Government to see what action is to be taken against the respondent.
Two wrongs cannot make one right.
The petitioner has to establish his own case.
Admittedly, the petitioner was in the waiting list, therefore, he cannot claim that he should be adjusted against those vacancies which have arisen subsequently after the process of selection had started.
There is no merit in these writ petitions and the same are hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.