RL Anand, J - Shri RC Verma petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking relief that the impugned order Annexure P-10 dated 1971993 be quashed and directions be given to the respondents to count the past service rendered by the petitioner under the Directorate of Education, Delhi Administration, Delhi from 2281962 to 2371964 for the purpose of pension etc.  2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that initially he was appointed to the post of Post Graduate Teacher in the Directorate of Education, Delhi Administration, Delhi on 2281962 in the scale of Rs. 250-470 vide appointment letter dated 2281962.
Subsequently, in response to the advertisement given by the Punjab Public Service Commission, the petitioner applied for the post of a Lecturer in Chemistry in the Directorate of Education, Punjab through proper channel.
He was selected and he joined his new assignment in the Government College, Hisar on 2371964.
The petitioner rendered service in the Delhi Administration from 2281962 to 2371964.
With the reorganisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab the petitioner was allocated to the State of Haryana.
After serving in the Education Department of the Haryana up to 31.8.1969, the petitioner was selected as Assistant Chemist in the Industries Department, Haryana on which post he joined on 2.9.1969 and he was confirmed w.e.f.
391969 vide office order dated 731972.
He retired on 3151993.
It is alleged by the petitioner that the Government of India, inter alia, decided in consultation with the State Governments vide letter dated 9.10.1986 that the liability for pension including the gratuity would be borne in full by the Central or State Government to which the government servant permanently belongs at the time of his retirement.
It was further provided that no recovery of proportionate pension will be made from the Central/State Government under whom he had served.
The system of allocation of pension between the Central and State Government which was previously in vogue had been dispensed with and this decision came into force w.e.f.
141987.
The petitioner made a representation dated 4121991 and submitted that under the Government of India's orders, liability for pension is to be borne by the Haryana Government with regard to the period when the petitioner served under the Delhi Administration.
Respondent No. 2 made a reference to respondent No. 1, but respondent No. 1 expressed his inability to agree with the proposal sent by respondent No. 2.
The case of the petitioner now is, that due to non-counting of the service rendered by the petitioner under the Delhi Administration for the period from 2281962 to 2371964 i.e. 1 year and 11 months, there is loss in pension and gratuity.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
They have filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, Rule 3 of the Haryana Government (Finance Department) Notification dated 31121982 as amended vide Rule 317, runs as follows :  Note 3(a) In respect of temporary employees of the following categories who render service under the Central/State Governments prior to securing posts under the Central/State Governments on their own volition in response to advertisement or circulars including those by Union/State Public Service Commission and who are eventually confirmed in their new posts, the proportionate pensionary liabilities in respect of temporary service rendered under the Central/State Governments to the extent such service would have qualified for grant of pension under the rules of the respective Government will be shared by the concerned Governments on a service share basis: (1) Those who having been retrenched from the service of Central/State Government secured on their own, employment under State/Central Government either with or without interruption between the date of retrenchment and date of new appointment.
(2).
Those who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Governments apply for posts under State/Central Governments through proper channel with proper permission of the administrative authority concerned."
Explanation : Where an employee in Category (2) is required for administrative reasons for satisfying a technical requirement, to tender resignation from the temporary post held by him before joining the new appointment, as a certificate to the effect that such resignation had been tendered for administrative reasons and or to satisfy a technical requirement, to join with proper permission, the new posts may be issued by the authority accepting the resignation.
As period of this certificate may also be made in his service book under proper attestation to enable to get this benefit at the time of retirement.
The gratuity, if any received by the Government employee for temporary service under the Central/State Governments will, however, have to be refunded by him to the government concerned.
(b) Those employee who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Governments apply for post under Central/State Governments direct without permission and resign their previous post to join the new appointment under the Central/State governments, will not be entitled to count their previous service for pension."
4.
In pursuance of the above quoted amendment the Delhi Administration was required to share the proportionate pensionary liabilities in respect of temporary service rendered by the petitioner for the period from 2281962 to 2371964 if the petitioner's claim for the grant of pensionary benefits and all other consequential benefits is accepted.
Keeping in view the requirement of the above-said rule, the Deputy Director of Education, District West, Administration Bench, New Moti Nagar, New Delhi was asked to intimate whether the Education Department, Delhi Administration is prepared to share the proportionate pensionary liabilities in respect of the service rendered by the petitioner for the period from 2281962 to 2371964 in the Education Department of Delhi.
The Delhi Administration has not given any reply despite the reminder and, therefore, the petitioner has not been extended the benefit.
It was also pleaded by the respondent that this writ petition is liable to be dismissed for non-joinder of necessary parties as Delhi Administration is a necessary party.
With this defence, the respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard Shri BP Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG Haryana, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
6.
It is the admitted case of the parties that earlier the petitioner was posted in the Delhi Administration in the Education Department and worked from 2281962 to 2371964.
Thereafter he was appointed in the erstwhile State of Punjab and thereafter he was allocated to the State of Haryana.
7.
The short point for determination is as to whether the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of his previous service rendered by him under the Directorate of Education, Delhi Administration, Delhi from 2281962 to 2371964 for the purpose of pension and other allied benefits.
My attention has been invited to the document Annexure P-4.
A reading of the same would show that a decision was taken between the Central and the State Governments to dispense with the system of allocation of leave salary and pension and with regard to pension, it was decided that liability for pension including gratuity will be borne in full by the Central/State Department to which the Government servant permanently belongs at the time of retirement and no recovery of proportionate pension will be made under whom he had earlier served.
Thus, the position is quite evident that government shall incur the liability for pension including gratuity with regard to that period from where the public servant has been transferred.
Furthermore, as per the decision of the Government of India, when a public servant has served under two or more governments the liability for leave salary will be borne in full by the Department from which the Government servant proceed on leave, whether it be his parent department or a borrowing department with whom he is on deputation.
In view of the above position, the government have no defence to offer that the petitioner cannot take the advantage of previous service from the State Government for the propose of pension etc.  8.
The learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon the amendment quoted (supra).
The reading of the same would show that this rule was enacted with a view to make adjustment between the previous government and the government in which the public servant has been appointed afresh but so far as the liability to pay pension is concerned, it is always open to the subsequent department i.e. the State Government in the present case, to take into consideration the previous service rendered by the petitioner when he was serving in the Delhi Administration.
Such like matters were also earlier decided by the various civil courts and the example cited is of Shri GP Saxena, Ex-Senior Geologist, who filed a Civil Suit in the court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Chandigarh and whose suit was decreed vide judgment dated 6th August, 1996.
No doubt, that judgment is of the subordinate Court, but the principle of law in my view has been rightly enunciated.
Moreover, the judgment of Sh. Saksena has been implemented by the State Government in its letter No. 1/7/50-21, B-II-91 dated 2351997 vide which the Government agreed to pay to Shri GP Saxena all the pensionary benefits in regard to the service rendered by him under Rajasthan Government.
9.
In this view of the matter, the present writ petition is allowed and a declaration is given that the petitioner will be entitled to the benefit of his past service for the purpose of pension etc. and the past service of the petitioner shall be counted for pension etc. by the State Government irrespective of the fact whether the State Government has received the share from the Delhi Administration or not.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.