Pratap Kumar Ray, J - This writ application has been filed praying for approval of the panel in pursuance of the first interview held on 19111996 upon quashing the order issued by the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Siliguri dated 11th March, 1997 whereby and whereunder the panel as prepared in terms of the first interview was cancelled and direction was given for preparation of a fresh panel by forming a new Selection Committee.
In the prior permission the post has been referred to as BA (Geo-Comb.)
preferably trained appearing at page 22 of the petition.
In terms of the letter of District Inspector of Schools dated 11th March, 1997, second interview was held on 8th April, 1997 and the Writ petitioner appeared in the said interview without any objection.
Subsequently, a panel was prepared in terms of the said interview dated 8th April, 1997 wherein the writ petitioner could not succeed.
The writ petitioner's grievance of this writ application, as affirmed on 24th April, 1997, i.e. after appearing in the second interview, to this effect that the panel as prepared in terms of the first interview was to be given effect to where she stood first.
A supplementary affidavit has been filed without taking leave of this court and thereby it is contended by the writ petitioner that on the second interview as held on 8th April, 1997 there was change of expert.
Earlier, in the first interview an expert having knowledge of Nepali language was placed and subsequently an expert having no knowledge in Napali language was placed.
On perusal of the records it is clear that the writ petitioner without assailing the decision dated 11th March, 1997 of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Siliguri, appeared in the second interview and thereby the writ petitioner waived her right.
It is settled legal position that empanelment of a candidate by a Selection Committee will not provide to the candidate concerned who was empanelled with a right to be appointed.
As per the Recruitment Rules issued by the Director of School Education, West Bengal, panel was required to be approved.
In the instant case, the panel as prepared in terms of the first interview as held on 19111996 was not approved and the same was cancelled, in view of the illegality in the matter of preparation of the panel as mentioned in the letter dated 11th March, 1997 of the District Inspector of Schools concerned.
The writ petitioner though has assailed in the writ petition the said decision but it has been done after her appearance in the second interview s held on 8th April, 1997.
Applying the doctrine of waiver and estoppel, the writ petitioner is not entitled to assail the selection as made on 8111997.
Besides this, under the Recruitment Rules the District Inspector of Schools concerned has right not to accord approval of panel.
In the instant case, the appointment of an expert having no knowledge in Nepali has not caused any prejudice to the petitioner since the post is of Geography teacher.
The writ petitioner took a chance to be successful in this selection process but failed and accordingly she cannot turn down and assail the selection.
In the following judgments the Apex Court has considered the principles reported in the case of Madanlal and others v. J.&K.
and others, 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC) : reported in 1995(3) SCC 486, in the case of Om Parkash Shukla v. Akhilesh Shukla, reported in 1986(1) Supp.
SCC 285 and in the case of Union of India and another v. N Chandrasekharan and others, 1998(1) SCT 631 (SC) : reported in 1998(3) SCC page 694.
Considering the settled legal position and considering the effect, I think that there is no illegality in the matter in question for holding the second interview and petitioner has no `locus' to challenge it.
This writ application thus fails and is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
2.
After delivery of the judgment, the learned Advocate for the respondent appears and files affidavit-in-opposition.
Let the affidavit be kept with the record.
If urged certified Xerox copy applied for, office is directed to issue the same at an early date on compliance of usual formalities.
Petition dismissed.