SS Nijjar, J - In this Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners seek the issuance of a writ of Certiorari quashing the TPM Order No. 20767-73/A-1 dated 6.10.99 issued by Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala Cantt.
deputing the Head Constables mentioned therein for training in the Intermediate School Course commencing w.e.f.
10.10.99 at PTC, Madhuban and for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the official respondents to recall the private respondents from Intermediate School Course and depute the petitioners in their place, being senior to them or in the alternative special seats may be created for the petitioners and they should be deputed for the Intermediate School Course.
It is also prayed that in case the private respondents pass the Intermediate School Course during the pendency of the Writ Petition, they should not be promoted as Assistant Sub-Inspector and given seniority over and above the petitioners.
2.
Both the petitioners passed the lower School Course in September, 1983 and were brought on list "C" on 25101983.
They were further promoted as Head Constables on 19.3.1989 and 29.8.1989 respectively.
They were confirmed as Head Constables on 3111992.
3.
On the other hand, ASI Maya Ram-respondent No. 3 was not confirmed as a Head Constable at the time of the filing of the petition.
He was, however, officiating Head Constable and ad hoc ASI.
He passed the Lower School Course in 1987 from H.A.P.
He was also promoted as Head Constable from HAP.
Thereafter, he was transferred to Kurukshetra in 1990.
The service details of the other respondents are mentioned in paragraph 3 of the writ petition as follows :-  "1.
Head Constable Prem Chand No. 588/KTL Promotion as Head Constable Confirmation as Head Constable.
39893988 (changed)  31891(wrong) 2.
HC Krishan Kumar No. 453/KKR(Lower : 3/83) 6.9.896.9.88 (changed) 31192 3.
HC Pawan Kumar No. 78/YNR 11.8.89 31.8.92 4.
HC Raj Kumar No. 28/YNR 1.6.89 31.8.92 5.
HC Kuldip Singh No. 71/YNR 6.8.89 31.8.92 6.
HC Surinder Pal No. 682/AMB 11.8.89 31.8.92" 4.
From the perusal of the above, it becomes evident that all the private respondents, excepting respondent No. 3 are junior to petitioner No. 1, on the basis of continuous length of service on the post of Head Constable.
Respondents No. 5 to 9 are junior to petitioner No. 1 if the seniority is taken from the date of confirmation.
Respondent No. 4 was confirmed on the same date as the petitioner No. 1.
Petitioner No. 2 would be senior to respondents No. 6 to 9, if the seniority is reckoned from the date of confirmation on the post of Head Constable.
From a perusal of the aforesaid data, it becomes evident that the petitioners are senior to one or the other private respondents either on account of continuous length of service or because of prior confirmation.
Therefore, undoubtedly, the petitioners were entitled to be deputed for the Intermediate School Course prior to the private respondents.
A Full Bench of this Court, three decades ago, in the case of Sardul Singh Head Constable v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab and Others, 1970 S.L.R.
505 has clearly held as follows :-  "... Every Head Constable on list "C" has the right to be sent for the Intermediate School Course in the order of his seniority determined in accordance with rule 138.
While sending the Head Constable for the Intermediate School Course, the Deputy Inspector General of Police shall first send the confirmed Head Constables and after their list is exhausted, the Head Constables on probation will be sent and last of all officiating Head Constables will be sent.
This appears to us to be the most reasonable, fair and equitable way of complying with the provisions of rule 139 of the Police Rules in the interest of all the Head Constables in the Police force who legitimately aspire for promotion.
Any Head Constable unwilling to undergo that course will of course be omitted."
5.
Keeping the aforesaid observations in view, it becomes evident that the petitioners were clearly entitled to be deputed to the Intermediate School Course alongwith the private respondents.
During the course of arguments, it has transpired that both the petitioners have been deputed to the Intermediate School Course during the pendency of the Writ Petition.
Therefore, the petitioners are not pressing the prayer with regard to being deputed to the Intermediate School Course.
6.
Mr. HS Mann submitted that the petitioner would be satisfied if a direction is issued to the official respondents to determine the seniority of the petitioners on the basis of the date of their confirmation as Head Constables.
There is no impediment in issuing such a direction.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has appropriately relied on a decision of the Full Bench of this Court in the case of Surjit Singh v. The State of Punjab and Others, AIR 1977 (P&H) 360.
After considering the relevant rules, the Full Bench has held as follows :-  "19.
In order to negative the petitioner's contention that an unconfirmed lower subordinate would be entitled to rank senior even to a confirmed one by virtue of his date of appointment, particular reliance has been placed on the second paragraph of sub-rule (2) of R 141 of the Rules.
This provision again lends massive support to the respondents' stand and tends to show that the intention of the rule-makers was patently otherwise than what is sought to be contended on behalf of the petitioner.
The aforesaid second paragraph lays down in categorical terms that no officer on probation in his rank shall take seniority above an officer who is confirmed in that rank even though on account of the length of officiating service he may be drawing a higher rate of pay.
The intent thus seems to be obvious that despite any length of officiating service and the drawing of higher emoluments an unconfirmed officer has never to take seniority above one who is confirmed."
7.
In view of the abovesaid enunciation of law by the Full Bench, the petitioner, are clearly entitled to seniority from the dates they were confirmed on the post of Head Constables.
8.
Mr. RD Sharma submitted that no direction for the fixation of the seniority of the petitioners can be given as a large number of Head Constables who would be affected thereby, have not been impleaded as parties.
He, therefore, submitted that the petitioners ought to be directed to file a representation for fixation of their seniority, which would be decided by the department, in accordance with the rules.
I am not much impressed by the aforesaid argument.
The petitioners are merely seeking fixation of their seniority on the basis of the rules governing their service conditions.
The respondents are duty bound to act in accordance with the statutory service rules.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to fix the seniority of the petitioners in the rank of ASI on the basis of the dates of confirmation on the post of Head Constable irrespective of the fact that they have attended the Intermediate School Course later than the private respondents.
No costs.
Petition allowed.