RL Anand, J - Shri Munish Khanduja (here-in-after called the petitioner) has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against Guru Jambheshwar University and its Registrar and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the impugned order/advertisement Annexure P-3 be quashed and directions be given to the respondents to admit the petitioner to BE/BTech course starting from the year 2001.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he passed the three year State Board of Technical Diploma in the year 1999 and it is a duly recognished Diploma by the respondent-authorities.
Thereafter, he applied for the Common Engineering Entrance Test - 2001 vide Roll No. 30000021.
He cleared his test and was awarded rank No. 17234 by the respondent authorities vide letter dated 29th June, 2001.
As per the letter, the counselling had to start w.e.f.
30th July, 2001 at Hisar and an intimation to that effect was circulated/notified in the newspapers on 25th July, 2001.
The respondent authorities issued a prospectus for 4-5 year B. Tech./Architecture Course wherein all the relevant information or eligibility for admission were given.
According to the prospectus, a candidate is eligible for admission to the first year of the respective course if he/she fulfils the following requirements :  i) If he or she is Indian Nationality; ii) If he or she has good moral character; iii) The candidate must have passed on or before the last date of submission of application for the particular counselling for admission, the 10+2 examination of Haryana School Board or its equivalent examination from a recognised Board/University with PCM and English and must have obtained at least 50% marks in the aggregate of PCM or have passed three years diploma from State Technical Board (mere pass for admission to Agriculture Engg.
at HAO Hisar and some other RECs) as per detail in part D of the brochure.
3.
The petitioner alleges that according to the eligibility criteria laid down in the prospectus, a candidate who has passed three years' diploma from State Technical Board is also eligible for admission in the First Year of the course.
Since the petitioner has passed three years diploma from the State Technical Board, therefore, he is eligible for admission as he also cleared the test.
4.
The respondent authorities changed the counselling schedule and it was fixed for 21st September, 2001.
While changing the counselling schedule, a condition was also laid down by the respondent authorities that diploma holders who have secured 50% marks in aggregate shall be eligible to take admission in first year of the Degree Course in Engineering and Technology despite the fact that there was no condition regarding securing of minimum 50% marks for diploma holder students in the prospectus.
Now the case set up by the petitioner is that this condition which has been advertised vide Annexure P-3 is illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional and contrary to the contents of the main prospectus and is liable to be set aside.
The main grounds for attack is that it is not permissible for the respondent authorities to add or subtract words from the language of the main Brochure which was acted upon by the public at large and the respondents are bound by the terms and conditions of the Brochure.
The order Annexure P-3 has been passed by an authority which was not competent to do so and, therefore, it should be struck down.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
The stand taken up by the respondents is that after the information brochure was published, a meeting of the Vice-Chancellors of various Universities in Haryana was held under the Chairmanship of the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. of Haryana on 13th June, 2001 and in the said meeting it was decided "that for 2001-2002 the rounding off marks shall not be permitted in any case.
It was observed that the CEET Brochure already mentions that the candidates securing 495% and above marks in Physics, Chemistry and Math in 10+2 Examination shall be eligible as 495% marks and above but less than 50% shall be round off to 50%.
It was decided that a public notice shall be issued much before counselling as none of the affiliating Universities will register such students.
It was also decided that such candidate shall not be admitted against NRI seats and those seats which are to be filled up by the Managements of self financing colleges at their own level".
This decision was communicated to the University by the Director, Technical Education, Haryana on 28th June, 2001 and in order to implement that decision, the instructions were issued.
It is because of the above decision that the University did not allow the admission to the candidates who had not secured 50% aggregate marks in Physics, Chemistry and Math.
Thus, the broad defence of the respondents is that since a decision has been taken on 13th June, 2001 that no admission shall be given to the candidates who had not secured 50% aggregate marks in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, therefore, the petitioner was not considered for admission.
6.
In support of his case the petitioner has placed on record a copy of the admit card, Annexure P-1; ranking number of the petitioner, Annexure P-2; and a copy of the impugned letter as Annexure P-3.
Along with the written statement, the respondents have placed on record the notice of counselling Annexure R-1 and a copy of letter dated 27.9.2001 Annexure R-II.
7.
I have heard Shri J.K. Goel Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Girish Agnihotri assisted by Shri Pankaj Maini Advocates on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
8.
The material point for consideration is whether a candidate who has not secured 50% aggregate marks in Physics, Chemistry and Math would be eligible to take admission in first year of degree course in Engineering and Technology or not ?
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner invites my attention to the Information Brochure.
At page 40 to the said brochure eligibility for admission has been laid downed.
According to clause C-2 A, following essentialities have been notice :  (i) Indian Nationality (ii) Good Moral Character (iii) The candidate must have passed on or before the last date of submission of application for the particular counselling for admission, the 10+2 examination of Haryana School Board or its equivalent examination from a recognised board/University with PCM and English and must have obtained at least 50% marks in the aggregate of PCM or have passed three years diploma from State Technical Board (mere pass for admission to Agriculture Engg.
at HAU Hisar and some other RECs) as per details in part D of the brochure.
(iv) 495% and above in the qualifying examination shall be considered as 50%.
(v) In case of SC/ST candidates no minimum percentage of marks is prescribed and mere pass in qualifying examination with the said subjects is adequate."
9.
A reading of the above would show that a candidate who has passed three years diploma from the State Technical Board, is eligible for admission to the first year of the course of BTech.
There is no condition laid down with regard to the securing of particular percentage of marks.
Rather, according to sub-clause (iv) it was also mentioned that 495% and above in the qualifying examination shall be considered as 50%.
To that extent a change was ordered in the meeting dated 13th June, 2001.
10.
The grouse of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the condition laid down in the order Annexure P-3 is illegal because no decision was taken in the said meeting nor the University has the competency and jurisdiction to change or alter the qualification once essential qualifications have been notified in the Brochure and those qualifications have been acted upon.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that as per the Brochure (important instructions) the eligibility criteria could be changed by the competent authority/State Government before the start of the counselling and since a decision had been taken, therefore, the petitioner has no case.
I do not subscribe to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, rather I am inclined to accept the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Firstly the important instructions, which are given at the back of the front page of the Brochure, in my opinion, are not an integral part of the Brochure.
Assuming for the sake of arguments that it is an integral part of the Brochure, it clearly specifies that the eligibility criteria can be changed by the competent authority or by the State Government before the start of the counselling.
Whether the same has been done in the present case or not, let us examine this case from that angle.
The specific stand of the respondents is that on 13th June, 2001 this decision was taken.
What was that decision, I had already recorded above in this judgment.
That decision was with regard to the rounding off of 495% aggregate marks of Physics, Chemistry and Math.
It has no relevancy so far as the qualifications of the petitioner are concerned who wanted to take admission in an entirely different category i.e. that he had passed the three years diploma from the State Technical Board which is recognized by the respondents.
Moreover, when the qualifications have been acted upon by all other candidates in hundreds and thousands, and by accepting those qualifications for eligibility, have entered into the test, it is not open to the respondent authorities to change the basic qualification detrimental to the interest of the candidates.
We all know that the contents of the Brochure/Prospectus have the force of law and those contents have to be respected.
Even the decision dated 13th June, 2001 does not talk with regard to those candidates who have passed the three years diploma from the State Technical Board.
It has been held by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court is Subhash Chandra v. The Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh and another, 1997(3) R.S.J.
346 that admission Brochure must be read as written and it will not be permissible to add or subtract words from the language of such clause and on the basis of which not only the petitioner but the public at large has acted upon.
The authorities are bound by the terms and conditions of the brochure as they have declared to the public and cannot be permitted to amend or alter them at any subsequent stage and especially in the absence of reservation of such a power.
In the present case, the power was reserved.
It was utilized but in a different context.
It never amended the qualifications and essentialities so far as Category D to the petitioner was concerned.
Therefore, relying upon the above judgment, I hold that the order Annexure P-3 is without jurisdiction, arbitrary and does not affect the candidature of the petitioner.
11.
Learned counsel for the respondents relied upon a Full Bench of this Court in Kuldip Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(3) SCT 454 (P&H)(FB) : 1997(5) S.L.R.
133, Dr. Surinder Kumar v. Kurukshetra University, 2000(1) SCT 567 (P&H)(DB) : 2000(1) S.L.R.
35 and Rajiv Kapoor v. State of Haryana, 2000(2) SCT 514 (SC) : 2000(2) S.L.R.
603.
With due respect, all the judgments are off the track.
It is not a case of rounding off marks.
I do not question the power of the respondent authorities that they cannot change the qualifications, but the changing of qualifications at the fag end and that too without any authority is a bad action specially when the essential qualifications as contained in the Brochure have been acted upon at large by the public who completed those qualifications as enforceable and appeared in the entrance test.
The petitioner never concealed his qualifications.
He was allotted the serial number.
He was allowed to appear in the entrance test.
The ranking was awarded to him and before the counselling took place, an arbitrary decision, without authority, was taken by the University by issuing the order Annexure P-3 vide which the essential qualification was changed.
This action is bad.
12.
Resultantly, I allow the writ petition by quashing the order/advertisement Annexure P-3 and give direction to the respondents to admit the petitioner forthwith to the course of BTech./B.E.
for the year 2001 on receipt of a copy of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Copy of this order be supplied to both the parties Dasti for compliance.
Petition allowed.