Satyabrata Sinha, J - The only question raised for consideration in this application is as to whether the Regulations incorporating a provision of interview which had been issued by a notification published in the Calcutta Police Gazette on 4th July, 1994 can be held to be applicable in case of the candidates who had passed the practical test in terms of the Regulation.
This was enforced in the year 1998.
This aspect of the matter is covered by a Division Bench Judgment of this Court in State of West Bengal v. Abdul Barkat & Ors., reported in 1999(4) SLR 449 : 1999(4) SCT 119 (Calcutta)(DB), where it has been held that the writ petitioner respondent applied for appointment as constable.
Admittedly, at the relevant point of time, there was no provision for interview or any other test.
Such a provision admittedly has been incorporated by a reason of a notification published in the Calcutta Police Gazette on 4th July, 1994 wherein 100 marks had been accorded, 50 being for reading and writing and 50 for general knowledge and current affairs.
As in the order of 1990 such a provision was not existing, the rules existing at the relevant point of time must be followed.
2.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that there is no infirmity in the judgment under appeal.
This aspect of the matter has been considered in NT Bevin Katti v. Karnataka Public Service Commission, AIR 1990 SC 1223, which in turn has been followed by the Appeal Court in BL Gupta v.
M.C.D., 1998(9) SCC.
223 : 1999(1) SCT 126 (SC).
3.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, however, has drawn our attention to a circular letter dated 2798, the relevant portion whereof are set out hereunder :-  "The undersigned is directed to say that the question of revision of Regulation 746 of the PRB has been under consideration for some time.
The provision for recruitment of constables in the West Bengal Police has been laid down in the said Regulation.
The Committee set up for revision of the PRB/P.R.C.
has already made certain recommendations in the matter.
The Director General and Inspr.
General of Police, West Bengal, have also suggested certain amendments to the Regulation 746.
Those recommendations and suggestions are to be examined in depth.
It is, however, felt, that, pending formal amendment of the Regulation, some provision should be made immediately for streamlining the procedure for selection of candidates.
The undersigned is now directed by order of the Governor to say that for selection of candidates for the posts of Constables in the West Bengal Police in terms of Reg.
746 of the PRB, the method/selection should include the following viz...." 4.
A bare perusal of the aforementioned circular will clearly show that merely a proposal was mooted out for amending the Regulation 746 of the Police Regulations of Bengal and thereby the Regulation itself was not amended.
Such Regulation was amended in the year 1994 and thus the State authorities could not have held interview contrary to and/or inconsistent with the provision of the said Regulation which had statutory force.
5.
For the reasons aforementioned we are constrained to hold that the learned Tribunal was wrong in dismissing the application filed by the petitioners herein.
The respondents are, therefore, directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for their appointment in terms of the Regulation as it then existed and in case vacancies are still existing, they may be accommodated in the existing vacancies and such order may be passed as expeditiously as possible.
The writ application is disposed with the aforementioned directions.
Let an urgent xerox certified copy of this order be given to the learned counsels for the parties at an early date, if applied for.
Orders accordingly.