SK Singh, J - Heard the parties.
2.
The present case shows the sorry state of affairs.
3.
The petitioner's husband who was posted as peon in the office of Respondent No. 4 died in harness on 2631982.
4.
The petitioner being the wife applied for her compassionate appointment on any Class-IV post.
Her application was received by the authority in the year 1982 itself and the same was forwarded on 2151982 to the Superintending Engineer and subsequently by letter dated 2011983 was sent to the Chief Engineer but till date no order has been passed on the same.
5.
As more than 17 years have elapsed since the death of her husband, as such, learned counsel for the petitioner seeing the advanced age of the petitioner does not press the application for her compassionate appointment.
6.
The only grievance of the petitioner, which remains, is that in spite of her husband's death in the year 1982 no family pension or other retiral benefits of her husband, which were to be paid to her, had been paid till date.
During the pendency of the present application some amount had been sanctioned and some of them had been paid but the remaining amount had not been paid rather respondent No. 2 sanctioned provisional family pension to be paid to the petitioner for two years.
7.
As there being no provision for payment of provisional family pension, by order dated 28.10.1999, respondent No. 4 was directed to be personally present in Court.
8.
Learned Govt. Pleader No. IX, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4, states that though some laches has occurred on the part of the authorities but due to non-supply of pension papers and three photographs of the petitioner, some laches has to be attributed to the petitioner also.
9.
I am afraid that from the records of the case it transpires that the petitioner has been appearing before the authorities time without number.
In her family pension or other dues, which were deposited by her late husband and earned by him had not been released to her in absence of her photograph, this could have been brought to her notice by the authorities temselves.
Such a stand, to my mind, appears only to create as escapegoat for non-payment of dues of a citizen in a welfare society where a widow of Class-IV employees has been made to run from pillar to post and finally she has come to this Court for her dues, which was to be paid to her as a right and had been earned by her late husband while discharging his duty as an employee of the State Government.
10.
Be that as it may, in the facts of the case, I direct the petitioner to appear before respondent No. 4 within a period of two weeks from today along with a copy of this order and respondent No. 4 shall get all the necessary requirements including photographs and other requirements made by her and release all the amounts payable to her including her family pension from 1982 till date with 12% interest which will be calculated from the date when those amounts were due to the petitioner till the date when the same is paid to her.
The said amount must be sanctioned in favour of the petitioner and sent to the Accountant General within a period of one month from the date when the petitioner appears before respondent No. 4.
11.
It has further been submitted by the learned Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of the Accountant General that within a period of two weeks from the date of receipt of the sanctioned order in the office of the Accountant General, the same shall be disbursed in favour of the petitioner.
12.
Though a stand has been taken on behalf of the petitioner that provident fund of Rs. 98496 has already been released in favour of the petitioner but according to the learned counsel, for all the amounts, which she has received, receipt thereof has been granted to her but she has not received the aforesaid amount (Rs. 98496) and she has not been given any receipt showing payment of the same.
In that view of the matter, respondent No. 4 is directed to verify the said fact also and if the same is due, it will also be released in favour of the petitioner.
13.
From the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the State, it appears that the petitioner remained in the quarter, which was allotted to her late husband till 1985.
Admittedly, so, the petitioner could not have been through (thrown ?)
out on the road being the wife of a Class-IV employee of the State Government who has not been given family pension, provident fund and other dues of her late husband whereas she has waited for payment of the same.
As such, no penal rent can be charged from her for staying in the said quarter for the period till 1985 after the death of her husband.
14.
With aforesaid directions/observations, the present writ application stands disposed of and personal appearance of respondent No. 4 is dispensed with.
Order accordingly.