Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India is to the orders dated 8121989 and 20.9.1999, Annexures P-13/T and P-14/T, respectively, to this petition, vide which respondents have declined to pay the treatment charges to the petitioner in excess of Rs. 6,000/- for the financial years 1998-99 and 1999-2000, respectively.
2.
The facts in the present case are hardly in controversy.
The petitioner, who was serving as Assistant Director, Education Department in the State of Haryana, retired from service on 30.11.1993.
On 1181992, the Government of Haryana took a policy decision and declared that the employees would be entitled to the medical reimbursement only to the extent of Rs. 500/- per month i.e. Rs. 6,000/- per year.
The petitioner, who claims to have undergone bye-pass surgery, was following up medical treatment and was taking medicines as an out-door patient.
These medicines have been prescribed to him by the doctors.
The petitioner was subjected to examination by a Medical Board constituted by the Government of Haryana, which examined him on 15.9.1999 and opined as under :-  Annexure P-10  Certificate of Chronic Disease ME 99/418 Not for M.L.C.
Purpose, Date 15.9.1999 38  Certified that Sh. SP Arora s/o Sh. Dilbagh Rai aged 64 years and working as Ret.
Asstt.
Director in (Deptt.)
Education, Haryana, CHD and resident of H.No.
422, Sector, Panchkula has appeared before the Medical Board, Panchkula and was found to be suffering from HT/CHD (Angina) Diabetes, Arthritis.
This disease has been declared as a Chronic Disease by Haryana Govt. letter No. 2/160/89 I HB III dated 1181992.
Sd/- Sd/- Sd/- Chairman Member 15/9 Member Medical Medical Board Medical Board Board Panchkula Panchkula Panchkula" 3.
The petitioner claims to have incurred an expenditure of Rs. 14,35355 in the year 1998-99 and nearly Rs. 7,000/- in the year 1999-2000.
The petitioner submitted his medical bills in accordance with rules, which were ultimately rejected by the respondents by the aforesaid two orders.
The reason given in these impugned orders was that the petitioner cannot get more than Rs. 6,000/- per year, as that is the limitation imposed by the instructions of the Government.
4.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed reply and it is contended that the policy of the Government is valid and the petitioner cannot claim reimbursement of more than Rs. 6,000/- per year and in any case he was not suffering from a chronic disease so as to entitle him for any benefit accruing therefrom.
It was also stated that the wife of the petitioner was also a JBT teacher in Haryana Government and she had retired on 2821998.
The petitioner and his wife are required to file a joint declaration, which has not been filed so far.
Resultantly, the claim of the petitioner for medical reimbursement is declined.
5.
Division Bench of this Court, in the case of Ravi Kant v. State of Haryana, 1999(1) Administrative Total Judgments 1 : 1998(4) SCT 206(P&H)(DB), held as under :-  "If we go by the strict definition of "indoor and out-door patient, the petitioner will not be an in-door patient.
Fixed Medical allowance to the tune of Rs. 100/- is meant to compensate the employee/his family only for the treatment of casual disease.
Intention behind the provision of providing fixed medical allowance does not seem to be that employee/his family should not be compensated for such disease which can prove fatal if constancy in treatment is not observed.
It would bear repetition that the petitioner is constantly taking medicines.
He has to take medicines daily.
If he does not take medicines daily, his remaining alive will be seriously in danger.
When he is constantly under treatment and treatment is indispensable for him, it has to be viewed as if he is receiving that treatment in the hospital.
Petitioner placed his body and mind with his employer.
It is for the employer to keep him in good health so that he is able to perform the duties expected of him.
It is the duty of the employer to reimburse him for the medical expenses which he has to incur for keeping him in a fit state of body and mind so that he is able to discharge his duties enjoined upon him by the nature of his employment.
Treatment being taken by him now is extension of the treatment which the CWP was getting on account of kidney failure.
Viewed from this angle also, this treatment has to be tagged on to the treatment he received earlier."
6.
Hon'ble Single Judge of this Court, in the case of Renu Sehgal v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) Recent Services Judgments 557 : 1998(4) SCT 565 (P&H), after discussing the law in detail, came to the conclusion that the instructions of the Haryana Government restricting the claim of the petitioner in the case of chronic disease was not in consonance with the basic rule of law and held as under :-  "A cumulative reading of the word "treatment" alongwith the other observations mentioned above, clearly makes out that a government servant shall be entitled to free of charge treatment in a hospital and the exceptions, if any, with regard to Board etc. have been specifically carved out in the rules themselves.
It will also be seen that no distinction whatsoever has been made in the rules with regard to reimbursement of medical expenses between indoor and outdoor patients and this has been drawn under paragraph 3 ibid.
It is, therefore, apparent that the said instructions insofar as they deny full reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on chronic disease to an outdoor patient cannot be justified as they are contrary to the Rules.
The word "chronic" has been defined in Butterworths Medical Dictionary (Second Edition) as a disease long continued.
It is common knowledge that a chronic disease and more particularly a malignant one destroys not only the financial but even the emotional health of the family and takes a very heavy on all who come into contact with the patient.
To my mind, therefore, paragraph 3 of the Government Instructions, Annexure P-9, insofar as they deny the benefit of full reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on account of treatment as an out- door patient cannot be justified on the touchstone of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution as well Ram Lubhaya Bagga's case (supra) therefore cannot come to the aid of the respondents."
7.
For the reasons stated in the above cases, I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the respondents' action in declining the claim of the petitioner in furtherance to its own policy is not sustainable in law.
Furthermore, it is apparent from the medical certificate, referred to above, that the petitioner was suffering from a chronic disease and was incurring expenditure on follow up treatment in relation to the heart disease.
Lastly, it is contended that joint declaration was required to be filed by the petitioner and his wife.
The purpose of such a declaration is to prevent reimbursement claim, being raised by the husband and wife in regard to the same disease.
In other words, husband as well as wife could not raise such a claim, thus claiming a douple payment on the same account.
That appears to be the spirit behind the objection taken in the preliminary objections.
If the petitioner has not already filed such declaration, he is obliged to file the some prior to release the amount in question to him.
8.
For the reasons aforesaid, this petition is allowed.
The impugned orders dated 8.12.1998 and 20.9.1999, Annexures P-13/T and P-14/T, respectively, to the petition, are hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to make the balance payment to the petitioner in accordance with rules.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.