RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Ex-Sepoy Gurmit Singh Butter has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing the orders Annexures P2 and P7 vide which his disability pension was rejected.
Further, the prayer made by the petitioner is that direction be given to the respondents to release him disability pension w.e.f.
141994.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :  The petitioner was born on 331967.
He joined the Indian Army on 341987.
He met with an accident in the year 1989 when he was on annual leave and was going to purchase some items from the military canteen.
He suffered compound fracture of Tibia and Fabula.
He applied for disability pension which was rejected vide letter dated 2871995.
He also filed an appeal which was also rejected on 14.11.1996.
In this manner the present petition.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the averments of the writ petition.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was on annual leave and in these circumstances the accident is not attributable to the military service.
The extent of damage, however, has been admitted by the respondent-authorities.
3.
The sole point which survives for determination is when an army personnel is on annual/causal leave and suffers an accident, whether such accident can be attributable to the army service or not.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents invites my attention to a judgment rendered in C.W.P.
No. 4507 of 1998 : 1991(3) SCT 567 (M.P.) titled Kulwant Singh v. Union of India and others and submitted that if an Army personnel suffers disability on account of an accident while on annual leave, such disability is not attributable to the Army service.
On the contrary, the learned Counsel for the petitioner relies upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Division Bench in Siri Krishan v Union of India, 1997(1) SLR 607, and another judgment Ex- Sepoy Balwant Singh v. Union of India, 1999(3) Service Cases Today 55 and submits that even when an Army personnel is on a long leave or casual leave, such person is entitled to the benefit of disability pension irrespective of the fact that he suffers the disability while on annual leave or casual leave.
Mr. Sehgal even submits that in C.W.P.
No. 9376 of 1994 : 1996(4) SCT 346 (P&H)(DB) Swaran Singh v. Union of India, decided on 18121998, it was observed that if an Army personnel is on furlough and suffers an accident/disability, he is still entitled to the disability pension.
4.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the considered opinion that the submission raised by the counsel for the respondents is devoid of any merit.
In the opinion of this Court, casual leaves, annual leave, furlough or medical leave etc. are the incidents of service and these types of leaves are permissible to the government employees.
In these circumstances, the defence of the respondents appears to be without any basis when it was argued by the learned Counsel for the respondents that the petitioner suffered the injury/disability when he was on annual leave.
While on annual leave the petitioner has never severed his relationship with his employer, who granted the annual leave to the petitioner according to rules.
The leave will remain as a leave and casual leave, long leave, medical leave and furlough are the different branches of leave.
This view of this Court can be looked into from another angle.
Supposing an Army personnel while on long leave/casual leave/furlough commits an offence, is it not governed by Army Rules ?
The answer is in the affirmative.
Supposing after availing annual leave such employee does not return to his unit, can he not be prosecuted departmentally ?
Again the answer is in the affirmative.
If such situations are there, how it can be said that an Army personnel when on long leave suffers disability that disability is not attributable to the Army Service.
5.
Resultantly, I allow this petition and by quashing the orders Annexures P2 and P7 give the directions to the respondents to release the disability pension to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
The petitioner is, however, directed to appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board, if called by the respondent-authorities.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.