VS Aggarwal, J - By this common judgment, three writ petitions namely Civil Writ Petition Nos. 18303 of 1998, 15712 and 3344 of 1999 can conveniently be disposed of together.
It is not in controversy that questions involved in all these petitions are identical.
Therefore, for sake of convenience, facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 18303 of 1998, Veena Kumari and others v. State of Haryana and others.
2.
The petitioners seek a direction to the respondents to grant the promotional increment and not to withdraw the said benefit of higher responsibility that was granted to the petitioners on promotion to the post of Social Study Master.
3.
The facts alleged are that petitioners were appointed as JBT Teachers in the Haryana Education Department.
They acquired higher qualification of BA/Inter/BEd.
during the course of their service.
A notification had been issued on 2371957 and in accordance with that the petitioners who have acquired higher qualification were granted higher grade.
Subsequently, the petitioners were promoted as Social Study Master.
They were granted one increment on account of higher responsibility from the date of promotion as Social Study Master.
Their initial pay in promotional grade was fixed.
4.
The Director, Secondary Education, Haryana on 681998 in another Civil Writ Petition No. 5532 of 1998 admitted that posts of Head Teachers involve higher responsibility.
In any case the petitioners' case is that they have to teach higher classes.
Subsequently, the State Government decided that the grant of increment on account of higher responsibility could not be granted to Social Study Masters and the Drawing and Disbursing Officers are withdrawing the said increments.
5.
The petitioners' claim is that since the increment had been granted because they were discharging higher responsibility while teaching higher classes in schools, therefore, under Rule 44(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1, they were entitled to the said increment and it could not be withdrawn.
6.
Notice of the petition had been issued and needless to state that the respondents contested the same.
It was pointed that function of the petitioners is to teach the students for which they were appointed.
It is immaterial that they teach 6th class or 10th class.
Teaching 6th to 10th class on promotion is no higher responsibility.
They were not promoted on administrative posts.
It was also pointed that they had already been granted higher pay scale on acquiring higher qualification.
They were not entitled to one additional increment or pay fixation under Rule 44(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1.
It is not in controversy that before the promotion the petitioners were teaching students of class 1 to 5 and on promotion they have to teach the students of class 6th to 10th.
7.
On the strength of these facts, learned counsel for the petitioners urged that when petitioners were promoted as Social Study Masters, they are discharging the duties of higher responsibility and, therefore, when they were promoted within the same scale, they were entitled to the increment claimed and in any case, the benefit could not be withdrawn.
8.
Reliance on behalf of the petitioners is being placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Dev Raj Sehgal and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 10770 of 1988, decided on 321995 : 1995(3) SCT 292 (P&H).
The petitioners in the cited case were initially appointed as J.B.T.
teachers.
When they acquired higher qualification, they were given the scale next higher to the scale in which they were working.
They were promoted as Head Teachers and Centre Head Teachers and they claimed the benefit of Rule 44(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I.
It was held that they were holding the post of higher responsibility.
Indeed the facts are totally distinguishable from the controversy before us.
Therein the promotion had been made to Head Teachers and Centre Head Teachers.
Since they were posts of different responsibility, the decision in the case of Dev Raj Sehgal (supra) will not be a precedent to help the petitioners.
Necessarily, one has to dwell to the facts of the present case afresh.
9.
It is not in dispute that petitioners had been working as J.B.T.
teachers.
They acquired higher qualifications and were awarded the scale of Social Study Master.
Later on they were promoted as Social Study Master.
An increment was granted by the impugned order that is proposed to be withdrawn.
10.
Before us there was little controversy for awarding of the scale of Social Study Master on acquiring the higher responsibility.
The dispute was about the increment within the scale of Social Study Master after the petitioners were promoted as such.
The relevant portion of Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1, reads :-  "44.
The initial substantive pay of a Government employee who is appointed substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows :- (a) If he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post, or would hold a lien on such a post, had his lien not been suspended - (i) when appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance (as interpreted for the purpose of rule 413) than these attaching to such permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post; (ii) when appointment to the new post does not involve such assumption, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time-scale which is equal to his substantive pay in respect of the old post, or, if there is no such stage, the stage next below that pay plus personal pay equal to the difference; and in either case will continue to draw that pay until such time as he would have received an increment in the time scale of the old post or for the period after which an increment is earned in the time-scale of the new post; whichever is less.
But if the minimum of the time-scale of the new post is higher than his substantive pay in respect of the old post he will draw that minimum as initial pay; (iii) when appointment to the new post is made on his own request under rule 3.17(a) and maximum pay in the time-scale of that post is less than his substantive pay in respect of the old post, he will draw that maximum as initial pay."
11.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Haryana urged that it is not a post of higher responsibility or duties and, therefore, the petitioners were not entitled to an increment.
It was further urged that since the petitioners were to teach a higher class does not imply that they were holding the post of higher responsibility or duties.
12.
Teaching by itself is of great responsibility.
It is the teachers who bring up the youngsters as goods citizens.
The future of any nation depends as to how the teachers teach.
But teaching of higher classes unless there is something to the contrary would ordinarily be of higher responsibility.
13.
The position herein as is apparent from the plea of the respondents is that earlier the petitioners were teaching to Class 1 to 5.
As Social Study Masters, they were teaching class 6th to 10th.
Therefore, they must be taken to be holding the post of higher responsibility.
This is also apparent from the fact that the scale of J.B.T.
teachers is lower than that of the post of Social Study Master.
That is why the State has provided the higher scale for Social Study Master.
To the same effect was the decision of this Court in the case of Lekh Raj Khera and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1986(3) Services Law Reporter 410 with which we respectfully agree.
We must hold, therefore, that the petitioners in the present cases were promoted to a post of higher responsibility and duty.
Consequently, they were entitled to the increment.
14.
As an offshoot of these reasons, it must be held that the impugned order issued by the respondents cannot be sustained.
The same is quashed.
The petitioners are entitled to the increment.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.