RL Anand, J - Ex.Spr.
Jainail Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus seeking the directions of this Court against the respondents to release disability pension to him w.e.f.
25.7.1977 along with interest.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Indian Army on 191971 and he was declared medically fit by the medical experts describing him in category `A'.
After completing the training successfully he was given oath as a trained soldier and he was again medically examined by the doctors periodically and there was no complaint of any ailment to him.
In the year 1997 (1977 ?)
when his Regiment was posted in the area of Chhamb Jaurian, he was put on general duty and extra duties were taken from him in the winter seasons in this area which are prone to insurgency.
As a result of stress and strain, restlessness and ache developed in his brain and he continued to pass sleepless nights.
He was sent to Field Hospital for medical check up where the doctor suspected some clot in his brain.
The doctors of that hospital could not control the mental imbalance, as a result of which he was sent to the Department of Neuro-Surgery at Military Hospital at Pathankot for further check up.
Even at Pathankot there could not be proper diagnosis, as a result of that the disease of the petitioner started aggravating.
Then he was referred to Command Hospital, Pune, where the medical authorities found that the disease of the petitioner could not be controlled and he could not remain fit for military service.
He was boarded out being invalidated from the service by placing him in category `C' (Permanent) and his disability was described to the extent of 50%.
Finally, he was discharged on 25.7.1977.
He made a request to the respondents from grant of disability benefit, but the same was rejected.
This request was repeated in the year 1996, but to no effect.
He also gave a notice on 1651997.
Hence, the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was not subjected to any extensive medical examination by the specialist.
He was suffering from a constitutional disease which could not be detected during the course of his medical check up as the disease was latent one.
The petitioner served in concessional areas.
There was no mental stress upon him.
He was clinically examined and the medical board consisting of experts opined that the disease Grandmal Epilespy was constitutional one and was not connected with the service factors in any way.
His disability was assessed at 20% for two yeas vide opinion of the medical board dated 1641977.
In short, the defence of the respondents is that since the disease suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the military service nor it has been aggravated during the course of military service, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
Two points survive for determination in this case.
First is, what is the extent of disability suffered by the petitioner.
Though the petitioner alleged that the disability declared vis-a-vis him was 50%, but there is no prima facie proof to that extent.
Rather, the proof is that the petitioner suffered disability to the extent of 20%, as declared by the medical board.
The second point for determination is whether the disease suffered by the petitioner, which is Grandmal Epilepsy, is attributable to the military service or not.
When the petitioner was admitted in the military service, he was medically examined by the medical experts and was placed in category `A'.
He underwent the training from 1971 to 1974.
Periodically medical check up was also done.
No abnormality was found with him.
Moreover, the case set up by the petitioner is that he served at Chhamb Jaurian and this Court can take a judicial notice about the stress and strain of the Jawans who serve such areas in order to defend our motherland.
There is no note in the medical sheet of the petitioner that at the time of his entry into service he was suffering from any disease or constitutional disability, much less epilepsy.
In these circumstances, it can be reasonably inferred that the petitioner suffered the disability when he was serving the Army and as such the disease is attributable to the Army service.
6.
In Om Parkash v. Union of India and others, 1998(4) SLR 296 : 1998(3) SCT 662 (P&H) while dealing with a similar case of epilepsy his Lordship was pleased to hold that when a recruit is found fit at the time of his entry into service and he developed the disease of epilepsy and became unfit for service, such disease should be attributable to the Army service and must have been suffered by the recruit on account of stress and strain of the service conditions.
No proof has been placed on the record by the respondents that the disease suffered by the petitioner was constitutional.
The ancillary point for determination is from which period the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was discharged from the military service on 25.7.1977.
He served the notice for the first time on 2411996.
In this manner, he slept over his right for 19 years.
Therefore, he would not be entitled to the benefit of disability pension from 26.6.1977, but certainly he will be entitled to this benefit from 111993 onwards.
Resultantly, this writ petition is partly allowed and directions are given to the respondent-authorities to release the benefit of disability pension to the petitioner w.e.f.
111993 onwards within a period of three months from the receipt of the copy of the order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum.
The petitioner shall appear before the medical Re-survey Board as and when called upon by the respondent-authorities.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.