JS Narang, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as Senior Scientific Officer (Physics) (hereinafter referred to as SSO (Physics) on 3051980 in Forensic Science Laboratory, Haryana, Madhuban, district Karnal.
The petitioner was subsequently given the additional charge of the post of Assistant Director (Physics) vide letter dated 2131984 (copy Annexure P-1).
The petitioner took charge and submitted the joining report on 2231984.
It is admitted case that from the post of SSO (Physics), the petitioner would be entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Director (Physics) as and when he would fulfill the conditions for promotion under the Haryana Forensic Science (Group-A) Service Rules, 1980.
The petitioner had by then not put in five years of service as SSO (Physics).
The petitioner completed his experience on 3051985, therefore, became eligible for consideration to be appointed to the post of Assistant Director.
In any case as per the order of the Government, he was holding the additional charge of the said post with effect from 2231984.
2.
The Government had communicated its decision to the effect that the Ex.Post-facto post was sanctioned under Rule 422(1) C.S.R.
Vol.
I, Part-I to the petitioner for granting the pay and allowances on the post of Assistant Director (Physics), the post he had held in addition to his own duties for the period i.e. 2231984 to 18111987.
It is by virtue of the order passed by the Government on 1671992 that the petitioner became entitled to draw the pay and allowances of the post of Assistant Director (Physics) for the period for which he had held additional charge, i.e. 2231984 to 18111987.
3.
The Government again passed another order on 1211996 vide which the pay and allowances granted to the petitioner for having worked on the post of Assistant Director (Physics) while holding additional charge was sought to be withdrawn and as a sequel thereto, the excess payment made to the petitioner was to be deducted from his salary, vide impugned order passed by the Government dated 1211996 (copy Annexure P-6).
4.
Aggrieved of this order, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
The admitting Bench specifically observed that no recovery be effected from the petitioner but his pay as has been fixed by virtue of Annexure P-6 shall be paid to the petitioner.
5.
The stand of the Government is that at the time when the petitioner was asked to hold the additional charge, the petitioner was not eligible for promotion on that date as he had not fulfilled the qualification provided under the rules.
Admittedly, the petitioner became eligible with effect from 3051985, i.e., the date on which he completed his five years experience in the rank of SSO (Physics).
However, actually the petitioner had been promoted to the rank of Assistant Director (Physics) on 18111987 (copy Annexure P-3).
It is admitted case that the post against which the petitioner had been promoted had fallen vacant way back on 2131984 but on that date, the petitioner was not eligible but had been given the additional charge of the said post.
Since his appointment had been made on 18111987 thus for the interregnum period for which he had been given the additional charge, the petitioner would not be entitled to the salary and allowances of the post of Assistant Director (Physics).
6.
I am afraid, the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent is devoid of any merit.
The additional charge had been given to the petitioner by virtue of the order passed by the Government and subsequently, he had been allowed the pay and allowances payable in the pay scale of Assistant Director (Physics).
It is too late in the day that after a period of six years, the impugned order is passed and the rectification was ordered that the petitioner was not entitled to the salary in the pay scale of the Assistant Director (Physics) from 2131984 till the date of his regular promotion to the rank of Assistant Director (Physics).
The perusal of the rule, i.e., Rule 422(1) of C.S.R.
Volume I Part I, which reads as under :-  "422.
A competent authority may appoint a Government employee already holding a post in a substantive or officiating capacity to officiate as a temporary measure, in one or more of other independent posts at one time.
In such cases, his pay is regulated as follows :- (i) Where a Government employee is formally appointed to hold full charge of the duties of a higher post in the same office as his own and in the same cadre/line of promotion, in addition to his ordinary duties, he shall be allowed the pay admissible to him, if he is appointed to officiate in the higher post unless the competent authority reduces his officiating pay under Rule 416; but no additional pay, shall, however, be allowed for performing the duties of a lower post; (ii) Where a Government employee is formally appointed to hold dual charge of two posts in the same cadre in the same office carrying identical scales of pay, no additional pay shall be admissible regardless of the period of dual charge; provided that if the Government employee is appointed to an additional post, which carries a special pay, he shall be allowed such special pay; (iii) Where a Government employee is formally appointed to hold charge of another post or posts which is not or are not in the same office or which, though in the same office, is not or are not in the same cadre/line of promotion, he shall be allowed the pay of the higher post or of the highest post if he holds charge of more than two posts, in addition to ten per cent of the presumptive pay of the additional post or posts: provided the additional charge is held for a period exceeding 39 days but not exceeding 3 months : Provided, further, that if in any particular case, it is considered necessary that the Government employee should hold charge of another post or posts for a period exceeding 3 months, the concurrence of the competent authority shall be obtained for the payment of additional pay beyond the period of 3 months; (iv) no additional pay shall be admissible to a Government employee who is appointed to hold current charge of the routine duties of another post or posts regardless of the duration of the additional charge; (v) If compensatory or sumptuary allowance are attached to one or more of the posts, the Government employee shall draw such compensatory or sumptuary allowance as the competent authority may fix : Provided that such allowances shall not exceed the total of the compensatory and sumptuary allowances attached to all the posts."
It is absolutely clear that when the Government appoints its employee formally to hold the charge and perform the duties of the higher post in the same office as his own and in the same cadre/line of promotion, in addition to his ordinary duties, he shall be allowed the pay admissible to him, if he is appointed to officiate in the higher post, unless the competent authority reduce his officiating pay under Rule 416.
The Government had passed a conscious order while allowing the pay to the petitioner in the rank of Assistant Director (Physics).
However, to my mind, the petitioner was admittedly not eligible on 2131984 when he had been asked to hold the additional charge of Assistant Director (Physics) but in any case, he became eligible on 3051985 though he had been actually promoted on 18111987.
There is no mistake on the part of the petitioner or any misstatement can be attributed to the petitioner in this regard.
It has been held that when a person works against the higher post though temporarily and in an officiating capacity pursuant to an order passed and his salary has to be drawn during that period against the said post, such person shall be entitled to the said salary.
In the case at hand, the Government had passed a specific order vide which the petitioner had been paid salary and allowances of the post of Assistant Director (Physics) and he had worked and functioned as such.
It shall be apposite to make a reference to the judgment of the apex Court in Selva Raj v. Lt.
Governor of Island, Port Blair and others, 1998(4) RSJ 22 : 1999(2) SCT 286 (SC).
The relevant paras of the judgment read as under :-  "2.
A hurded notice was issued in the SLPs which has resulted into these appeals was to the effect whether the petitioner is entitled to draw the salary attached to the post of Secretary (Scouts) during the time he actually worked on that post pursuant to the order at Annexure `E' dated 28.1.1992 at page 32 of the Paper-Book.
And if so, what was the scale of pay for the said post according to him."
When we turned to the order dated 28.1.1992 under which the appellant was called upon to look after the duties of the Secretary (Scouts) we find the following recitals as per Order No. 276, dated 28.1.1992 : "The Director of Education, A & N Islands is pleaded to order the transfer of Shri Selvaraj, Primary School Teacher to Middle School, Kanyapuram to Directorate of Education (Scouts Section) to look after the duties of the post of Secretary (Scouts) under GFR 77."
3.
It is not in dispute that the appellant from the date of the order and his salary was to be drawn against the post of Secretary (Scouts) under GFR 77.
Still he was not paid the said salary for the work done by him as Secretary (Scouts).
It is of course true that the appellant was not regularly promoted to the said post.
It is also true as stated in the counter affidavit of Deputy Resident Commissioner, Andaman and Nicobar Administration that the appellant was regularly posted in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 and he was asked to look after the duties of Secretary (Scouts) as per the order aforesaid.
It is also true that had this arrangement not been done, he would have to be transferred to the interior Islands where the post of PST was available, but the appellant was keen to stay in Port Blair as averred in the said counter.
However, in our view, these averments in the counter will not change the real position.
Fact remains that the appellant has worked on the higher post though temporarily and in an officiating capacity pursuant to the aforesaid order and his salary was to be drawn during that time against the post of Secretary (Scouts).
It is also not in dispute that the salary attached to the post of Secretary (Scouts) was in the pay scale of 1640-2900.
Consequently, on the principle of quantum meruit the respondents authorities should have paid the appellant as per the emoluments available in the aforesaid higher pay scale during the time he actually worked on the said post of Secretary (Scouts) though in an officiating capacity and not as a regular promotee.
This limited relief is required to be given to the appellant only on this ground.
4.
The decision of the Central Administrative Tribunal rejecting the claim of the appellant to the aforesaid limited extent is, therefore, required to be set aside.
The appeals are allowed to the limited extent that the respondents will be called upon to make available to the appellant the difference of salary in the time scale of 1640-2900 during the period from 2911992 to 19.9.1995 during which time the appellant actually worked.
It is made clear that the payment of the aforesaid difference amount of salary shall not be treated to amount to pay promotion given to the appellant on the said post.
It is only on the ground that he had actually worked, as such this relief is being given to him.
The difference of salary as aforesaid shall be paid to the appellant within eight weeks from today.
No costs."
7.
I find that ends of justice would be met with by allowing the petitioner to retain the pay which had been given to him while holding the additional charge of Assistant Director (Physics) not from 2131984 but from 3051985.
8.
In view of the above, I allow the petition and quash the impugned order dated 1211996 (copy Annexure P-6) and I hold that the petitioner shall be entitled to re-fixation of his pay in the rank of Assistant Director (Physics) with effect from 3051985 and upon re-fixation, if any amount is found due and payable by the petitioner to the Government, the same shall not be recovered as it is too late in the day for staking the claim in respect thereof.
9.
The above directions be carried out by the concerned authorities within two months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy of this order from the petitioners, whichever is earlier.
Petition allowed.