RL Anand, J - Amrit Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing of the orders, Annexures P-3 and P-5.
It has been further prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents directing them to release the disability pension to the petitioner, which was assessed at 40%.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Air Force Service on 11.5.1982.
He was discharged from service on 1721995 on account of the disease Neurosis.
Though the petitioner alleges that his disability was assessed at 40%, it is proved on the record that the disability assessed by the Medical Board was only 20%.
3.
The stand of the respondents is that the disease suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the Air Force Service.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
There is nothing on the record that when the petitioner joined the Indian Air Force, he was suffering from any disability.
In these circumstances, it cannot be held that the disease suffered by the petitioner is a constitutional one.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of this court dated 1072000 passed in CWP No. 6668 of 1998.
As against this, counsel for the respondents relies upon a judgment reported as Gurdip Singh v. Union of India, 1997(5) SLR 341 : 1997(3) SCT 414 (P&H)(DB).
7.
After hearing the rival contentions of the parties, I am of considered opinion that the disease suffered by the petitioner is not a constitutional one as there is nothing on the record that when the petitioner joined the Indian Air Force, he was suffering from such disease.
Rather, in the view of this court, such type of diseases invariably are suffered by the armed forces personnel keeping in view the fact that very stringent discipline is supposed to be maintained in the Air Force Service like Army service.
In this view of the matter, I hold that the disease suffered by the petitioner is not a constitutional one rather it was suffered by the petitioner when he was serving the Air Force.
In this regard, reliance can be placed upon Kanta Devi v. Union of India and others, 1999(1) SLR 669 : 1999(1) SCT 559 (P&H).
Resultantly, I allow this writ petition and directions are given to the respondents to release the disability pension of the petitioner w.e.f.
18.1.1995 at the rate of 20% within three months from the receipt of a copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12%.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called.
In case, the petitioner does not appear before the Re-survey Medical Board after due service, it will be open to the respondent-authorities to withhold the disability pension.
No costs.
Petition allowed.