Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has filed this writ petition for issuance of directions in the nature of Certiorari for quashing award dated March 30, 1999 (Annexure P5) given by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Ambala.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he remained under the employment of Improvement Trust, Yamuna Nagar i.e. respondent No. 2 with effect from 21111988 to 661989.
Thereafter, he was again appointed on 27.8.1990 as a Typist and continued serving till 661991 when his services were illegally terminated by the Chairman of the Improvement Trust, Yamuna Nagar without serving any written notice to him and without paying any retrenchment compensation as provided under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The petitioner also filed statement of claim before the Labour Court, Ambala mentioning therein that he had completed 240 days of continuous service in the last 12 calendar months.
3.
Notice of motion was issued and reply was filed by respondent No. 2, Municipal Committee, Improvement Trust, Yamuna Nagar.
4.
We have heard arguments on behalf of counsel for the parties and have gone through the petition, annexures attached therewith and the written statement.
5.
The petitioner was engaged on daily wages by the then Chairman, Improvement Trust, Yamuna Nagar who was not a competent authority and also his appointment was without the approval of the Government.
As per instructions dated 571991 which have been attached as Annexure R1, the services of all the Trust employees who were not recruited against the sanctioned posts by the Government were dispensed with as the Improvement Trust was dissolved.
Para No. 3 which is material for adjudication of present controversy is reproduced here under :-  "3.
It has been decided that services of all Trust employees who have not been recruited against the posts sanctioned by the Government should be dispensed with.
Further, employees who have not completed 240 days should also be terminated.
The Municipal Committee may be asked to absorb as many regular employees of the Trust in their cadre as may be possible.
No promotion or fresh appointment of the Trust employees should be made without prior approval of the State Government."
6.
The services of all Trust employees who were not recruited against the posts sanctioned by the Government and also those employees who had not completed 240 days were to be dispensed with.
The Municipal Committee was only asked to absorb as many regular employees of the Trust in their cadre as may be possible.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis and on non-sanctioned post.
Therefore, he could not be retained with the Municipal Committee.
With the above observations, this writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.