Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On November 27, 1993, the Punjab Public Service Commission advertised six posts of Lecturers in Philosophy.
One of these six posts was in a Training College.
The candidates were inter alia required to have a Master's Degree in the relevant subject with atleast 55% marks.
In case of the post in the Training College, "the qualification of M.Ed.
alongwith above qualification" was also essential.
The petitioner was a candidate for all the six posts.
The Punjab Public Service Commission conducted the selection.
The results was declared on October 4, 1994.
The petitioner was not one of the successful candidates.
2.
Feeling aggrieved, she filed this petition.
She impleaded all the six selected candidates as respondent Nos. 3 to 8.
It was inter alia alleged that none of the "six private respondents possess the qualification of M.Ed.
Accordingly, none of them is eligible for being appointed to the post of Lecturer in Philosophy in the State Government Training College in terms of the advertisement Annexure P1".
She also stated that she possessed the qualifications of MA, M.Ed., MPhil.
She was eligible.
3.
In response to the notice issued by the Court, a written statement was filed on behalf of the Punjab Public Service Commisison by the Secretary.
It was admitted that the petitioner was the only candidate who had M.Ed.
qualification and that none of the other applicants possessed this qualification.
It was further stated that "the Commisison had recommended six candidates against the six vacancies of Lecturers in Philosophy as per their merit".
So far as the post in the Training Colleges was concerned, it was averred that "Veena Kumari (application No. 35) had been recommended against the post of Lecturer in Philosophy in Training College..." So far as the petitioner is concerned, it was averred that "she was interviewed but her merit does not fall within the zone of selection.
Being lower in merit, her name was not recommended for the post of Lecturer (in) Philosophy in the Training College."
4.
The petition was listed for hearing in the year 1995, it appears that in view of the averment made on behalf of the Commission that Veena Kumari had been recommended for appointment to the post of Lecturer in Training College, the petitioner gave up respondent Nos. 4 to 8 as had been initially impleaded.
Subsequently, it was stated on behalf of the State Government and the Commisison that Mr. Manjit Singh had been appointed as Lecturer in Philosophy in the Government College of Education at Jalandhar and S Rajwinder Singh had been appointed as Lecturer in Philosophy, at Government Training College, Faridkot.
Accordingly, both these persons were impleaded as respondent Nos. 4 and 5 with the permission of the Court.
Separate replies on their behalf have also been filed.
5.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, counsel for the petitioner has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that a person who does not possess the qualification of M.Ed.
is not eligible for appointment to the post of Lecturer in any of the Training Colleges.
Secondly, the learned counsel has submitted that the Commission could not have determined the petitioner's position in the merit list by including ineligible candidates.
The respondents had to determine the petitioner's position in the merit list only by considering the eligible candidates.
On behalf of the respondents, it has not been disputed that a person who does not possess the qualification of M.Ed.
is ineligible for appointment to the post of Lecturer in Philosophy in the Training Colleges.
However, it has been asserted that the State Government should have made the appointment only in strict order of merit and the mere fact that a person higher in order of merit has been posted in Training College shall not render the appointment as illegal.
6.
Counsel for the parties are agreed that the State Government should be directed to consider the claims in strict order of merit.
First five candidates should be appointed to the posts in the Government Colleges (other than Training Colleges) and thereafter, the claim for appointment to the post of Lecturer in the Training College should be considered on the basis of eligibility and position in the merit list.
Even Mr. Berry who appears for the State and the Punjab Service Commission does not dispute this position.
7.
Admittedly, for the post of Lecturer in a Training College, the candidate had to possess the additional qualification of M.Ed.
besides the other qualifications laid down in the advertisement.
It is the admitted position that none of the selected candidates whose names have been recommended by the Commission possesses the qualification of M.Ed.
In this situation, the persons who are at Sr. Nos. 1 to 5 in the merit list prepared by the Commission shall be eligible for appointment against the five posts in the Government Colleges but not for the posts in the Training Colleges.
So far as the posts in the Training College are concerned, only persons possessing the qualification of M.Ed.
were entitled to be considered.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was the only candidate fulfilling that qualification.
In this situation, the averment made in the written statement filed by the Commisison that she was lower in merit, is obviously mistaken.
This merit list appears to have been prepared by taking into consideration the names of persons who were not qualified.
This was not according to law.
8.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
It is held that the candidates selected by the Commission shall be considered for appointment against the five posts of Lecturers in Philosophy in the Government Colleges (other than the Training Colleges) in the order of their merit.
Thereafter, the posts of Lecturers in the Training Colleges shall be filled up only from amongst the eligible candidates and if any person who does not fulfil the qualification and is below No. 5 in order of merit has been appointed to the post in the Training College, his/her appointment shall be illegal and, thus, liable to be set aside.
If any of the first five has been posted in the Training College, he/she shall be entitled to be adjusted against the post of a Lecturer in a Government College.
It further appears that even though, initially, respondent No. 3 was alleged to have been recommended for appointment in a Training College, she was ultimately appointed in a Government College.
Her position in the merit list if it be within the first five, shall not be interfered with.
The petitioner's claim shall be considered for the post of Lecturer in the Training College by excluding the ineligible candidates.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.