RL Anand, J - Gurpreet Singh Sadana son of Surinder Singh Sadana has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents No. 1 and 2 to immediately consider his admission to D.P.Ed.
Course of one year as he is more meritorious than respondents No. 3 to 5.
He further made a prayer for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for setting aside the admission of respondents No. 3 to 5 for the said Course.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he is a graduate and son of a teacher.
He applied for the Diploma in Physical Education at Patiala, which is a one year Course.
According to him, he represented India in Asian Roller Skating Championship held in China and Roller Skating is a game which has been recognised by the School Games Federation of India.
It is a non-graded sport and does not fall within the purview of the Director Sports and it is not essential on the part of the petitioner to obtain a certificate regarding the authenticity of the certificate obtained by him from the School Games Federation.
The petitioner alleges that admittedly respondents No. 3 to 5 are less meritorious than that of him and they did not participate nor represented India in any event and, therefore, the admission of respondents No. 3 to 5 to the said Course should be struck down.
3.
The stand of the State, on the contrary, is that though the petitioner has obtained a certificate from School Games Federation of India certifying that Roller Skating is a recognised sport and is included in the calendar of school games by the School Games Federation of India, yet the Director of Sports has not given any authenticity to such certificate and, therefore, the petitioner could not be considered in the reservation category to the said Course.
4.
A re-joinder was also filed on behalf of the petitioner in which he reiterated the allegations made in the petition by denying those of the written statement of respondent No. 2.
5.
I have heard Mr. Kanwaljit Singh, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Ms. Gurveen H Singh, AAG, Punjab on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
In this case no contest has been given on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 3 to 5, who were proceeded ex parte.
6.
From the pleadings of the parties, the point for consideration would arise whether the petitioner is more meritorious as compared to respondents No. 3 to 5 and whether the admission of respondents No. 3 to 5 should be set aside or not.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon page No. 20 of the Prospectus, which is in Punjabi.
The learned counsel has translated the relevant clauses relied upon by him.
According to him, the petitioner is entitled to the admission because as per the terms of the prospectus the petitioner represented India in Asian Roller Skating Championship held in China and this game has been certified by the School Games Federation of India.
He relies upon Annexure P9, the certificate which has been issued by the School Games Federation of India which is recognised by the Ministry of Sports, Government of India, and in this certificate it has been certified that Roller Skating is a recognised sport and is included in the calendar of school games by the School Games Federation of India.
The counsel submitted that as per the clause of the prospectus since Roller Skating is a recognised event by School Games Federation of India and the prospectus clearly spells out that at the time of the admission only those events will be recognised which are approved by the University Sports Board or School Games Federation of India.
In short, Mr. Kanwaljit Singh wanted to convey to this Court that Roller Skating is a non-graded event and in these circumstances the Director of Sports, Punjab does not come into picture.
7.
There is a fallacy in the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Clause No. 6 of the prospectus is a guiding clause which cannot be read in isolation with the clause relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
According to clause No. 6 appearing at page 6 of the prospectus it has been stated that in order to give advantage of the certificates pertaining to sports, only those certificates will be recognised which have been issued by the Sports Department.
With regard to non-graded certificates it has been written in this prospectus that such non-graded certificates shall be produced before a committee whose decision shall be final.
In the present case the certificate of the petitioner, Annexure P9, has not been approved by the admission committee, and, therefore, the petitioner was not eligible for admission in the said Course.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is even entitled to the benefit of the admission on the premises that a person holding non-graded certificate like the petitioner can still take the benefit, if he fulfils conditions No. (i) to (iv) as mentioned in clause No. 6(2).
This argument is not acceptable to this Court for the reason that in the certificate produced by the petitioner there is no mention about the name of the coach or manager.
Further, as per sub-clause (iv) a candidate is supposed to comply with all those criterion which are applicable to the graded sports.
On this account also the petitioner is not fulfilling the requisite qualification.
Therefore, I do not see any merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.