RL Anand, J - Romi Rominder Singh petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of directions in the nature of mandamus against the respondents - State of Punjab and Director, Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh - to allot him a seat in Civil Engineering or any other trade according to his merit at Patiala or Ludhiana.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that on 1651999, a Joint Entrance Test for admission to various diploma courses of three years duration was held by Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh.
The result was declared on 961999 and the petitioner qualified the test with merit at Serial No. 1894 by obtaining 540 marks.
The counselling and allotment of seats in UT, Chandigarh was held on 17.7.1999 from out of the candidates selected by the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh and the petitioner was offered seat in Civil Engineering at Chandigarh.
The counselling and allotment of seats in Punjab was held on 781999 and the candidates below in merit to the petitioner were offered better seats but he was refused to consider in Punjab on the ground that he has already accepted seat in UT Chandigarh.
According to the petitioner, his juniors were offered seats in Punjab, therefore, his merit has been ignored by respondent No. 2 and in these circumstances he is entitled to the directions as prayed for.
3.
The case set up by the respondents is that the counselling for Chandigarh as well as Punjab was held on separate dates and as per Clause 12 of the advertisement, once a seat has been accepted by a candidate in a particular institution, the same shall not be changed and the fee deposited shall not be refunded.
4.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner made a moral argument by submitting that since a seat is lying vacant in Punjab, therefore, suitable directions be given to respondent No. 2 for the migration of the petitioner to some college in Punjab because the course of first year is common both in Punjab and Chandigarh.
The submission made by the learned counsel may look alluring but on deeper scrutiny it is not acceptable to this Court as there is no vested interest in the petitioner to make a choice at his will from one institute to the other irrespective of the fact that there might be one vacant seat in the institution in Punjab.
Clause No. 12, which is applicable to the petitioner, clearly spells out that a seat once accepted by the candidate shall not be changed and the fee deposited by him shall not be refunded.
These types of clauses have been held to be valid by a Full Bench of this Court in a case Anil Jain v . The Controller of Examinations, MDU, Rohtak, 1997(6) S.L.R.
98.
There is also a logic in the submission raised by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 that if a candidate is allowed to change his seat at his own whims, there will never be a certainty with regard to vacant seats of a particular institution.
The petitioner has accepted the candidature in Chandigarh with open eyes and he has deposited the fees.
He has continued his studies for one year or more and in these circumstances it will be too late for him to say that his candidature should be shifted to Punjab.
In these circumstances, I do not see any merit in this petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.