RL Anand, J - Mrs Mohinderjeet Kaur, Retired District Family Welfare Education Officer, Rohtak, has filed the present Civil Writ Petition seeking direction of this Court against the respondent-authorities to release a sum of Rs. 3241550 by way of medical reimbursement, which according to her, she spent on the treatment of her husband Shri Sampuran Singh, who retired from Border Roads Organization.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she retired as District Family Welfare Education Officer, Rohtak.
Her husband Shri Sampuran Singh got a serious heart attack on 31121998 at about 600 A.M. and he was immediately taken to a private medical practitioner in Phase No. 11, Mohali.
The said doctor advised her to take the patient to Bhargava Nursing Home and Cardiac Centre in Sector 8-B, Chandigarh.
The petitioner herself was patient of arthiritis and diabetes.
She was also a heart patient and, therefore, she could not take her husband to the PGI, Chandigarh.
Rather she took her husband to Bhargava Nursing Home and Cardiac Centre in Sector 8-B, Chandigarh.
3.
The petitioner had to incur a sum of Rs. 3241350 on immediate treatment of her husband by way of Angiography and TMT etc.
The petitioner submitted the medical reimbursement bills before the respondent authorities and the reimbursement thereof has been denied illegally.
4.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
According to the respondents, Shri Sampuran Singh retired from Border Roads Organization.
The treatment was taken by her husband in a private Nursing Home.
The case of the petitioner was examined and rejected vide letter dated 12.4.1999 on the ground that hospital was not recognised by the Haryana Government.
Moreover, the petitioner was directed vide letter dated 4.8.1999 to submit the information to the following effect :-  i) Your husband is retired from Central Govt. and getting pension and under which Govt. instructions he is dependent on you ?
ii) Does the Central Govt. provide the medical facilities to its pensioners or not ?
If yes, what facility is provided ?
A copy of the instructions may be supplied to this office.
Does the Central Govt. reimburse the expenditure of the treatment taken by her husband, if yes, a copy thereof may sent.
iii) When the petitioner submits her reimbursement bill through Civil Surgeon, Rohtak then why did she submit this bill direct to this office" ?
5.
I have heard Shri WR Dua, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Anmol Rattan Singh, learned DAG, appearing on behalf of the State of Haryana and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
It is the admitted fact that the husband of the petitionr did not get treatment from the Government recognized hospitals like, PGI at Chandigarh, Batra Hospital and Escort Hospital at Delhi.
My attention has also been invited to letter dated 6.7.1985, Annexure P-6, according to which the medical reimbursement was made available to the spouse and minor children of retired officers/officials and in this regard it is necessary for the officer to submit the dependent certificate.
The husband of the petitioner retired from Border Roads Organisation.
He is getting the pension from the Government and in these circumstances, it cannot be said that he was dependent upon the petitioner.
It is a matter of common knowledge that the reputed institution like PGI is also situated at Chandigarh.
In these circumstances it was necessary for the petitioner to take her husband to the PGI, Chandigarh instead of Bhargava Nursing Home in Sector 8-B, Chandigarh.
7.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the husband of the petitioner is not dependent upon the petitioner and in these circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to the medical reimbursement.
8.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the husband of the petitioner is not entitled to any medical reimbursement from his own department and moreover his pension is so meagre that he could not get the treatment running into about 32,000/- and odd from his personal resources.
9.
The argument raised by the learned counsel is not acceptable to this Court.
We are to interpret the policy of the Government which clearly spells out that before a officer/official can get the medical reimbursement of his family members, such family member should be dependent upon him.
The husband of the petitioner was never dependent upon the petitioner and, therefore, she has not been able to make out a case of medical reimbursement.
10.
There is no merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.