NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Petitioner is a Junior Engineer in the Department of Public Health in the State of Public.
In the tentative seniority list of Junior Engineers in the P.W.D.
(Public Health) Branch his name figures at serial number 113-A.
By order dated 23121996 the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Public Health promoted him to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 on purely temporary basis in public interest for a period of six months or till a candidate recommended by the Punjab Service Commission for direct recruitment was available whichever was earlier.
He was described as having been posted in the Mechanical wing of the Department.
Subsequent to his promotion, some other Junior Engineers who are junior to him in the tentative seniority list were also promoted on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the regularly selected candidates from the Punjab Public Service Commission were available.
While the petitioner was working as a Sub Divisional Engineer, the Chief Engineer of his Department recommended to the State Government his reversion to the post of Junior Engineer and this has led to the filing of the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
2.
Notice of this petition was issued to the respondents and reversion of the petitioner was stayed.
His grievance is that persons junior to him have been allowed to continue whereas he is being reverted.
In the reply filed by the Joint Secretary to the Government of Punjab, it is averred that there were three posts of Sub-Divisional Engineers available in the mechanical wing of the Department against which the petitioner and two others, namely, Nirmal Singh AMIE qualified and Shinghara Singh were promoted on temporary basis.
It is also pleaded that two posts had been abolished thereby resulting in the reversion of two persons.
According to the respondents, Nirmal Singh is AMIE qualified and, therefore, the petitioner and Shinghara Singh are being reverted.
It is admitted that persons junior to the petitioner are continuing to work as Sub-Divisional Engineers but their continuation is sought to be justified on the ground that they are posted in the Civil Wing of the Department where the posts are available.
It is also averred that the petitioner is a Mechanical Engineer whereas the other Junior Engineers as referred to by the petitioner who are junior to him, possess the qualification of Civil Engineering and that they were promoted as Civil Engineers.
3.
We have heard counsel for the parties and it is their admitted case that there is a common seniority list of Juniors Engineers in the PWD (Public Health) Branch and that the petitioner is senior to those Junior Engineers who have been referred to in para 7 of the writ petition.
In a recent Division Bench judgment of this Court in Surinder Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, Writ Petition 15240 of 1994 decided on February 14, 2000.
It has been held that there is no separate definition of Assistant Engineer Civil, Electrical or Mechanical in Class-II Rules and that the Junior Engineers Civil and Mechanical have one cadre.
Since the cadre of the Juniors Engineers Civil and Mechanical is one and they have a common seniority list, there is no reason why the petitioner should be reverted when persons junior to him are still continuing as Sub-Divisional Engineers.
This is clear violation of the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution.
It appears that the department has segregated the civil and mechanical wings and is promoting officers accordingly which is not warranted by the Rules as held by this Court in Surinder Singh's case (supra).
We, therefore, allow the writ petition and quash the recommendation made by the Chief Engineer recommending reversion of the petitioner.
No costs.
Petition allowed.