RL Anand, J - Controversy in this case is very short though well advanced by the counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner has filed the present writ seeking the directions against the respondents for the quashment of the letter vide which he was deprived the transfer benefits.
3.
The facts of this case are not disputed.
The petitioner remained posted in the States of Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir.
Ultimately, he made a request for transfer to Delhi on compassionate grounds on account of sickness of his father on 13.8.1993.
He was attached to 121 Aux Bn.
(later designated as 130 Bn) at Delhi.
On 12101994, the petitioner was promoted as Second in Command and was posted in the 8th Battalion, CRPF, Nagaland.
On 8121994, the petitioner made a request for his posting at Delhi or in the alternative at Chandigarh.
This request of the petitioner was agreed to on 2.1.1995 and he was posted at Chandigarh.
The petitioner has prayed that he is entitled to transfer allowance which has been deprived to him on the ground that the transfer of the petitioner to Chandigarh was at his own request and, therefore, as per SR 114, he is not entitled to the transfer allowance.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
There is no dispute so far as the regulation is concerned.
If the transfer of the petitioner was at his own request, certainly he was not entitled to the transfer allowance.
The case set up by the petitioner is that his request for transfer was for Delhi only.
Had the petitioner been transferred to Delhi, certainly he was not entitled to the transfer allowance but in the present case, the petitioner was transferred to Chandigarh and it was not a transfer on his request and, therefore, he is entitled to the transfer allowance.
In support of his contention, counsel for the petitioners refers to Annexure P-4 dated 891994, whereby the petitioner made a request to the Director General, CPRF, for his transfer to a Delhi based Unit on compassionate grounds as he could hardly pay any attention towards his father's serious illness.
6.
In order to appreciate the controversy between the parties, it will be appropriate for me to incorporate paras 2 and 3 of the letter, Annexure P-4, which read as under :-  "2.
The Aux Bn was converted into regular Bn w.e.f.
1494 and after its initial raising shifted to Papan Kalan, New Delhi in June 94.
Being the only Dy.
Comdt.
posted in the Bn, and its coys being continuously as regular Bn and under training with limited resources, I could hardly pay any attention towards my father's serious illness (the ground on which the undersigned was posted to Delhi).
3.
I am in the zone for promotion to the rank of Second-in-Command and promotion (order) is likely to be issued in the very near future.
Since there is no vacancy in 130 Bn, I will again be shifted from this Bn.
My request to the authorities is that in view of my compelling domestic problems, I may kindly be posted to a Bn in Delhi atleast for one year."
Counsel for the petitioner also drew my attention to the order dated 2512000, which reads as under :- "On perusal of pleadings of parties and Annexure P-4, prima facie, two questions arise for consideration.
Firstly, whether the petitioner was posted to 130 Bn in Delhi on compassionate grounds for attending to his father's serious illness; and secondly, whether at the relevant time, there was available vacancy for the petitioner's promotion to the rank of second in command in any other Bn in Delhi.
If the answer to these two questions is in the affirmative, then, of course, posting of the petitioner at Chandigarh would be no solace for denying the benefit of allowances etc. in terms of SR- 114, which is quoted at page 7 of the writ petition.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents states that he is not in a position to answer these questions for want of record.
Records shall be produced at the time of hearing in Court."
On the contrary, the counsel for the respondents has invited my attention that the letter, Annexure P-4, has to be read along with the letter, Annexure R-1, 8121994, wherein the petitioner has prayed that his posting at the first instance, at Delhi and if he could not be adjusted in Delhi, then, near Delhi so that he may be able to look after the interest of his father.
Counsel for the respondents submitted that keeping in view the request of the petitioner, he was posted at Chandigarh and, therefore, he is not entitled to any relief as prayed for.
7.
It will be useful for me to reproduce in verbatim the letter, Annexure R-1, which reads as under :-  "Respectfully it is submitted that I had applied for posting to Delhi on compassionate grounds (my father being seriously ill) vide my application dated 8993.
So far, no decision has been communicated on my request.
If it is not feasible to retain me in Delhi for one year, I may kindly be given posting nearer to Delhi so that I am able to arrange necessary medical treatment for my father, as it is not possible for me to take my father to Nagaland where I have been posted.
It is also submitted that there is vacancy of Second-in-Command in 135 Bn, CRPF at Chandigarh and if I am posted to that Bn, I shall be able to arrange treatment of my father from PGIMER, Chandigarh."
Refuting the argument of Mr. Malhotra, Mr. Randhawa submitted that there were five vacancies at Delhi and five officers were adjusted.
The petitioner could also be adjusted there.
It was his first option.
The petitioner was not adjusted at Delhi in spite of the fact that vacancies were available there.
He was transferred to Chandigarh but it cannot be said that this transfer was at the request of the petitioner.
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, this court is of the opinion that the petitioner has no case.
Both Annexures P-4 and R-1 have to be read together.
I have already quoted the operative portions of the letters referred to above.
A reading of the letter dated 8121994 would show that the petitioner had applied for posting to Delhi on compassionate (ground) vide his letter dated 891993.
It was clearly mentioned by the petitioner in this letter that if it is not possible on the part of the authorities to accommodate him at Delhi for a period of one year, he may be given posting near to Delhi so that he may be able to make proper arrangements for the medical treatment of his father as it was apprehended by the petitioner that it might not be possible to take his father to Nagaland.
This request of the petitioner was considered by the respondents and the petitioner was transferred to Chandigarh.
In these circumstances, as per Regulation 114, the petitioner was not entitled to any transfer allowance.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.