GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for quashing of the decision taken by the Executive Council of the Haryana Institute of Public Administration (hereinafter referred to as `the Institute') in its 39th meeting held on 1712000 and the consequential order Annexure-P4 dated 922000 passed by its Director reverting the petitioner from the post of Administrative Officer to that of Private Secretary.
2.
The facts relevant to the decision of this case are that the petitioner joined the service of the Institute on 2991983 as Steno-typist.
In January, 1984 he was appointed as Junior Scale Stenographer by direct recruitment.
During the next fifteen years, he received the following promotions :-  (i) In October 1986, he was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer.
(ii) In September 1990, he was promoted as Personal Assistant.
(iii) On 1651994, he was promoted as Private Secretary.
(iv) On 23.6.1999, he was promoted as Administrative Officer.
It appears from the record that in view of the protest lodged by some employees against the petitioner's promotion as Administrative Officer, the Director of the Institute referred the case the Executive Council and on the basis of the decision taken by the latter, he passed the order dated 922000 and reverted him to the post of Private Secretary.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the decision of the Executive Council of the Institute and the consequential order passed by the Director on the ground that the promotion order issued by the competent authority after due consideration of the cases of all eligible employees could not have been reviewed by the Executive Council and, in any case, the impugned decision could not have been taken without giving notice and opportunity of hearing to him.
He was averred that in the second meeting of the Executive Council of the Institute, it had been decided that the Director shall be the appointing authority for Class-I and Class-II posts and, therefore, his promotion could not have been treated irregular on the premises that the Director was not competent to make promotion on the post of Administrative Officer.
He has further averred that the Institute has not framed rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of its employees but the draft rules are being followed by it for last many year and as per those rules, he was rightly promoted as Administrative Officer.
4.
In the written statement filed by the Director of the Institute, it has been averred that the Executive Council had, in its first meeting held on 16.8.1993, created one post of Administrative Officer which was to be filled up by deputation and since then the said post was being filled up the deputation, but without keeping this in view, the then Director promoted the petitioner and that too after the State Government had issued order dated 14.6.1999 appointing Shri MK Ahuja, a member of the Haryana Civil Service, as Administrative Officer of the Institute of deputation.
It has been further averred that the Institute had proposed service rules by the same have neither been approved by the Executive Council nor have been notified so far and, therefore, the same cannot be acted upon, for the purpose of making recruitment to the post ex cadred in the service of the Institute.
5.
At the hearing, Shri G Parsana Kumar placed before the Court photostat extract of the minutes of the meeting of the Executive Council which makes a mention of the sanction given by the State Government to the creation of the post of Administrative Officer, the extracts of the minutes of the meeting of the Executive Council held on 17101993 in which the Punjab Civil Services Rules (except Pension Rules) and other instructions issued by the government from time to time were adopted by the Institute, photostat copy of the draft Service Bye-Laws framed by the Institute and the file containing noting-sheets in which issue relating to promotion of Administrative Officer was dealt with.
6.
A perusal of the record produced by Shri G Parsana Kumar shows that while sanctioning the post of Administrative Officer, the State Government had neither prescribed the qualification nor it had laid down the procedure for recruitment.
The file which contains the notings relating to promotion of Administrative Officer shows that before ordering the office to undertake exercise for the appointment on the post of Administrative Officer, the then Director of the Institute recorded the following note :-  "I had kept this file pending as after I joined in early Nov 98, I wanted to assess the situation and requirements of HIPA.
I have been trying with CS to get an ED and US (T) appointed in HIPA.
3 reminders have been sent but no response.
I have twice mentioned this to him also.
CS could not spare anyone for working as Principal, DTC Panchkula as no one was willing to come on deputation to HIPA from the Secretariat.
We are now going to hire retired officers for DTC and SMS Gurgaon.
Administrative work has increased, we are running more Courses.
HIPA needs Senior Level Officers.
There is not even one officer in HIPA to assist on he administrative side.
Two Faculty Members are wrongly burdened with administrative work.
FCS will hopefully be relieved shortly if we get a retired DS for the post of Principal, DTC Panchkula.
To relieve RO (DM) for his work as HI, we may get a person from HTC on deputation - put up draft letter.
On administration side we may fill up the post of Ad.O from among our existing staff.
Our efforts to get an outsider, for this post has apparently not succeeded as the Selection Committee found no one suitable from among the candidates who had applied.
The draft rules authorise the Appointing Authority (Director) to decide the mode of recruitment i.e. by promotion or by deputation, the qualifications and minimum experience.
In the light of the above facts and our needs, it is felt that - (i) We may fill up the post of Ad.O by promotion from our own staff.
(ii) The minimum qualifications should be that a person should be Supdt.
or in an equivalent grade in the ministerial staff.
(iii) The Supdt./equivalent grade official of ministerial staff, should have at least 3 years experience in his grade.
Put up names/record of persons who may be considered.
Sd/-  (Tirlochan Singh) Director  15699"  Thereafter the summary of the service record of the petitioner, Smt. Arvinder Kaur (Superintendent) and Shri Puran Chand (Superindent) was placed before the Director who opined that the petitioner deserves to be promoted on the basis of longest length of service in the Superintendent's grade.
The agenda note prepared for 39th meeting of the Executive Council of the Institute contains the reasons for promotion of in-service officer to the post of Administrative Officer.
The relevant extract of the agenda item No. 12 reads as under :- "In this connection, it is stated that there is one sanctioned post of Administrative Officer.
Since 1983-97, this post was filled up on deputation (from) amongst officer working in equivalent pay scales or even in the Supdt.
's pay scales.
This post had been vacant for quite some time.
Later on one HCS Officer Sh. MK Ahuja was appointed as Administrative Officer by the State Govt.
But before Sh. Ahuja could join HIPA, the then Director HIPA promoted Sh. Ashok Kumar Bhardwaj (OSD) as Administrative Officer of HIPA on 23.6.1999.
In the meantime Sh. Mukesh Ahuja HCS joined on 2461999 as Administrative Officer.
There were thus two Administrative Officers against one post.
However, one Officer has been adjusted against the vacant post of Under Secretary (Training).
Faculty is aggrieved that Sh. Ashok Kumar who was a Steno when he joined this Institute just 15 years back has got five promotions in total disregard to Govt. rules and procedures as applicable to HIPA.
He was promoted as Ad.O Under the power of Director and on the basis of draft Service Rules of HIPA- 1990 which have not yet been approved.
Draft Rules framed for filling up the post of Administrative Officer are as under :- Scale of Pay Mode of appointment Qualifications and experience Appointing authority Rs. 2200-4000 (i) By promotion To be decided Director (un-revised) (ii) By deputation by appointing authority.
Sh. Ashok Kumar was the senior-most in the Superintendent's grade and had more than 5 years experience in Superintendent's grade.
All his reports for the last 5 years were outstanding.
It will also be pertinent to add here that since the promotion of Sh. Ashok Kumar Bhardwaj, four HCS officers namely Sh. MK Ahuja, Smt. Anita Yadav, Sh. Vivek Dhankar and Smt. Anju Chaudhary have been posted as Administrative Officers in HIPA but all of them have managed to get themselves transferred.
Thus, it seems that the officers of HCS cadre are not willing to work on this post.
Even the officials of Superintendent's grade did not file any objection against his promotion.
The State Govt. vide D.O No. 102/99/EI/5758 dated 271999 was requested to post the HCS officers as Under Secretary instead of Administrative Officer.
In response to this letter the State Govt. (in Training Branch) has intimated that the post of Under Secretary does not exist in the field organisation and requested HIPA to get created the post of Deputy Director or Joint Director (depending upon the seniority of HCS Officer) in place of existing post of Under Secretary (Training) with the approval of the Executive Council."
The extract of the decision taken by the Executive Council in its meeting held on 1712000 is also reproduced below - "After detailed discussion E.C.
was of the opinion that the order of promotion of Sh. Ashok Kumar Bhardwaj be withdrawn and he be reverted back to his old post.
Efforts be made to fill up the post from amongst eligible ministerial cadre."
7.
The petitioner argued that the impugned decision of the Executive Council and the order passed by the Director of the Institute to revert him from the post of Administrative Officer should be declared as void because before taking the impugned decision the Executive Council and the Director did not give him notice and opportunity of hearing.
He submitted that by virtue of the order of promotion passed by the Director, he had acquired a valuable right to hold the post of Administrative Officer and draw salary in the pay scale of Rs. 8000-13500, and he could not have been deprived of that right without following the procedure established by law.
He further argued that in the absence of any statutory rule to the contrary, the decision taken by the Director to promote him could not have been treated arbitrary and illegal warranting its review because this was done after considering the cases of all eligible officers.
8.
Shri G Parsana Kumar candidly admitted that no action-oriented notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner before withdrawing his promotion as Administrative Officer and reverting him as Private Secretary.
He also admitted that the petitioner was promoted as Administrative Officer after due consideration of the candidature of other eligible employees and no evidence is available on the record of the Institute from which it can be inferred that the order dated 23.6.1999 was passed by the Director due to extraneous reasons.
He, however, defended the decision taken by the Executive Council by arguing that the then Director should not have promoted the petitioner after the State Government had sent Shri MK Ahuja on deputation.
9.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions.
In our opinion, the impugned decision of the Executive Council and the consequential order passed by the Director of the Institute are liable to be invalidated on the ground of violation of the rules of natural justice and also because the decision making by the Executive Council is vitiated by arbitrariness and the consequential violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
A careful reading of the file produced by Shri G Parsana Kumar shows that the then Director of the Institute had recorded cogent reasons for making appointment on the post of Administrative Officer by promotion from the staff of the Institute and the order promoting the petitioner was passed after due consideration of the service record of the three eligible employees.
There is nothing in that file and other material placed on the record of the writ petition from which it can be inferred that while selecting the petitioner for promotion as Administrative Officer, the then Director of the Institute had acted with ulterior motive or due to extraneous reasons.
It is, therefore, reasonable to take the view that the petitioner had acquired a legitimate right to hold the post of Administrative Officer subject to satisfactory performance and he could have been reverted from that post or even removed from service on being found guilty of misconduct.
However, what happened after six months of his promotion was that on the complaint made by some employees of the Institute, the Director placed the matter before the Executive Council and without going into the legality of the exercise undertaken by the then Director resulting in the issuance of order dated 23.6.1999, the Executive Council of the Institute decided to withdraw the petitioner's promotion and to revert him to the post of Private Secretary and that too, without holding any enquiry and without giving notice and opportunity of hearing.
In our opinion, the right acquired by the petitioner to hold the post of Administrative Officer could not have been tinkered by the Executive Council without complying with the fundamental rule of natural justice that no man shall be condemned unheard.
In State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269, their Lordships of the Supreme Court unequivocally recognised the applicability of the principles of natural justice in purely administrative matters.
The proposition laid down in that decision reads thus :-  "An order by the State to the prejudice of a person in derogation of his vested rights may be made only in accordance with the basic rules of justice and fairplay.
The deciding authority, it is true, is not in the position of a Judge called upon to decide an action between contesting parties and strict compliance with the forms of judicial procedure may not be insisted upon.
He is, however, under a duty to give the person against whom an enquiry is held an opportunity to set up his version of defence and an opportunity to correct or to controvert any evidence in the possession of the authority which is sought to be relied upon to his prejudice.
For that purpose the person against whom an enquiry is held must be informed of the case he is called upon to meet, and the evidence in support thereof.
The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed is entitled to a hearing applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the fundamental rules of our constitutional set up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
Duty to act judicially would, therefore, arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed.
It need not be shown to be super-added.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essentials of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is a nullity.
That is a basic concept of the rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a decision in any particular case."
10.
The rule enunciated in Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei's case (supra) has been applied and followed in the following cases :-  (i) Sayeedur Rehman v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1973 SC 239; (ii) Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and another, AIR 1978 SC 597; and (iii) Olga Tellis and others v. Bombay Municipal Corporation and others, 1986 RRR 290 : AIR 1986 SC 180.
11.
By applying the ratio of the aforementioned decisions to the facts of this case, we hold that the impugned decision of the Executive Council of the Institute and the order passed by its Director are vitiated due to the violation of the basics of natural justice.
12.
We are also convinced that the decision of the Execution Council to withdraw the petitioner's promotion and to revert him to the post of Private Secretary with a direction that the efforts be made to fill up the post from amongst the eligible ministerial employees is self-contradictory, apart from being arbitrary, unjust and violative of his fundamental right to equality.
The latter part of that decision is clearly indicative of the fact that higher body of the Institute is not in favour appointing an outsider on the post of Administrative Officer.
In view of this, the decision to rescind the petitioner's promotion cannot but be declared as wholly arbitrary.
Admittedly, the petitioner was holding a ministerial post in the grade of Superintendent at the time of his promotion to the post of Administrative Officer and before issuing the order Annexure-P.1, the then Director of the Institute had considered the cases of other eligible persons.
Thus, there was no justification to withdraw the petitioner's promotion as Administration Officer and, at the same time, direct the Institute to fill up the post from among the ministerial employees.
13.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexures-P.3 and P.4 are quashed.
However, we give liberty to the respondents to decide the issue relating to the petitioner's promotion afresh after giving him reasonable opportunity of hearing.
Petition allowed.