Arijit Pasayat, CJ - Petitioner's prayer for a declaration that he is entitled to get reservation as a member of Scheduled Caste having been turned down by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Ernakulam Bench (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal'), this Original Petition has been filed.
2.
Petitioner's case in brief is as follows : He was born as a Christian Sambavar.
His parents originally belonged to Hindu Sambavar community.
They covered into Christian Sambavar community much earlier to his birth.
In the year 1989, he converted into Hindu Sambavar Community and assumed the new name `Madhu'.
He was appointed as Extra Departmental Mail Carrier, Veroor Branch Office with effect from 19.2.1990.
At that time though the tried to obtain a caste certificate from the Tahsildar, he could not obtain it in time.
So he entered into service under the name `Mathew'.
The Superintendent of Post Offices, Changanassery as per notification dt. 3061995 invited applications from Extra Departmental Agents of the same Division in respect of unfilled vacancies of Postal Assistants for the year 1994.
Out of the three vacancies, one was reserved for Scheduled Caste.
Petitioner also applied for the post along with a caste certificate issued by the Tahsildar and a copy of the notification regarding his conversion.
He also submitted an application to the Assistant Superintendent of Post Offices seeking change of his name and community in the service records.
The Superintendent of Post Offices required the petitioner to show reasons for entering in service with the name Mathew.
He submitted an explanation.
But petitioner's claim for being considered as Scheduled Caste candidate was not accepted and another Scheduled Caste candidate was appointed.
The Tribunal took note of the fact that when originally the petitioner was selected, his selection was as another community candidate.
He did not get the name changed in pursuance of the notification till the date of application for the post of Postal Assistant and he was not selected by the Departmental Promotion Committee, which held a meeting on 2381995.
3.
The Tribunal observed that the petitioner was born to Christian parents and therefore the question of his getting the benefit as a Scheduled Caste does not arise.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no bar for a Christian getting re-converted and on re-conversion the original caste or community to which he belonged gets restored.
Learned counsel appearing for the successful candidate submitted that conversion can be to a particular community, not a caste.
In any event, undisputed position being that the petitioner was born as a Christian and his entry into service was as a Christian, the subsequent attempt to get th benefit of Scheduled Caste cannot be accepted.
Similar is the stand of the counsel appearing for the Central Government.
4.
In B Basavalingappa v. D Munichinnappa, 1965(1) SCR 316 the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 specified Bhovi caste as a Scheduled Caste.
The respondent, a Voddar by caste contested election as a Scheduled Caste Bhovi.
A Constitution Bench examined the scheme of Article 341 and upheld the contention of the appellant that in view of the stringent provisions of the Constitution with respect to a notification issued under clause (1), it is not open to anyone to include any caste as coming within the notification on the basis of evidence - oral or documentary - if the caste in question does not find specific mention in the terms of the notification, it was not open, therefore, to give evidence that a particular caste was a Scheduled Caste not mentioned in the 1950 Order.
5.
It is a settled position in law that caste is the result of birth and not of choice or volition.
If the structure of the caste is such that its members must necessarily belong to Hindu religion, and the persons who cease to belong to that religion must go out of the caste.
It is more so in the case of a Hindu, because no non-Hindu can be in the caste according to rules and regulations.
A caste may consist not only of persons professing Hindu religion, but also some other persons professing some other religion as well.
Conversion from Hinduism to other religion may not involve loss of caste, because even persons professing such other religion can be members of the caste.
(See Kailash Sonkar v. Smt. Maya Devi, 1984(2) SCC 91).
6.
In Chaturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani v. Moreshwar Parashram, 1954 SCR 817, on the question of caste and religion and the effect of conversion, it was observed as follows :  "Looked at from the secular point of view, there are three factors which have to be considered : (1) the reaction of the old body, (2) the intentions of the individual himself, and (3) the rules of the new order.
If the old order is tolerant of the new faith and sees no reason to outcaste or excommunicate the covert and the individual himself desires and intends to retain his old social and political ties, the conversion is only nominal for all practical purposes and when we have to consider the legal and political rights of the old body, the views of the new faith hardly matter........ On the other hand, if the covert has shown by his conduct and dealings that his break from the old order is so complete and final that he no longer regards himself as a member of the old body and there is reconversion and readmittance to the old fold, it would be wrong to hold that he can nevertheless claim temporary privileges and political advantages which are special to the old order.........
The only modification here is that it is not only his choice which must be taken into account but also the views of the body whose religious tenets he has renounced, because here the right we are considering is the right of the old body, the right conferred on it as a special privilege to send a member of its own fold to Parliament."
In Kailash Sonkar's case, AIR 1984 SC 600 (supra), it was observed that caste to which a Hindu belonged is essentially determined by birth and if a Hindu is converted to another religion which does not recognise caste, conversion amounts to loss of the said caste.
7.
In S Swvigaradoss v. Zonal Manager, FCI, 1996(2) SCT 56 (SC) : AIR 1996 SC 1182 it was held that person laying claim to membership of certain scheduled caste, born of Christian parents, cannot claim to be member of scheduled caste, if his parents converted prior to his birth and ceased to be a member of scheduled caste.
In Srish Kumar Choudury v. State of Tripura, 1991(1) S.C.T.
255 : AIR 1990 SC 991 the Supreme Court considered a case whether Laskar community in State of Tripura is a Scheduled Caste.
After examining the scheme of the Constitution it was held that though evidence may be admissible to verify the entries in the Presidential Order to find a caste/tribe included in a particular tribe or caste, tribal communities, the admissibility of the evidence is confined withinthe limitations enacted in the order.
It is not open to the Court to make any addition or subtraction from the Presidential Order.
The position was again reiterated in Kumari Madhuri Patil v. V Addl.
Commissioner, Tribal Development, 1994(6) SCC 241 : 1995(1) SCT 261 (SC).
Article 366(24) of the Constitution of India, (in short `the Constitution') defines `Scheduled Castes', means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes.
races or tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to be Scheduled Caste for the purpose of the Constitution.
8.
In S Swvigaradoss's case, AIR 1996 SC 1182 (supra), it was inter alia observed as follows (at p. 1184 of AIR) :  "Christian is not a Scheduled Caste under the notification issued by the President.
In view of the admitted position that the petitioner was born of Christian parents and his parents also were converted prior to his birth and no longer remained to be Adi Dravida, a Scheduled Caste for the purpose of Tirunelveli District in Tamil Nadu as notified by the President, petitioner cannot claim to be a Scheduled Caste."
9.
In view of the aforesaid position in law, we do not find any infirmity in the conclusions of the Tribunal to warrant interference.
The Original Petition is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.