RL Anand, J - Nobody has given the appearance on behalf of respondents No. 5 to 7.
2.
Shri Vikramjit Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the admission granted to respondents No. 5 to 7 in BE Civil Engineering in Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana.
The case set up by the petitioner is that his claim on merit has been ignored by respondent No. 3, which, has accommodated respondent No. 7 Shri Sukhjit Singh.
3.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
The petitioner passed his three-year Diploma in Civil Engineering from Government Polytechnic, Amritsar in May, 1998 securing more than 72% marks.
The candidates passing Diploma Course in Engineering are entitled to admission to 2nd year/3rd Semester of BE courses run by institutions in the State of Punjab.
A Lateral Entry Engineering Test is held by the State Government every year for Diploma Holder candidates for admission to 2nd year/3rd Semester of Engineering in various institutions in the State of Punjab.
The petitioner also appeared in that test.
The result was declared and petitioner was ranked at Serial No. 2 in the merit of General Category candidates in Civil Engineering Discipline.
The case set up by the petitioner is that there were five seats in the General Category.
He has been placed at Merit No. 2 while Sukhjit Singh respondent No. 7 was placed at Serial No. 10, therefore, action on the part of respondent No. 3 for granting admission to respondent No. 7 to the said course is violative of the Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
The stand of respondents No. 1 to 3 is that out of five seats of general category there is a further spilt up of five seats.
Four seats have been earmarked for 85 per cent category reserved for residents of Punjab and one seat has been allocated to 15 per cent category reserved for Punjabis residing outside the Punjab.
Further out of four seats in the 85% category as stated above, only one seat has been reserved for urban Panjabi.
Since the merit of the petitioner is at No. 2, therefore, he has no locus standi to file the present writ petition.
Moreover, the petitioner has also been accommodated and he is getting his studies at Bhatinda.
Therefore, equity and fair play further compel this court not to grant any relief in favour of the petitioner.
It is also the stand of the respondent authority that respondent No. 7 was offered seat on a concessional basis as the said seat was lying vacant when it was so offered on 2791999 before the Ist Hon'ble D.B.
which was seized of the matter in C.W.P.
No. 11990 of 1999.
It is also the case of respondents No. 1 to 3 that Shri Sukhjit Singh is getting the study in the said course and any direction would not only jeopardise the career of Shri Sukhjit Singh, respondent No. 7 but it will further augment his miseries.
It is also the case of the respondent authority that the petitioner is already doing his course at Bhatinda.
5.
After hearing the counsel for the parties I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner has no locus standi to file the present writ petition because his merit is at serial No. 2, whereas, only one seat has been earmarked for the category to which the petitioner is eligible.
Also keeping in view the fact, that Shri Sukhjit Singh has taken the seat in the Engineering College at Ludhiana, extraordinary powers under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India should not be invoked in favour of the petitioner, who in the mind of this court just wants to disturb the admission of Sukhjit Singh, respondent No. 7.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.