RS Mongia, J - The petitioner after starting his career as Medical Officer in the State of Punjab on May, 1968, rose to the rank of Professor on regular basis w.e.f.
September 16, 1982, after getting promotions on various ranks.
According to the petitioner, he is the senior-most Professor working in the Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab and as per the statutory rules, the post of a Principal in a Medical College is to be filled from amonst the Professors working in the Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab.
It is further the case that he has been holding the post of Vice Principal of various Institutions and since August, 1999, he was acting as a Principal of Government Medical College, Amritsar.
The Chandigarh Administration had started a Medical College at Chandigarh in the year 1991.
The petitioner was sent on deputation to the Chandigarh Administration in the Medical College, Chandigarh.
One Dr. JS Chopra (respondent No. 4) who was working in the PGI was appointed as Principal of the Government Medical College, Chandigarh.
It is the case of the petitioner that said Dr. Chopra somehow got biased against him and it was because of mala fide intention that he gave two adverse reports to him for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94.
The petitioner was repatriated to the parent Department in July, 1994, and he joined Government Medical College, Amritsar.
The Annual Confidential Report for the year 1992- 93, in which adverse remarks were recorded by Dr. Chopra was conveyed to the petitioner on May 15, 1994.
The ACR for the year 1993-94 was conveyed to the petitioner on April 21, 1995.
The A.C.Rs.
for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 have been appended as Annexures P-1 and P-2 respectively with the writ petition.
It may be observed here that the representations against the adverse remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 were also rejected by the State of Punjab vide orders dated July 24, 1998, copy Annexure P-4, and May 27, 1998, copy Annexure P-3, respectively.
2.
The official respondents constituted a Departmental Selection Committee for considering the cases of eligible Professors for the post of Principal on October 29, 1999.
As per the allegation made in the petition, the petitioner was ignored for promotion because of the adverse remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94.
The names of respondents No. 2 and 3 were recommended.
3.
This writ petition has been filed challenging, inter alia, non-promotion of the petitioner on the basis of adverse remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 as also the promotion order of respondent No. 2 dated December 8, 1999, copy Annexure P-12.
The petitioner has also prayed for quashing the adverse remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94.
4.
The adverse remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 have been challenged primarily on the following grounds :-  "(i) Biased attitude of Dr. JS Chopra, respondent No. 4.
(ii) Dr. Chopra himself initiated the remarks as Principal (initiating authority) and himself reviewed the remarks as Secretary, Medical Education.
The ACRs were never sent to the Adviser of the Administrator, UT Chandigarh, for confirmation.
(iii) The adverse remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 were conveyed to the petitioner belatedly on May 15, 1994 and April 21, 1995 respectively.
(iv) The remarks are not based on facts.
The previous reports as also the reports after the impugned reports are good.
(v) The representations against the adverse remarks should have been considered by the UT Administration and not by the State of Punjab.
5.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that the respondent authorities have misread the annual confidential reports for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 by dubbing them as "integrity doubtful", whereas in the specific column regarding the integrity of the petitioner, there is nothing adverse to him regarding his integrity being doubtful.
That being so, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, as per instructions of the State Government dated July 21, 1997, copy Annexure P-8, only five years' record prior to the date of consideration for promotion had to be seen.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that if the findings of this Court on the question as to whether the reports for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 can be said to be integrity doubtful is in favour of the petitioner, then he would not press for the quashing of the said reports and the rejection of the representations against those reports.
6.
The case of the respondents is that the reports for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 amounted to "integrity doubtful" and, therefore, as per the instructions of the Government dated October 22, 1996, copy Annexure P-14, eight years record of the petitioner prior to the date of consideration for promotion had to be taken into account.
7.
As to whether the reports for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 can be said to be dubbing the petitioner with "integrity doubtful", it will be apposite to reproduce the remarks for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 :-  Report for year 1992-93  "Subject : Adverse remarks recorded in the ACR for the year 1992-93 Dr. OP Mahajan Prof. Physiology.
Reference on the subject noted above.
Though your over all grading during the year 1992-93 has been assessed as "Above Average" but the following adverse remarks have been recorded in your annual confidential report for the year 1992-93, the detail of which is given below : (19) Defects, if any  : Slow in performance of assigned responsibilities.
Has to be coaxed into doing things.
22(ii) Over all general (a) Personality assessment.
(b) General conduct  : Questionable in view of his suspected reporting to press the information not palatable for the college.
(c) Qualities of Leadership  : Uses in wrong direction.
He hold part plays (parleys ?)
with other faculty members in his office which are not in the interest of the developing college.
Remarks by the Director Principal Chandigarh Medical College, Chandigarh  : He is a person and Vice Principal who cannot be relied upon for confidential matters.
He is suspected to have briefed the press representative in his office about the news which was published in the Newspaper and not in good taste as far as college is concerned.
Here is recorded evidence that he met the press representative in his office and news appeared in the press the very next day which was not good for the college.
This information was passed on to the Adviser to Administrator upon his questioning about it.
In view of the above remarks recorded in your ACR you are advised to your own interest, to improve yourself.
In case you want to explain your position in this regard, you may send your reply to this office within a period of 21 days from the date of issue of this letter.
Sd/- Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab."
............ Report for the year 1993-94  Subject : Adverse remarks recorded in the ACR for the 1993-94 Dr. OP Mahajan Prof. Physiology.
Reference on the subject noted above.
Though your over all grading during the year 1993-94 has been assessed as "Above Average" but the following adverse remarks have been recorded in your annual confidential report for the year 1993-94, the detail of which is given below : Part-II  Remarks recorded.
5.
Is he punctual and regular in performance of his duties.
He has been coming invariably late in the morning as observed by the undersigned personally.
7.
(a) Manner in which he had maintained order and discipline.
He had committed a number of administrative follies for which he was dealt with in writing at appropriate times.
10.
If the officer or official concerned is suspected of corruption or is believed to be corrupt.
This opinion should be notified by reasons which may be in possession of the reporting officer.
No corruption against him or proof of any corruption although thre are numerous complaints about it of even having taken money from students but no substantial proof for it.
13.
Defects, if any.
Dubious personality.
Cannot be relied upon for confidential matters.
14.
Does he possesses initiative.
None.
15.
(iii) (a) Personality  : Dubious (b) General conduct  : Not above board.
(c) Qualities of Leadership  : Generally lacking.
ASSESSMENT OF THE REVIEWING OFFICER.
He is not fit for any administrative post other than that of the Professor of Physiology at any place, lacks administrative skills, cannot be relied for a sensitive post especially dealing with confidential or financial matters.
In view of the above remarks record in your ACR you are advised in your own interest to improve yourself.
In case you want to explain your position in this regard, you may send your reply to this office within a period of 21 days from the date of issue of this letter.
Sd/- Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, Chandigarh" 8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that perusal of the report for the year 1992-93 would show that the petitioner had been graded above average and there is no remark regarding his integrity being doubtful.
There is a specific column in the proforma for recording the adverse remarks regarding the integrity and from the report for the year 1992-93, it would be seen that no adverse remarks had been recorded regarding the integrity as none was conveyed to the petitioner.
So far as the report for the year 1993-94 is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the overall assessment was above average.
He drew our attention to column No. 10 of the report (supra) where in the column regarding the integrity, it has been written as under :-  "No corruption against him or proof of any corruption although there are numerous complaints about it of even having taken money from students but no substantial proof for it."
9.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner further argued that from the above, it cannot be said that the petitioner was being dubbed as having `integrity doubtful'.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the petitioner cannot be relied upon for confidential matter and in the report for the year 1993-94, the remarks in column 10 (supra) as also the remarks in column 13 that the petitioner has dubious personality, cannot be relied upon for confidential matters and further the assessment recorded by the reviewing officer that "he is not fit for any administrative post other than that of the Professor of Physiology at any place, lacks administrative skills, cannot be relied for a sensitive post especially dealing with confidential or financial matters", the petitioner is certainly having his integrity as doubtful and, therefore, his record for the last eight years as per the instructions, copy Annexure P-14, had to be considered and he has been rightly superseded by his juniors.
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the aforesaid reports, we are of the view that the reports may be dubbed as adverse to the petitioner but these cannot be dubbed as amounting to `integrity doubtful'.
This is for two reasons.
Firstly in the specific column No. 10 in the proforma for recording ACR it had not been recorded that the integrity of the petitioner was doubtful.
In the report for the year 1992-93, there is even no adverse remark in column No. 10 as none was conveyed to the petitioner vide annexure P-1.
Even in the remarks in column No. 10 for the year 1993-94, it was specifically mentioned `no corruption against the petitioner or proof thereof' meaning thereby the authorities were satisfied that he could not be dubbed as having `integrity doubtful' for both the years 1992-93 and 1993-94, the over all assessment is above average.
Had the petitioner otherwise been dubbed as having integrity doubtful, then the overall assessment could not have been above average, rather it would have been `C integrity doubtful'.
The adverse remarks in the various columns can certainly be taken into consideration at the time of considering the officer for promotion, if according to law, the report of that particular year can be taken into consideration.
In our considered view, though the remarks in different columns of the reports for the years 1992-93 and 1994-94 may be adverse to the petitioner yet cannot be said to be indicating as "integrity doubtful".
11.
Now the question which arises for consideration is if there are no reports of integrity doubtful whether for purpose of promotion, eight years' record is to be considered or five years' record is to be considered.
For this purpose, the instructions of the Government dated July 21, 1997, and October 22, 1996, copies Annexures P-8 and P-14 respectively will have to be examined.
The instructions dated July 21, 1997, copy Annexure P-8, are in the following terms :-  "Subject : Clarification regarding service record to be seen for placement in the higher scales/Efficiency Bar and promotion.
Sir/Madam, I have been directed to bring to your kind attention the Punjab Government circular letter No. 77/45/35-5PPI/20975 dated 17101995 vide which it was decided to see the entire service record of the employee/officers from which the promotion is to be made and for giving the first proficiency step-up, last 8 years record is to be seen and for the grant of second proficiency step-up last 10 years record is to be seen.
Apart from this for placing the employee/officer in the higher scales, the service record upto the date when the employee/officer is due for placement in the higher scale is to be seen.
It was also decided to put an end to the policy of seeing last 5 years service record in case of promotions.
2.
The Government has now reconsidered the matter and has decided that from now onwards for promotions/placement in the higher scales/proficiencies step up, the service record of the last 5 years record is to be seen.
The instructions dated October 22, 1996, copy Annexure P-14 (relevant portion) are reproduced below :-  "Subject : Cases where the integrity is found to be doubtful - policy regarding promotion in such cases.
xxx xxx xxx 4.
The above said policy has been discussed and it has been decided that in cases where there is an entry regarding doubtful integrity, and such remarks had been conveyed to the official/officer and representation if any filed by the concerned official/officer has been considered by the competent authority and the adverse remarks are not expunged in those cases that official/officer is not to be promoted on higher post provided that from the date of recording such adverse remarks regarding integrity upto the date of consideration for promotion he had not been given any proficiency step up or placement in senior scale.
But if proficiency step up or placement in senior scale has been made then these adverse remarks are not to be taken into consideration.
As per instructions circulated by this department vide letter No. 47/45/95- 5PPI/20796, dated 17101995, where it has been clarified that the service record which had been perused while giving proficiency step up, promotion or placement in higher scale had already been considered and proficiency step up, promotion or placement in higher scale had already been done then that record is not to be considered for any purpose.
If after the date of adverse entry regarding integrity, there is no adverse entry regarding integrity in the annual confidential reports of the employee for next eight years, in that event the official/officer may be considered for promotion.
In other words on the date of consideration for promotion if there is no adverse entry regarding integrity for the last 8 years then the official may be considered for promotion.
5.
Policy of the government regarding writing of annual confidential reports in connection with the integrity has been laid down vide letter No. 15/11/88- IPPI-17179, dated 4111988.
It should be ensured that entries regarding integrity in the confidential reports should be made as per the instructions and if any body records any adverse remarks in the confidential reports of an official regarding integrity by violating the above said instructions then such remarks should be expunged from the report."
Reading of the above instructions dated October 22, 1996, copy Annexure P-14, makes it very clear that in case there is entry regarding `integrity doubtful' of a particular officer, his eight years' previous record from the date of consideration has to be seen.
Otherwise in accordance with the instructions dated July 21, 1997 (Annexure P-8) for purpose of promotion, only five years' previous record has to be seen from the date of consideration.
In other words, we can say that with an entry of `integrity doubtful', a person is not likely to get promotion for a period of eight years.
12.
In the present case, it is admitted in the written statement that the petitioner had been ignored for promotion because of the reports for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 when the Departmental Selection Committee sat for consideration on October 29, 1999.
According to us, the reports for five years only prior to the date of consideration should have been taken into account, i.e., reports for the years 1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97, 1997-98 and 1998-99.
Since the petitioner had been ignored on the basis of record, which, according to the Government's own instruction, could not have been taken into consideration we are of the view that the consideration of the petitioner's case for promotion was not in accordance with law.
13.
For the view we have taken in the matter, it is not necessary for us to go into the question of the validity of the annual confidential reports for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 and the orders rejecting the representations against these reports.
14.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct respondent No. 1 to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as a Principal, keeping in view the aforesaid observations, against the vacancy for which he was considered on October 29, 1999, and if not found suitable may be considered for the subsequent vacancies that may have arisen or may arise hereinafter.
These directions be carried out within a period of two months of the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner, whichever is earlier.
A copy of this order, attested by the Special Secretary, be given to Mr. Cheema for onward transmission to the concerned quarters.
Petition allowed.