RC Gandhi, J - The petitioners seek issuance of writ of Certiorari to quash Order No. DSHJ/Estt/98-99/158 dated 471988 issued by respondent No. 3, Director Sheep Husbandry Deptt.
Jammu, whereby the order bearing No. DSHJ/Estt/NG/98-99/58 dated 25.5.1998 and order dated 29.6.1998 pertaining to the appointment of the petitioners have been rescinded.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the petitioners have been appointed on regular basis as Class-IV employees against the posts of Shepherds and Orderlies.
The impugned order is issued on political, mala fides and extraneous considerations which are writ large and also in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The services of the petitioners cannot be terminated at the instance of Minister concerned, unless the petitioners are provided an opportunity of being heard.
The respondents have also not observed the principles of natural justice.
3.
Respondents have filed their objections stating therein that the respondent No. 3 has no authority to appoint the petitioners, unless they have been found selected by the duly constituted selection committee.
The orders of appointment of the petitioners were issued by respondent No. 3 a day or two before his retirement in an arbitrary and unjust manner.
The Government has framed and notified SRO-64 of 1994 which contains rules and regulations of daily rated workers and work charge employees, who have rendered continuous service of 7 years.
The Class-IV vacancies vacant in the Department are to be utilized for regularising the available, eligible, daily rated/work charge employees.
But in the instant case, it has been brought to the notice of the respondents that neither the procedure prescribed has been followed while making appointments nor the eligible persons have been considered, and otherwise also, these appointments are contrary to the rules and is the result of an abuse of powers.
4.
Petition is admitted to hearing and is taken up for final disposal with the consent of the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
It is not in dispute that respondent No. 3 has made the appointments at the fag end of his service, that is, a day before his retirement.
The Class-IV posts are to be filled-up after advertising the posts for the desirous candidates, who submit their applications seeking selection and appointment against the posts so advertised.
Such candidates are required to be subjected to the process of selection by the committee for determining their merit for selection.
The final appointment can be made by respondent No. 3 only after receiving the recommendation of the selection committee.
The appointment of the petitioners without their recommendation by the duly constituted selection committee is an act of favouritism by the respondent No. 3 and the same is illegal.
Notwithstanding, such appointment can be dealt with by the respondents under the provisions of Regulation 67-(A)(i) of the Jummu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations, Volume-I.
For facility of reference, this provision of the regualtion reads thus:  "67-A...................................... (i) The orders or notification of promotion or appointment or reversion should be cancelled as soon as it is brought to the notice of the appointing authority that such a promotion or appointment or reversion has resulted from a factual error and the Government servant concerned should, immediately on such cancellation be brought to the position which he would have held but for the incorrect order or promotion or appointment or reversion."
6.
The respondents have rescinded the order of appointment of the petitioners taking shelter under the aforestated provision of law on coming to know that the Director, Sheep Husbandry Department, Jammu (Respondent No. 3) has committed an error in issuing impugned order, which action may even be an abuse of the powers by appointing authority.
7.
Mr. Raina, learned counsel for the petitioners also submitted that the impugned order has been issued by the respondent No. 3 without application of mind, and has translated the will of the Minister Incharge of his department for rescinding the order of appointment of the petitioners.
The order sought to be quashed reads as under :  "As desired by the Hon'ble Minister for Animal/Sheep Husbandry Deptt.
J&K on 371998, the appointment orders issued vide this Directorate No. DSHJ/Estt/NG/98-99/158 dated 25.5.98, No. DSHJ/Estt/NG/98-99/158 dated 29.6.98 and No. DSHJ/Estt/NG/98-99/158 dated 29.6.98 are hereby rescinded with immediate effect.
Inform all concerned accordingly."
8.
It is no doubt that orders sought to be quashed have not been properly worded.
It is not disputed that the appointment orders of the petitioners have been issued without advertising posts and subjecting the petitioners to the process of selection.
The respondents have taken a stand that the appointments of the petitioners have been made without proper selection, thus being bad in law, the respondents under Regulation 67-A(i) can undo such appointments.
If the illegal appointment made by the authority of the Government is not undone by the appointing authority and the matter is brought to the notice of the Minister, who in turn directs his Head of the Department or to the appointing authority to take action, and in such circumstances, while taking action, the order is worded stipulating "as desired by the Hon'ble Minister for Animal Husbandry Deptt.
J&K on 371998", there appears to be nothing bad in it.
9.
So far as the argument that principles of natural justice have not been complied with is concerned, there is no doubt that the petitioners have not been provided an opportunity of being heard before termination of their services.
While it has been observed that the appointments of the petitioners have been made without adopting procedure prescribed and by abuse of power by the appointing authority in appointing the petitioners, it is to be seen, if opportunity of being heard is afforded to the petitioners, could they establish illegal action of the appointing authority as legal.
The purpose of affording an opportunity has been enunciated in AIR 1996 SC 1669 : 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC), State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, pronouncing the principle to be followed in the context of disciplinary enquiries and the order of punishment imposed by the employer upon the employee.
The Supreme Court evolved the basic principle of natural justice and observed in the following words :  "While applying the rule of audi alteram partem (the primary principle of natural justice) the Court/Tribunal/Authority must always bear in mind the ultimate and overriding objective underlying the said rules viz. to ensure that there is no failure of justice.
It is the objective which should guide them in applying the rule to varying situations that arise before them."
10.
Illegal appointment does not vest any right in the petitioners to continue.
Even, if the rule of Audi alteram partem is applied to this case by affording opportunity to the petitioners, they are not in a position to improve their position and to achieve the object behind providing a opportunity of being heard to make the appointments tenable in law.
11.
The appointments of the petitioners have been made by the respondent No. 3 without following due process of law and by abusing the power of appointment.
It is not expected of an authority of the Govt. vested with the powers to abuse such powers for showering favours to person in derogation of procedure and the law.
Learned counsel could not make out any case warranting interference with the impugned order.
For the aforesaid reasons the petition having no substance is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.