TS Doabia, J - The petitioner came to this Court with a plea that he should be given appointment on compassionate grounds.
2.
So far as Mr. Chaudhry appearing for respondents 1 and 2 is concerned, he submits that they have no policy in existence under which compassionate appointment can made.
Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the petitioner submits that compassionate appointment can be made by the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
For this, reliance is being placed on SRO 43, wherein the definition of family is given.
The definition of family as given in Rules 2 and 5(3) of SRO 43 dared 2221994, be noticed.
These read as under :-  (2) Application of Rules :- These rules shall apply to the compassionate appointment of a person who is a family member of :- (i) a Government employee who dies in harness other than due to militancy related action; (ii) a Government employee who dies as result of militancy related action and is not involved in a militancy relates activities; (iii) a civilian who dies as a result of militancy related action not involved in militancy related activities and total income of the family from all sources does not exceed Rs. 3,500/- per month as assessed by the Revenue Officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner; (iv) a permanent resident Junior Commissioned Officer or Non-Commissioned Officer of the armed force or an officer of equivalent rank of the para- military force who is killed in action connected with law and order duties within the State of Jammu and Kashmir as a result of enemy action on the line of actual control.
Explanation :- For the purpose of these rules :- a) `Armed Force' means Navy, Military, Air Force; b) `Para Military Force' means a force constituted under any law for the time being in force made by the Competent Legislature; c) `Permanent Resident' means the permanent resident of the State of Jammu and Kashmir as defined under section 6 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir; d) `Family' means spouse, son, daughter, adopted son, adopted daughter, sister or brother wholly dependent on the deceased............. (5) Appointment in other cases :- Appointment under these rules in respect of a member of the family of a Government employee or a civilian who has died as result of militancy related action or in respect of a family member of the office of Armed Force or para-military force, shall be made by the General Administration Department in accordance with the procedure hereinafter prescribed.......... (3) A family member of a deceased member of armed force or paramilitary force who is eligible under these rules may apply for appointment against a suitable vacancy to the Government in the Home Department through the Commanding Officer of the Unit in which the deceased member of the armed force or para- military force was last serving.
The Home Department after determining the eligibility may forward the case to the Government in the General Administration Department."
3.
Thus, compassionate appointment has to be given not only to the dependent(s) of a deceased employee who was in State service, but also to a dependent of a family member of a deceased member of armed force or para- military force.
It is on the above rules, reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner, and this has been rightly placed.
4.
Under what circumstances compassionate appointment has to be given has been dealt with in detail in SWP No. 488/1998 titled Vijay Kumar v. State of J&K decided on 2961998 (1999(2) SCT 34 (J&K)).
The respondents would take notice of the above judgment also.
The petitioner to make available a copy of the order passed by this Court in this petition as also a copy of the order passed in writ petition referred to above, to the respondent-authorities.
The respondents would, accordingly, take remedial measures within a period of two months.
The Commanding Officer of the Unit where the petitioner's brother was posted, would make a recommendation to respondent No. 3.
5.
The respondent No. 3 independently of the recommendation would consider the matter and see to it that the requisite relief is granted to the petitioner.
6.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.