RS Mongia, J (Oral) - A Division Bench of this Court had disposed of C.W.P.
No. 16989 of 1997, Ved Singh v. State of Haryana, on July 6, 1998, by passing the following order :-  "The petitioners are claiming that they should be given an opportunity for opting a date with effect from which they should be put in a particular pay scale on the ground that after they had earlier opted for a particular date for being fixed in a particular pay scale.
The State Government vide various orders passed much after the date of earlier option revised with retrospective effect.
The details have been given in Annexure P/8 filed with the replication as to by which order and with effect from which retrospective date the pay was revised.
This Bench has already held in Sita Ram and others v. State of Haryana and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 14188 of 1997, decided on March 24, 1998, that in case the pay/pay scale of a particular person is revised retrospectively by virtue of an order of the court or by the Government, then in such an eventuality the concerned incumbent is entitled to an opportunity to opt for a date with effect from which the revised pay scale should be given.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition in the same terms as the aforesaid Civil Writ Petition No. 14188 of 1997.
Consequently, we allow the petitioners to give fresh option of date within one month for the revision of their pay scales and if they do give the fresh options, then their pay scale be accordingly revised but the arrears so calculated would be confined to three years and two months prior to the filing of the present writ petition which was filed on November 17, 1997.
If fresh options are given by the petitioners as aforesaid, the respondents will consider the case of the revision of their pay accordingly within a period of six months of the receipt of the options."
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that this case is fully covered by the judgment aforesaid inasmuch as the petitioner was granted selection grade on October 31, 1995, with retrospective effect from April 1, 1981, which resulted in the revision of his pay from April 1, 1981.
The earlier option which the petitioner exercised for the date w.e.f.
which the pay scale should be revised as per the revised pay scale was given prior to October 26, 1995.
3.
In view of the abovesaid judgment, we are of the opinion that the petitioner would be entitled to revised option from the date w.e.f.
which her pay scale should be revised in the revised pay scales.
4.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition in the same terms as in C.W.P.
No. 16988 of 1997.
However, the arrears of pay/pension will be confined to three years and two months prior to the filing of the present writ petition, which was filed on August 22, 1998.
Petition allowed.