RL Anand, J - Sangat Singh Bawa, retired Principal, District Institution of Educational Training, Ferozepur City, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus seeking directions of this court for the respondent-State of Punjab to release the balance amount of Rs. 25,000/- out of gratuity admissible and payable to him by quashing the impugned order dated 30101995, Annexure P-3, passed by the respondent under rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (Vol. II), being unconstitutional, void and in- operative.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he retired on 31.8.1993 as Principal, District Institution of Educational Training, Ferozepur City, on attaining the age of superannuation after putting in 37 years of service in the Education Department in various capacities.
He remained posted as District Education Officer (Primary), Hoshiarpur, during the year 1987-88 and in that capacity, he was concerned with the implementation of the Central Scheme named `Operation Black' Board as circulated by the Joint Secretary, Schools, Education, Govt. of India, to all the Education Secretaries of all the State Governments, with a view to eliminate disparity in the education system to bring about improvement in the quality of publicly-funded schools at the level of primary education.
The petitioner honestly and to the best of his ability implemented the scheme in District Hoshiarpur and meticulously followed the instructions issued in this behalf.
He, in the discharge of his functions, incurred displeasure of high er functionaries of the Department, including the then Minister.
In that context, some complaints were manipulated against the petitioner alleging that he had committed irregularities in the purchases made by him.
A charge-sheet was served upon him on 1731993 by the Secretary of the Education Department under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The petitioner submitted his reply to the charge-sheet denying the imputation of misconduct and pleading innocence with a specific plea that there was no violation of any of the rules and instructions of the Govt. in the matter of purchases made by him under the said Scheme.
The State Govt. ignoring the reply of the petitioner and vide order dated 3151993, appointed Shri ML Sachdeva, Deputy Director, Secondary Education, as the Inquiry Officer.
Shri Sachdeva did not submit any inquiry report.
The petitioner was not apprised of any report having been made by this officer nor he was supplied with any copy of the report till he retired from service on 31.8.1993.
It is the case of the petitioner that earlier to the service of the charge-sheet dated 1731993, the department handed over the inquiry to the Vigilance Bureau and vide letter dated 611993, Inspector, Vigilance Bureau, informed the petitioner that a regular inquiry No. 3 dated 4121992 has been registered against him.
The petitioner was served with the statement of allegations with regard to the alleged irregularities.
He submitted reply dated 121993 refuting the allegations of the Vigilance Bureau.
He also made subsequent representation dated 2231993 and stated that he had not committed any irregularity.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that he was not informed or associated in any manner by the Vigilance Bureau in connection with inquiry No. 3 dated 4121992 registered by it.
However, the petitioner, to his surprise, received a show cause notice dated 281995 from the Joint Secretary wherein a reference was made to the service of charge-sheet dated 1731993 upon the petitioner and his reply dated 24.4.1993 and also to the inquiry conducted by the Vigilance Department and also to the receipt of a report dated 2161995 vide which the petitioner was held guilty of the commission of irregularities in the matter of purchases made in the implementation of the said Scheme.
It was also mentioned in the show-cause notice that the report of the inquiry has been accepted and it revealed that the petitioner had caused loss to the Govt. to the tune of Rs. 25,00090 by abusing his position while making purchases of the books and other articles.
The petitioner submitted the reply to the show cause notice dated 2181995.
He refuted the allegations and the conclusion of the inquiry report and re-iterated that he did not commit any irregularity.
Ignoring the reply and without supplying the copy of the inquiry report, the Principal Secretary to the Govt., Department of Education passed the impugned order dated 30101995 directing that a sum of Rs. 25,00090 be recovered from the gratuity of the petitioner under rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (Vol. II).
The petitioner submitted that this order is vague as there is no indication how the calculation was made to the tune of Rs. 25,00090.
With the above broad allegations, the petitioner has prayed that directions be issued to the respondent for the release of Rs. 25,000/-, which has been withheld from the amount of his gratuity.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the State, who has denied the allegations and the case set up by the State is that the petitioner, while purchasing the books under the Scheme Operation Black Board did not follow due procedure and guide-lines and caused a loss of Rs. 25,00090 to the State and this fact was brought to the notice of the Department by the Vigilance Department.
The respondent pleaded that the petitioner was charge-sheeted due to the irregularities committed by him and after considering his reply to the charge-sheet as unsatisfactory, as Inquiry Officer was appointed for departmental inquiry against him.
The Department of Vigilance also registered a regular inquiry No. 3/1992 regarding the same charges and it has been proved that the petitioner is fully responsible for the loss of Rs. 25,00090 which was deducted from his gratuity.
It was also submitted that the Department of Vigilance was also making inquiry against the petitioner and for that reason the Administrative department did not initiate any action of its own.
Rather it extended full cooperation to the Inquiry Officer of the Vigilance Department.
It was maintained by the respondent that full opportunity was given to the petitioner.
In para-7 of the reply, the stand of the State was categorical that as per the record the enquiry was made under rules and full opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend himself and after following the due procedure the enquiry report was submitted by the Vigilance Department and on the basis of that report, a sum of Rs. 25,00090 was deducted from the gratuity of the petitioner.
After the receipt of the report of the Vigilance Department, the petitioner was served with a show cause notice.
His reply was considered and, thereafter, the impugned order, Annexure P-3, was passed.
Thus, the short stand of the respondent is that proper procedure was adopted by the Vigilance Department in regular inquiry No. 3/1992, the principles of natural justice have been complied with and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any amount.
4.
In support of his case, the petitioner has placed on record Annexure P-1, the show cause notice dated 281995, which was served upon him by the State Govt. vide which he was called upon to show-cause why a sum of Rs. 25,00090 be not recovered from him, out of his gratuity under rule 2.2(b).
Annexure P-2 is the reply to the show cause notice.
Annexure P-3 is the impugned order vide which the recovery of the said amount was ordered to be made by the department.
Annexure P-4 are the guide-lines issued by the Director, Department of Education (Primary Section) to all the District Education Officers of the State.
5.
Respondent has also placed on record the copy of the order dated 1111995, passed in CWP 3995 of 1994.
In this petition, the petitioner had claimed the retiral benefits.
It was made clear by the State during the course of those proceedings that all the retiral benefits in favour of the petitioner, except Rs. 25,000/-, which were not released in view of the orders passed in disciplinary proceedings, have been released.
Annexure R-2 is the copy of the letter issued by the Vigilance Deptt.
in the name of the Secretary to Govt. Punjab, in which it has been informed that on inquiry, it is revealed that the petitioner without the consultation of the members of the Committee, placed orders for the purchase of the material to private firms without quotations and without obtaining NOCs.
from the approved sources, under his signatures and has, thus, violated the instructions of the Govt.
Besides, he purchased books at the rate of Rs. 50/- each whereas the purchase was to be effected up to Rs. 45/- and, thus, the petitioner has misused his powers and put the Govt. to a loss to the tune of Rs. 25,00090.
6.
I have heard Mr. Paramjit Batta, counsel for the petitioner and Ms. SK Bhatia, DAG, Punjab, on behalf of the State, and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the order, Annexure P-3, passed by the respondent-authorities is illegal because the petitioner has not been afforded opportunity to associate himself in the departmental proceedings either at the level of the Govt. or at the level of the Vigilance Deptt.
The counsel submitted that it is the case of the respondent-State that the departmental inquiry which was at one stage initiated against the petitioner, did not reach to the logical conclusion because of the registration of vigilance inquiry No. 3/1992 and in that inquiry also, the petitioner was not afforded any opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses of the department.
He has not led any evidence in rebuttal to the evidence of the department and, therefore, any finding made by the Inquiry Officer in the regular inquiry No. 3/1992 is not binding upon the petitioner.
Also, there is no basis to show how the Vigilance Department calculated the loss of Rs. 25,00090.
8.
As against this, the learned counsel for the State submitted that it is the categorical stand of the State that the inquiry conducted by the Vigilance Deptt.
was according to rules and full opportunity was given to the petitioner to defend himself.
After following the due procedure, the inquiry report was submitted by the Vigilance Deptt.
to the State Govt. and it was found that on account of the default of the petitioner, a loss to the tune of Rs. 25,00090 has been caused to the State and, therefore, this amount has been deducted from the gratuity of the petitioner.
Ms. Bhatia also maintained that in this case only the principles of natural justice were required to be followed as it was a case of minor penality.
9.
After hearing the rival contentions of the parties, this court is of the considered opinion that the present petition is totally devoid of any merit.
The petitioner made a detailed representation/reply to the show cause notice, Annexure P-1.
It was nowhere alleged by him that he was not associated by the Vigilance Deptt.
in the regular inquiry No. 3/1992.
On the contrary, it is the specific stand of the State that regular inquiry conducted by the Vigilance Deptt.
was according to the rules.
The petitioner was associated in that inquiry.
In this view of the matter, it has to be inferred that the inquiry conducted by the Vigilance Deptt.
was in accordance with the procedure and on the basis of the recommendations made by the Vigilance Deptt.
a show cause notice was served upon the petitioner as the State Govt. wanted to recover the same and it was a case of minor punishment, the principles of natural justice were required to be complied with.
A reading of the show cause notice, Annexure P-1, would show that the petitioner was apprised of the allegations proved against him.
It was informed to the petitioner that during the year 1987-88, a sum of Rs. 22,39,045/- was given as grant under the "Operation Black Board" Scheme for the improvement of the buildings and in the level of education in 313 schools in the blocks of Dasuya and Mukerian in district Hoshiarpur.
The petitioner constituted a Committee but he did not obtain the advise of the Committee and placed the orders under his own signatures for the various purchases and this act of the petitioner was in violation of the instructions issued by the State Govt. Also it was informed to the petitioner that the price of the books to be purchased by him would not be more than Rs. 45/- but the petitioner paid more than Rs. 50/- as the price of each book as result of which, he by his own act and conduct, caused a loss of Rs. 25,00090 to the Govt.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the petitioner was kept under dark.
The petitioner tried to justify his act.
He submitted his reply to the show cause notice in the shape of Annexure P-2 but he did not specifically deny that he never participated in the inquiry conducted by the Vigilance Deptt.
The Order, Annexure P-3, cannot be held to be cryptic.
It is a self-speaking order in which there is re-iteration of facts and also to the effect that the petitioner was given full opportunity to give his explanation.
Order, Annexure P-3, shows that there was full application of mind on the part of the State-authorities.
In this view of the matter, the impugned order, Annexure P-3, cannot be held to be illegal and violative of the principles of natural justice.
10.
Counsel for the petitioner relied upon Managing Director, ECIL Hyderabad, etc. etc. v B Karunakar etc. etc., AIR 1994 SC 1074 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) and submitted that the petitioner was entitled to the copy of the report submitted by the disciplinary authority and the non-supply of the copy of the same amounts to denial of reasonable opportunity.
This judgment cannot come to the rescue of the petitioner.
Present was a case of minor penalty where only the principles of natural justice were required to be followed.
The show cause notice was an elaborate one and it contained all the particulars of the report of the Inquiry Officer.
11.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.