Satya Brata Sinha, J - The question which arises for consideration in this application is as to whether in the facts and circumstances of this case Rule 55(4) of West Bengal Service Rules, Part-I (hereinafter called and referred to for the sake of brevity as the said Act) is attracted.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Jute Field Assistant in the scale of Rs. 125-200 on 991963.
The said scale of pay was revised and a new Intermediate Selection Grade at Rs. 370-500 was granted.
The petitioner contends that the posts of Agricultural Overseer, Agricultural Demonstrator, Field Assistant, Field Man, Jute Field Assistant, Fertilizer Demonstrator, VIW (Jute), Agricultural Assistant (Field), Agricultural Inspector and all other posts constitute the same cadre.
According to the petitioner, the names of Janaranjan Kundu, Jamini Bhusan Sinha, Haran Chandra Mukherjee and Chittaranjan Das were appearing in Serial Nos. 605, 606, 607 and 608 as they had joined the post of Gram Sevak in August, 1964.
All the aforementioned posts were redesignated as Krishi Projukti Sahayak.
He thereafter was promoted to Grade-A of Krishi Projukti Sahayak with effect from 141981 and his scale of pay was refixed with effect from 191987 in the scale of pay of Rs. 590/-.
According to the petitioner, a Joint Gradation List was to be published in terms of the order of the Governor dated 25th October, 1980.
The petitioner contends that his pay was to be refixed but the private respondents are getting a higher scale of pay.
The learned Tribunal held :-  "The petitioner was awarded New Intermediate Selection Grade benefit with effect from 191978 and his pay was fixed at Rs. 370/- pm with effect from 191978 in his original cadre i.e. cadre of Jute Field Assistants, whereas, Shri Mukherjee was given the benefit of New Intermediate Selection Grade from 181974, i.e. much earlier in his original cadre, the cadre of Gram Sevak.
His pay was also fixed at Rs. 415/- w.e.f.
191978.
This being fact, the petitioner though senior in respect of the date of joining, but was drawing lesser pay than Shri Somnath Mukherjee in the original cadre."
As regard, the order dated 24th October, 1980 as regard preparation of the Joint Gradation List it was held:-  "Under para 5 of the said memo, it has been stated that the employees even after constitution of the cadre of Krishi Projukti Sahayak will continue to receive their pay, allowances from the respective Budget Heads as usual.
There was no change in the scale of pay.
After the ROPA Rules, 1987 the pay of the petitioner as well as of Sri Somnath Mukherjee was refixed, but the difference of pay which existed earlier continued to exist.
This does not attract provisions of Rule 55(4), WBSR Pt-1 read with Memorandum No. 13250-F dated Calcutta November 7, 1983 as the petitioner was drawing lesser pay prior to refixation."
It was submitted that in view of the provisions contained in Rule 55(4) of the said Rules, the learned Tribunal erred in passing the impugned order.
It was also submitted that as the cadres of all concerned merged by reason of an executive instruction issued in 1980, the respondents acted illegally in directing payment of a higher grade to others by an order passed in 1982 with retrospective effect from 1978.
This case appears to be concluded by two Division Bench decisions of this Court.
In State of West Bengal v. Gobinda Nath Dey and others, FMAT No. 3346 of 1994 disposed of on 1051999 since reported in 1999(4) SCT 299 (Cal.)
: CLT 1999(3) HC 495, a Division Bench of this Court corum (SB Sinha and SN Bhattacharjee, JJ) relying on various decisions of the Apex Court held :-  "A bare perusal of the said rule will clearly show that the same applies only in a case of promotions.
In the instant case, the Muharrirs had not been promoted to the post of Lower Division Clerk, but they had merely been redesignated by the State.
Such redesignation of post or merger of cadre is within the domain of State in terms of its rule making power of Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India or Article 162 thereof."
3.
The question as to whether re-designation of the Muharrirs was permissible in law came up for construction before the Apex Court in State of West Bengal v. Subal Chandra Das and others, reported in 1996(2) SCT 543 (SC) : 1996(7) SCC 191, wherein it was clearly held that such re-designation is permissible and by reason of such re-designation on intermediate scale of pay can be granted to LDCs and UDCs who were recruited directly.
The contention that the LDCs are entitled to higher scale of pay was rejected stating : -  "The contention of Sri Verma is that Muharrirs, who were holding lower scale of pay prior to their being fused into the category as LDC, are now getting higher scale of pay as LDCs while the direct recruited LDCs are stagnated at the same scale of pay.
Therefore, the High Court was justified in directing to create intermediate scale of pay.
We find no force in the contention.
It is seen that once Muharrirs have been redesignated as LDCs and fused into the category of LDCs all become a class.
It would appear that in an earlier litigation filed by the parties, inter se promotion between the Muharrirs and LDCs and UDCs was considered and the High Court in a writ petition had directed the Government to prescribe 1:1 ratio between Muharrirs and LCCs for promotion to the post of UDCs.
The State Government had acted upon and issued rules in that behalf.
Therefore, each source, until exhausted, has channel of promotion to UDC within their respective 50% quota.
On the Muharrirs being integrated as LDCs, no further distinction or discrimination in the scale of pay or promotion chances between Muharrirs and the direct recruit LDCs is maintainable.
All are now entitled to get the same scale of pay and other service benefits.
It would appear that in some instances some of the Muharrirs, due to length of service, are getting higher pay."
It was further noticed :-  "It is, therefore, evident that the Apex Court has clearly held that Rule 55(4) of the Rules would not be applicable in a case of this nature and re- designation of Muharrirs was permissible in law.
It is now a well settled principle of law that only because of a fortuitous circumstance a person at one point of time was in the lower scale of pay by itself would not create any right in his seniors to a higher salary."
In Union of India v. ES Soundara Rajan, reported in AIR 1980 SC 959, upon which Mr. Dey himself has relied on, the Supreme Court stated the law in the following terms :-  "Indeed a series of other decisions right down to 1977(1) SCR 377 at 389 have taken the view that even though two categories may be close cousins they are quite distinct.
There cannot be any discrimination spelt out merely because they have been dealt with in regard to their salary scales or the conditions of service differently.
Equity postulates identity of the class and once that is absent, discrimination cannot arise.
This argument appeals to us and we are not prepared to agree with the conclusion reached by Andhra Pradesh High Court so long as Commercial Clerks and ASMs/SMs fell into two different categories and this seems to be plain and is contained in the narration of facts by the Andhra Pradesh High Court as well as Madras High Court.
It is equally important to remember the well established proposition that there cannot be a case of discrimination merely because fortuitous circumstances arising out of some peculiar developments or situations create advantages or disadvantages for one group or the other although in the earlier stages they were, more or less alike.
If one class has not been singled out for special treatment, the mere circumstance of advantages accruing to one or the other cannot result in breach of Article 14 of the Constitution.
On this basis we should agree with the reasoning of the High Court of Madras and so declare the law correctly."
Thus, the contention of the respondents to the effect that they have been discriminated against cannot be held to be availed contention.
In Union of India v. OP Saxena, reported in 1997(3) SCT 550 (SC) : 1997(6) SCC 369, the Apex Court inter alia held that the seniors are not entitled to stepping up of pay as a matter of right.
4.
This aspect of the matter again came up for consideration before the Apex Court in Union of India v. R Swaminathan, reported in 1997(4) SCT 467 (SC) : 1997 SC 3554, wherein upon consideration of the rule relating to fixation of pay in terms of rule 22(i)(a) of the fundamental rules, it was held that they are exits of the seniors for stepping up of pay dealing with a contention that all (over all ?)
seniority for regular promotion is maintained.
This matter again was considered by the Apex Court in Union of India v. M Suryanarayana Rao, reported in 1998(3) SCT 817 (SC) : 1998(6) SCC 400 and Union of India v. P Jagdish, reported in 1997(2) SCT 554 (SC) : 1997(3) SCC 176.
This aspect of the matter has also been considered by the Central Administrative Tribunal in Jiban Kumar Bose v. Union of India, reported in 1998(2) CLT 23.
The said decision was followed by another Division Bench of this court corum Ruma Pal, J (as she then was) and SN Bhattacharjee, J in Keshab Chandra Saha and others v. State of West Bengal and others, reported in 2000(2) SCT 203 (Cal.)
(D.B.)
: 2000(1) CLJ 197 wherein it was held :-  "It is clear from the second part of the Rule that the benefit shall not be admissible where pay drawn by the Senior Officer in the lower post before promotion to the higher was also less than that of his junior.
Admittedly, the petitioners do not get the benefit of NISG scale as Lower Division Assistant and it was granted to Anil Baran Dey.
So, in the feeder post Anil Baran Dey enjoyed higher pay."
Pal, J in a concurrent but separate judgment observed :-  "The decision recognised that a junior could get higher pay in circumstances which are rationally justifiable.
The question before us, therefore, is whether the grant of higher pay to the respondent No. 11 could rationally be justified even though he was promoted to the post of Upper Division Assistant subsequent to the respondents.
In the case of Government of AP and others v. M Pandurang and others, reported in 1996(2) SCT 226 (SC) : 1996(7) SCC 11, the Supreme Court found that one of the juniors had been granted selection grade scale of pay, and that by necessary consequence, he would draw higher scale of pay, though he happened to be junior to others in the promoted post.
The Supreme Court held that in such a situation there was no question of granting parity of scale of pay to the seniors working in the cadre."
5.
In the instant case a finding of fact has been arrived at that the concerned employees were getting a higher scale of pay than the petitioner even in 1978.
Assuming for the sake of argument even if it be accepted that a higher pay was wrongly directed to be granted, the petitioners cannot get the benefit of such illegality.
Furthermore, no relief can be granted in favour of the petitioner as the concerned employees have not been impleaded as parties in the writ petition.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this application which dismissed accordingly but in the facts and circumstances of this there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.