B Akbar Basha Khadiri, J - This CMA has arisen in this way :  The appellant herein, ESI Corporation passed an order under Section 45-A of Employees' State Insurance Act (hereinafter called in short as `ESI Act') directing the respondent to pay contribution towards the employees engaged for loading and unloading the furniture.
The respondent SR.S.
Brothers are the dealers in Godrej Products, Furniture and office equipments.
For the purpose of their business, they had to load and unload furniture in lorries, for which purpose, skilled labourers were to be engaged.
The respondent engaged an independent agency run by one Meenakshi Sundaram to send skilled persons for loading and unloading.
The ESI Corporation held those persons also as employees of the respondent and directed the respondent to pay contribution for these persons also.
The respondent preferred a petition under Section 75 of the ESI Act for a declaration that the order passed by the ESI Corporation in this regard is illegal.
2.
The learned trial Judge, after enquiry came to the conclusion that the persons employed for loading and unloading are not the direct employees of the respondent, that the payments were not made to them directly, that the payments were made to them through separate agency situate in different places, and that there is nothing to show that the employees used for loading and unloading were persons under the supervision and control of the respondent herein and accordingly allowed the claim made by the respondent herein.
As against the order, the ESI Corporation has come forward with the instant CMA  3.
Heard both the sides.
Section 2(9) of the ESI Act recites as under :  "(9) "employee" means any person employed for wages in or in connection with the work of a factory or establishment to which this Act applies and - (i) who is directly employed by the principal employer on any work of, or incidental or preliminary to or connected with the work of, the factory or establishment, whether such work is done by the employee in this factory or establishment or elsewhere; or (ii) who is employed by or through an immediate employer in the premises of the factory or establishment or under the supervision of the principal employer or his agent on work which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory or establishment or which is preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of the factory or establishment; or (iii) whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal employer by the person whose services are so lent or let on hire has entered into a contract of service;  and includes any person employed for wages on any work connected with the administration of the factory or establishment or any part, department or branch thereof or with the purchase of raw materials for, or the distribution or sale of the products of, the factory or establishment; or any person engaged as an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices Act, 1961, or under the standing orders of the establishment, but does not include - a) any member of the Indian Naval, Military, or Air Forces, or b) any person so employed whose wages (excluding remuneration for over-time work) exceed such wages as may be prescribed by the Central Government; Provided that an employee whose wages (excluding remuneration for over-time work) exceed such wages as may be prescribed by the Central Government at any time after and not before the beginning of the contribution period, shall continue to be an employee until the end of that period."
4.
Section 2(9) contemplates three categories of employees:  i) Those who are directly employed by the principal employer in any work of or incidental or preliminary to or connected with the work of the factory or establishment whether such work is done by the employees in the factory or establishment or elsewhere are in first category.
By the amending Act 44 of 1996 the employees working on any work connected with the administration of the factory or establishment or any part, department or branch thereof, or with the purchase of raw materials for the factory or establishment or for the distribution have been specifically included in this category.
ii) Those who are employed by or through an immediate employer are employees of second category.
In order to come within the purview of the Act those persons must work in the premises of the factory or establishment or under the supervision of the principal employer or his agent on work which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory or establishment or which is preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of the factory or establishment.
iii) Those whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal employer by the persons with whom the persons whose services are so lent or let has entered into contract of service are in third category.
5.
The learned counsel for the appellant argued that the payment made for loading and unloading, even though entrusted to different agencies, would amount to wages within the meaning of Section 2(22) of the ESI Act.
Section 2(22) of the ESI Act recites as under:  "Wages" means all remuneration paid or payable in cash to an employee, if the terms of the contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled and includes any payment to an employee in respect of any period of authorised leave, lock-out, strike which is not illegal or lay-off and other additional remuneration, if any, paid at intervals not exceeding two months, but does not include - a) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund, or under this Act; b) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession; c) any sum paid to the person employed to defray special expenses entailed on him by the nature of his employment; or d) any gratuity payable on discharge."
6.
According to the respondent, no wages are paid to the loadmen directly, but the independent contractor who engages the loadmen receives liquidated sum every month irrespective of the number of the employees sent by him for loading and unloading purpose.
The learned counsel had also contended that the payment of wages alone is not the criterion in deciding whether such employees come within the purview of the ESI scheme.
According to the learned counsel, the main ingredient to be considered is whether the employer has supervision and effective control over such loadmen.
7.
The learned counsel for the respondent cited the decision reported in Rajkamal Transport & another v. The ESI Corporation, Hyderabad, 1996-II-LLJ-435 (SC).
In that case Rajkamal Transport, engaged in carriage business engaged certain Hamalis for loading and unloading purpose, they collected by charges for loading and unloading from the customers and paid the amount to Hamalis.
In that case, their Lordships of the Supreme Court of India have held that the source from which the payments emanate is not a main test to be considered, but what is important is if the Hamalis work in connection with the work of establishment.
Their Lordships have held that the loading and unloading works were done with their direction and control.
In that case, the Hamalis were directly engaged by the carrier himself, though payment was collected and paid through the customers.
It was evident that the employer had direct control and supervision over the work of Hamalis.
But, the fact of the case on hand is different, the loadmen were the employees of the different agency.
They were directed to go to the respondent concern to load and unload furniture, office equipments etc. An independent agency was employed by the respondent to send loadmen because of their skill in loading and unloading work.
The employer may not be aware of the number of workmen engaged by the contractor.
The employer may not know the names and other details of these persons.
He was not aware of the amount payable to each of the workmen.
He could not have insisted on the attendance of any personality at any time.
He had no control over the manner in which the work was preformed by them.
There is nothing to show that any master and servant relationship existed between the loaders and employer.
As such the loaders are casual employees deputed to the respondent concern by an independent contractor, to whom the payments were made.
Under these circumstances, it cannot said that the loadmen would fall within the category (iii) referred to in paragraph No. 4 of this judgment.
I do not find any error apparent in the findings of the trial Judge.
This CMA is therefore dismissed.
No costs.
Application dismissed.