ML Singhal, J. (Oral) - Amrik Singh was working as Pump Driver in the PWD Public Health Department.
He was retired on 30111989 on attaining the age of 58 years.
He filed suit for declaration claiming that he was a Class-IV government servant and when he was a Class-IV government servant, he could not have been retired at the age of 58 years but was entitled to continue till he attained the age of 60 years.
He joined service on 19121952 as work charge pump driver in the erstwhile State of PEPSU.
It was a Class IV post.
After integration of the State of PEPSU into the neighbouring State of Punjab on 1111956 he was absorbed as pump driver in the successor State.
On 27.1.1960, he was regularised.
He was confirmed.
It was alleged that the conditions of service could not be varied to his disadvantage after the integration of the State of PEPSU into the State of Punjab.
This is what has been enjoined by the provisions of Section 115(7) of States Re-organisation Act, 1956.
It was further alleged that the post of pump driver was all along a Class IV post and it was never a Class III post.
2.
Defendants contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that post of pump driver was a Class III post in Punjab and as such he was rightly retired at the age of 58 years.
3.
Plaintiff's suit was decreed by Additional Senior Sub Judge, Patiala on 3111993.
Additional District Judge, Patiala dismissed the appeal of the State of Punjab vide order dated 181996.
4.
Aggrieved from these decrees, State of Punjab has knocked the door of this Court through this regular second appeal.
5.
In this appeal, the only point that needs consideration is whether the post of pump driver was Class IV post in the State of PEPSU and whether it was Class IV post in the State of Punjab.
After the integration of the State of PEPSU into the State of Punjab on 1111956, the conditions of the service could not be varied to his disadvantage.
It is undisputed that when he was appointed in the year 1953 in State of PEPSU, the post of pump driver was a Class IV post.
In the State of Punjab, the post of pump driver has been treated as Class IV post.
One Ravinder Singh, who was pump driver, was retired on 31.12.1978 at the age of 60 years and he gave affidavit Ex. PA, which was not controverted by the State.
The Governor of Punjab issued general Notification directing that drivers shall be treated as Class IV employees, who were in the service of PEPSU State on 1111956.
That Notification reads as follows :-  "In partial modification of the Government order, dated the 15/16th June, 1959, and in exercise of powers conferred by the provisions of Article 309 of the Constitution of India the Governor of Punjab is pleased to order that Drivers Chauffours who were in service in the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union immediately before the Ist of November, 1956, shall continue to be treated as inferior Govt. servants (Class IV) except that for purposes of TA only they shall be regarded as Ministerials (Class III)."
6.
Post of pump driver has to be treated as Class IV post.
Merely because there was revision in the pay of pump drivers that does not mean the post of pump driver was raised to Class III status.
Even if there is upgradation of the post from Class III to Class IV, the post will nonetheless remain a Class III post.
There is no evidence what is the channel of promotion from the post of pump driver.
There is no evidence that the plaintiff ever climbed the ladder of promotion and went higher in the hierarchy or there is any hierarchy.
It is true that, if a Class IV is promoted to Class III post, he is not entitled to the benefits available to a Class IV post.
He cannot claim to continue till he reaches the age of 60 years as held by this Court in Krishan Lal Aggarwal v. State of Punjab, 1994(1) SCT 382 (P&H).
7.
In my opinion, the Courts below took correct view of the matter and gave the relief which the plaintiff had asked for.
There is no force in this appeal.
This appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.