Arun Kumar Goel, J - Petitioners, numbering 155 have filed this writ petition with a prayer to issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to allow them to perform their duties as casual laboureres; with a further direction to regularise the services in the department as well as prohibiting the respondents from dispensing with their services as casual labourers.
2.
Backdrop of this case according to petitioners is that they were employed with Integrated Water Shed Development Project and all of them are members of union under the name and style of "Integrated Water Shed Development Project, Hill Employees Union, Jammu (J&K)".
This Union is a registered trade union and a copy of the certificate of its registration has been placed on record as Annexure "A" to the petition.
Further case of the petitioners is that they regularly go to the office and mark their presence but they apprehend their dis-engagement by the respondents without any valid reason.
In these circumstances it has been mentioned that respondents may be directed to permit the petitioners to continue performing their duties and also pay their wages.
3.
On the other hand stand of the respondents in their objections filed to the writ petition is that petitioners were casual labourers and not daily wagers.
So there is no question of their being regularised.
A writ is stated to be not maintainable since no relief can be claimed by the petitioners as casual labourers because the very nomenclature indicates that they are engaged only as and when the need arises from time to time.
Besides this, it is also pleaded by the respondents that there is no statutory right whereby State is under an obligation to allow the petitioners to continue in job.
The right of petitioners to maintain a writ of mandamus was also disputed since there is no statutory right in their favour leading to a corresponding duty upon the respondents as claimed.
4.
While admitting that the services of the petitioners were engaged, it has been pleaded that Integrated Water Shed Development Project being a World Bank Aided Project was started during the year 1990 and 1991 and was to come to an end on and with effect from 3061997.
But one year extension having been given by the World Bank, it continued upto June, 1998.
In these circumstances it is clearly pleaded that no casual labourer can be engaged after 30.6.1998, and till this date wages of all the casual labourers have been paid as fixed under the rules wherever engaged.
Thus in this background it was submitted that the petitioners have no right to insist upon the State of convert casual labourers into permanent service.
Rejoinder was filed to this reply of State, and according to para-3 under the heading `Preliminary' it has been stated that the petitioners have acquired the status of daily wagers because for all this period since the date of their engagement they are regularly performing their duties, as such they cannot be now termed as casual labourers as were initially called.
While replying to paragraph-9 of the objections it has been stated by the petitioners that even after June, 1998 Project is still existing and continuing.
Further case of the petitioners in their rejoinder is that they have information that now again there has been expansion of Project and after its expansion the petitioners have been allowed to work.
So they have also got every right to get their wages.
5.
In view of the admitted position of this case that the services of the petitioners on their own showing in the writ petition were engaged as casual labourers, that too in a Project and for the purpose of regularisation SRO 64 of 1994 contains instructions of the Government whereunder in a proper case services of daily rated employees are liable to be regularised.
There is no material to show that on the appointed day petitioners had completed the requisite number of years, and rightly so because the services of the petitioners were engaged by the respondents depending upon the requirement to protect plantation carried out under the World Bank Aided Project.
It may also be appropriate to notice here that as and when the Project comes to an end, its continuance cannot be asked as a matter of right as claimed by the petitioners because there are no funds available with the respondents under any Scheme/Project funded either by the State Government or by the Central Government.
Stand of the respondents is clear and specific which has not been repudiated by pointedly controverting the same in the rejoinder to it filed by the petitioners.
6.
Averments made are general in nature.
In AIR 1992 SC 789 : 1992(1) SCT 425 (SC), Delhi Development Horticulture Employees Union v. Delhi Administration, Delhi, while considering the engagement of certain persons under Jawahar Rozgar Yojna, the Supreme Court made the following observations while declining the claim of regularisation of their employment :  "13......
This country has so far not found it feasible to incorporate the right to livelihood as a fundamental right in the Constitution.
This is because the country has so far not attained the capacity to guarantee it, and not because it considers it any the less fundamental to life.
Advisedly, therefore, it has been placed in the Chapter on Directive Principles Article 41 of which enjoins upon the State to make effective provision for securing the same "within the limits of its economic capacity and development".
Thus even while giving the direction to the State to ensure the right to work, the Constitution-makers thought it prudent not to do so without qualifying it.
14....... No fault could, therefore, be found with the limited object of the scheme given the limited resources at the disposal of the State.
Those employed under the scheme, therefore, could not ask for more than what the scheme intended to give them.
To get an employment under such scheme and to claim on the basis of the said employment, a right to regularisation is to frustrate the scheme itself.
No Court can be a party to such exercise.
It is wrong to approach the problems of those employed under such schemes with a view to providing them work.
These concepts, in the context of such schemes are both unwarranted and misplaced.
They will do more harm than good by depriving the many of the little income that they may get to keep them from starvation.
They would benefit a few at the cost of the may starving poor for whom the schemes are meant.
That would also force the State to wind up the existing schemes and forbid them from introducing the new ones, for want of resources.
This is not to say that the problems of the unemployed deserve no consideration or sympathy."
On analogy, this judgment squarely covers the present case.
7.
Petitioners in their rejoinder have stated that they have not been paid their wages for the last about seven months.
This rejoinder is supported with an affidavit dated 18th September, 1998.
On their own showing it is admitted case of the respondents that the life of the Project came to an end on 30.6.1998.
It is clarified that if till this date any of the petitioners had been working in the Project as per contemporaneous official record, he would be entitled to be paid his wages as a casual labourer for the period his services were availed by the respondents forthwith.
No other point is urged.
As a result of aforesaid discussion it is clear that there is no merit in this writ petition which is accordingly dismissed subject to direction of unpaid wages as aforesaid.
Interim order passed on 241997 is hereby vacated.
Petition dismissed.