SS Goindi, Member - The petitioner was employed as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways, Amritsar-I His services were terminated.
Aggrieved against the same he sought reference under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 6.7.1993 Annexure P-4 held that the termination of service was actually on the ground of misconduct but had been ordered without following procedure under Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Accordingly by the said award it was directed that the petitioner shall be reinstated in service with full back wages.
The State of Punjab questioned the said award through the present writ petition.
2.
During the pendency of the writ petition, however, the petitioner was reinstated in service by the respondents.
So the only question that survives for consideration is whether he is entitled to back wages.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, way back on June 2, 1999 had stated that the workman was prepared to give up 50% of the back wages awarded in his favour.
The matter was adjourned for approval by the Standing Committee headed by the Deputy Commissioner.
On the request of the State of Punjab, the matter was once again adjourned to 3181999 and lastly on 27.9.1999.
It is stated by Ms. Gurveen, learned AAG, Punjab, that according to the instructions received by her from the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Amritsar-I, the matter has not so far been decided by the Standing Committee.
We cannot afford to keep the matter pending because the relief to the petitioner is being unduly delayed.
His offer giving up 50% of the back wages is quite reasonable.
3.
We, therefore, direct that the respondents shall pay the remaining 50% of the back wages to the petitioner within three months from today failing which the said amount of 50% back wages payable to him shall carry interest @ 18% pa. with effect from 142000.
4.
This direction shall constitute a decree under section 21 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, and shall be meticulously complied with.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
Copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties free of cost within a week.
Orders accordingly.