RL Anand, J - SP Sharma, ex-Boiler Superintendent of M/s Haryana Breweries Limited (a Govt. of Haryana Undertaking), has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order Annexure P-4, against the respondent vide which the appeal of the petitioner was dismissed.
The petitioner his sought further direction against the Board of the respondent to re-decide his appeal in accordance with law.
2.
The case, set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as Boiler Supervisor with the respondent on 25.12.1978 and was promoted as Boiler Superintendent on 25.8.1984.
He was placed under suspension on 7.7.1990 and after holding enquiry he was dismissed by the Managing Director vide order dated 831991.
The order of dismissal is Annexure P-1 on the record.
The case of the petitioner further is that the Board of Directors decided his appeal against him.
Since the order of dismissal was passed by the Managing Director, who was the punishing authority of the petitioner, therefore, the appeal lied with the Board of Directors of the respondent of which the Managing Director was one of its members and in this manner the Board in which the Managing Director (the punishing authority) is the member could not decide the appeal and it would tantamount to be the judge of his own cause.
It was further pleaded by the petitioner that he made a request to the respondent to grant him an opportunity for personal hearing but he was informed that his case will be taken up by the Board on 1151991 at 1100 am Unfortunately, on the said date and time he could not make himself available before the Board on account of his illness.
Resultantly, his appeal was dismissed by the Board which was allegedly influenced by Mrs. Rewa Nayyar, who was one of the effective participants in the meeting of the Board.
With these broad allegations, the petitioner has prayed for the quashment of the order Annexure P-4 vide which he was conveyed about the decision of the Board regarding the dismissal of his appeal.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent which filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondent, the decision of the Board was independent and on merits and it was not influenced by the participation of Mrs. Rewa Nayyar as there were four other Directors who applied their independent mind with regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.
The defence of the respondent further is that the charges against the petitioner were proved and the punishing authority gave an appropriate punishment when the petitioner was dismissed from service.
It is further pleaded that no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner.
It is further the case of the respondent that the petitioner filed representations against the decision of the Board and those representations were also dismissed on merits.
With this broad defence the respondent was prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, Advocate, for the petitioner, Mr. Amarjit Singh Chadha, Advocate, for the respondent and with the assistance of the learned counsel have gone through the record of.
the case.
5.
It is a common case of the parties that the order of dismissal of the services of the petitioner was passed by Mrs. Rewa Nayyar, who is an IAS officer.
It is also admitted during the course of submissions that Mrs. Rewa Nayyar participated in the meeting of the Board, which was held on 1151991.
In these circumstances, the only short point which survives for determination is whether a man should be judge of his own cause or not.
It is a settled principle of law that justice not only should be done but seem to have been done.
This accepted and universal principle of law has been made applicable to the departmental proceedings.
This Court cannot lose sight of the fact that a maximum penalty as possibly could be conceived under the law has been imposed upon the petitioner vide which his bread and butter has been deprived of.
In these circumstances, the expectation of the law becomes more.
Since Mrs. Rewa Nayyar participated in the meeting dated 1151991 and 3181991 therefore, the impugned order Annexure P-4 in the interest of justice and fair play deserves to be set aside.
6.
During the course of submissions it has also been brought to the notice of this Court that Mrs. Rewa Nayyar is no more the Managing Director of the respondent and she is also not a member of the Board of Directors.
In this view of the matter, the order Annexure P-4 is hereby set aside with clear observation that the existing Board shall have the right to pass a fresh order on the appeal filed by the petitioner under Rule 65.
The Board shall also give the opportunity to the petitioner for personal hearing and shall pass a speaking order within 3 months,  Petition allowed.