RL Anand, J - By this order, I dispose of two writ petitions No. 2883 of 1991 Constable Sukhvir Singh and others v. Union of India and others, and 2054 of 1992 Head Constable Raj Kumar and others v. Union of India and others, as in the opinion of this Court, both the writ petitions can be disposed of by one order because common questions of law and fact are involved.
2.
The brief facts of the case, we stated below, have been taken for CWP 2883 of 1991.
3.
The petitioners have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for the issuance of a writ of certiorari, prohibition, mandamus or any other order or writ seeking directions of this Court for the quashment of the orders, Annexure P-5 to P-7, and the case set up by the petitioners is that they retired from the Army before attaining the age of 55 years and, thereafter, they were employed with the Central Industrial Security Force and their pay was fixed under the general policy followed by the Government for re-fixation of pay of re- employed pensioners.
On 821983, the Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence decided that in case of those Ex-servicemen who retired before attaining the age of 55 years, the pension to the tune of Rs. 250/- in the case of service officers and in case of persons below commissioned officers rank, the entire pension was to be ignored in fixing their pay on re-employment.
It was also stipulated by the Govt. that the option would be called within six months from the date of the issuance of the notification.
The grouse of the petitioners is that it was incumbent upon the Govt. to circulate those orders and take the option of the employees, especially from the petitioners who had retired before attaining the age of 55 years before passing any adverse order against them.
It is further alleged by the petitioners that without complying with the principles of natural justice, orders Annexures P-5 to P-7, were passed and, as such, the same are not sustainable in the eyes of law as they have violated the principles of natural justice.
On these broad allegations, the petitioners have prayed for the issuance of the directions.
4.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply by way of affidavit.
The stand of the respondents is that there was no requirement of giving any notice before effecting recovery.
If the petitioners have taken undue advantage due to non-exercise of option, they cannot raise any grievance even to return back the unintended amount received by them.
5.
I have heard Mr. Vinod Sharma, counsel for the petitioners and Mr. PS Brar, counsel for the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
It is settled principle of law that pecuniary interest is a right in property.
Before a person is to be divested of any right, he is supposed to be heard as per the principles of natural justice.
Admittedly, the respondents, before effecting the recovery, have not adhered to the principles of natural justice.
No show cause notice was given to any of the petitioners as to why the amount should not be realised from them.
Also there was no notice to the petitioners before re-fixation of their pay.
In this view of the matter the impugned orders, Annexures P-5 and P-7 (in CPW 2883 of 1991) and Annexures P-5 and P-6 (in CWP 2054 of 1992) cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
7.
Resultantly, the impugned orders, Annexures P-5 to P-7 (in CWP 2883 of 1991) and Annexure P-5 and P-6 (in CWP 2054 of 1992) are hereby set aside with a clear observation that it shall not prevent the Government to realise the excess amount paid to the petitioners and order to re-fix their pay according to law but only after complying with the principles of natural justice before passing any adverse order.
The respondents shall also pass a speaking order.
Order accordingly.