JS Khehar, J - There was an indefinite strike by the employees of the Municipal Committees in Haryana.
The strike commenced from 16121996.
The work in the Municipal Committees was accordingly paralyzed.
It is in these circumstances, the Government decided to make appointments in place of regular employees of the Municipal Committees to tide over the situation.
For the aforesaid objective, various advertisements were issued by the Government.
The petitioners responded to these advertisements.
On their selection, they commenced to discharge their duties in various municipal committees during the subsistence of the strike.
It is admitted by the respondents in the written statement that the petitioners worked for December, 1996 to April, 1977.
Naturally on the conclusion of the strike, the petitioners were liable to be relieved.
2.
As a gesture of goodwill, the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Local Government Department, Chandigarh issued memorandum dated 1351997 conveying the decision of the Government wherein the Deputy Commissioners and Commissioners of Municipal Corporation, Faridabad were required to retain all regular employees recruited during the strike period.
Those employees who were recruited on ad hoc basis and on daily wage basis but against available vacancies, were to be adjusted seniority-wise against available vacancies.
Those who could not be adjusted for reason of non-availability of vacancies were to be accommodated against future vacancies on priority basis.
The decision of the Government contained in the memorandum dated 1351997 was again circulated for implementation by the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana to the Deputy Commissioners of the State vide his memorandum dated 641998.
3.
In furtherance of the decision of the State Government to absorb employees who voluntarily worked during the strike period in the Municipal Committees/Municipal Corporations in Haryana, the Deputy Commissioner Kurukshetra vide an order dated 6.7.1998 passed specific orders whereby the petitioners were absorbed against available vacancies.
A perusal of the order would show that those employees who are continuing in service would be entitled to back wages, however, those whose services had been terminated after the strike was called off would too be paid wages only with effect from the date of their absorption.
The terms and conditions of appointment contained in the memorandum dated 6.7.1998 are being extracted hereunder for facility of reference :-  "(a) Your character will be verified then only you will be considered for duty.
(b) If you are married ?
Then you have to give a declaration certified by Gazetted Officer that you have not more than one spouse living.
(c) You have to give in a declaration that you have not been removed from services and nor you have been punished by the Court.
(d) Revised Employees Conduct Rules 1966 will be applicable on you.
(e) You will be governed by the Civil Services Rules, directions of Govt. issued by the Govt. from time to time and Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982.
If the matter in question is not described in this letter will be decided by means of rules and Govt. orders which include administrative directions as well.
(f) Any false declaration by you at the time of appointment will lead to termination from service.
(g) Before giving the joining report you will have to produce health certificate from CMO, Kurukshetra.
(h) You will not be paid any TA for travelling undertaken for health inspector, joining duty or removal from service.
(i) Within a year of joining duty you will have to pass type test which involves typing in Hindi and English of 25 and 30 words per minute respectively.
You are not eligible for ever are (?)
in pay till you pass the type test.
(j) You will have to take an oath of allegiance to Indian Constitution.
(k) You are on probation for a period of two years.
This time can be increased as well.
If during probation your conduct is found to be unsatisfactory then your services may be terminated without any notice."
A perusal of the aforesaid terms shows that the appointments of the petitioners would be subject, inter alia, to their verification of character and antecedents and other conditions of service as are applicable to regular employees.
Significantly, the order of appointment/absorption stipulated that the petitioners would be on probation for a period of two years.
All these conditions coupled with the entitlement of the petitioners to draw salary in the regular pay scale lead to an irresistible conclusion that their appointment/absorption was on regular basis.
4.
Another memorandum dated 971998 was issued by the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana.
This memorandum was in continuation of the earlier memorandum dated 641998.
Paras (ii) and (iii) of the aforesaid memorandum are relevant for the present controversy and the said paras are accordingly extracted hereunder:  "(ii) The employees appointed on ad hoc/daily wages basis in Municipal Committees during strike may not be adjusted as regular, rather they may be considered as appointed on ad hoc basis.
Such employees will be regularised in the light of instructions issued by the Chief Secretary to Govt. Haryana meant for ad hoc employees in future.
(iii) If also the instructions of the department at the time of adjustment regular appointment has been given to the surplus staff appointed during strike, the orders issued by you be amended to the extent that the appointment is "Ad hoc" On the basis of subsequent memorandum of the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana dated 971998, the respondents issued the impugned order dated 1641999.
Gist of the same is obvious from para 2 thereof which is being reproduced hereunder :-  "This office had issued orders regarding your absorption on the post of Clerk/Octroi Mohirrir by means of the referred letter.
But now according to the revised directions received from the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana vide letter No. 3E-97/38/28701-719 dated 971998 it is made clear to you that your appointment on the posts of Clerk/Octroi Mohirrir by this office vide Memo.
No. 1652-72/L.F.A.
dated 871998 is considered as ad hoc appointment."
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the petitioners were absorbed as regular employees and, thus, were vested with certain vital rights.
Civil rights vested in the petitioners in furtherance of their absorption into service consequent upon the decision of the Government communicated by the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Government Haryana, Local Government Department vide his memo dated 1351997 had been divested by the impugned order dated 1641999 and their status had accordingly been changed by making them merely ad hoc appointees.
This alteration in the conditions of their service adversely affecting their rights has been made without affording them any opportunity of hearing.
6.
To buttress the aforesaid argument addressed by the learned counsel for the petitioners, reliance has been placed on NK Srivastava v.
M.C.D., 1991(1) SLR 727 : 1991(1) SCT 443 (Delhi) wherein by the impugned order, the order of regularisation of services of the petitioner was cancelled which had the effect of treating the petitioner as ad hoc and temporary employee.
Since this order had been passed without affording the petitioner any opportunity of hearing, the same was set aside as the action taken was held to be in violation of the rules of natural justice.
Reliance has also been placed on a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Anand Kumar v. Haryana Urban Development Authority, 1995(1) RSJ 230 : 1995(1) SCT 677 (P&H) (DB), wherein it was held that the order of regularisation of service passed had the effect of conferring valuable rights in the employees and that before such rights can be taken away, minimum which was required to be done was to give notice to the affected employees calling them upon to show cause why the order passed in their favour should not be recalled.
7.
It is, therefore, clear that after the petitioners had been absorbed in service and were vested with the rights flowing only to regular employees, it was incumbent upon the Authorities to comply with the principles of natural justice before depriving the petitioners of their valuable rights.
It is undisputed that the petitioners in this case have never been informed why their absorption into service has been modified so as to classify them as ad hoc employees.
It is, thus, clear that they have had no opportunity whatsoever to justify their continuation as regular employees after they had been duly absorbed into service in furtherance of the decision of the Government communicated by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana Local Govt. Department vide his memorandum dated 1351997.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the impugned order by which nature of appointment of the petitioners has been redefined as on ad hoc basis is clearly contrary to the principles of natural justice and as such, is quashed.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.