SB Sinha, A.C.J.
- This appeal is directed against a Judgment and order dated 12th December, 1997 whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by the respondent herein was allowed.
2.
The respondent is an employee of the Appellant No. 1.
He in his writ application prayed of the following reliefs :  "On the basis of the report enumerated above the following charges have been drawn up against you : (1) Having an excess collection of Rs. 9270 on a sale of Rs. 11305 including bag money; (2) Keeping unbooked of 5 (five) passengers of Rs. 070 fare stage each with some motive; (3) Violating Regualtion 25(2) of SBSTC Employee Service Regulations; (4) Performing duty negligently and carelessly and all these constituting misconduct."
3.
The petitioner filed his show-cause before the Managing Director of the First Appellant wherein he, inter alia, stated :  [Matter omitted in Regional Language.--Ed]  4.
Thereafter, a departmental proceeding was initiated whereafter the impugned order of revival as contained in Annexure `F' to the writ petition was passed which was the subject matter of writ petition filed by the respondent, wherein he was found guilty.
The learned trial Judge, inter alia, held that as along with the Chargesheet no list of documents as also list of witnesses had been served upon the petitioner, the entire disciplinary proceedings was vitiated.
The learned Trial Judge has also relied upon a decision of the Managing Director of ECIL v. B Karunakar, 1993(4) SCC 727 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC).
5.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant relying on or on the basis of a decision in Channabasappa Basappa Happali v. The State of Mysore, reported in AIR 1972 SC 32 submitted that where an admission of guilt has been made, even the disciplinary proceedings was not required to be initiated as no prejudice was caused by reason of non-supply of list of documents and witnesses.
It was further submitted that even if no proper enquiry had been held, the relief reinstating the petitioner with full back wages could not have been granted and in support thereof reliance has been placed on State of Punjab & Ors. v. Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy, 1996(9) SCC 322 : 1996(3) SCT 410 (SC).
It was urged that in any event, principles of natural justice cannot be put in a strait-jacket formula and in view of the fact that the writ petitioner had admitted his gilt, he cannot be said to be prejudiced and in support of the said contention reliance has been placed on State Bank of Patiala & Ors. v. SK Sharma, 1996(3) SCC 364 : 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC).
6.
Mr. Mitra, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that had the appellant been satisfied that the entire case is based on admission, question of initiation of a departmental proceedings would not have arisen.
According to the learned Counsel a delinquent employee has a right of reasonable opportunity being given, the entire proceedings would be vitiated.
7.
It is not in dispute that the Appellant herein has framed regulations in exercise of its power conferred by sub-section (1) read with Clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 45 of the Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950.
In terms of the said Regulation the procedure for imposing penalty had been laid down.
The said procedures, thus, are admittedly liable to be complied with.
8.
In terms of Clause (2) of Regualtion 38 it was obligatory on the part of the respondent to supply a list of documents by which and the list of witnesses by whom the articles of charge are proposed to be sustained.
Admittedly, such lists had not been supplied.
The writ petitioner, therefore, could not have known as to on what basis and by whom the charges levelled against him might be proved.
In absence of such knowledge, evidently he could not prepare his defence.
Clause 9 of the said Regulation enjoins a duty upon the enquiry officer to submit a report which would state the factors mentioned therein.
The disciplinary authority in terms of Clause (10) of Regulation 38 is required to consider the record of enquiry and record its findings on each charge.
The disciplinary authority, upon satisfying himself as regards the guilt of the petitioner, is required to form his opinion only having regard to the findings on the charges framed against the delinquent employee.
9.
`Admission' as is well known must be considered in its entirety.
An admission cannot be culled out from considering portions of the show-cause.
Annexure `D' to the writ application which contains the purported admission the part of delinquent officer, thus, must be read as a whole.
Did the delinquent officer admit his guilt ?
The answer to the said question must be rendered in the negative.
The Appellants never considered the said show-cause as an admission of misconduct and/or admission of facts leading to his commission of misconduct.
Once the disciplinary authority intended to initiate a departmental proceedings despite the show-cause filed by the writ petitioner, it was obligatory on his part to scrupulously follow the procedure laid down in the said Regulation.
Admittedly it failed to do so.
10.
In Channabasappa Basappa Happali v. The State of Mysore, AIR 1972 SC 32, the fact situation was absolutely different.
In that case, the delinquent officer was put certain questions and in answer thereto made a statement.
In that case the delinquent officer did not want to defend himself and he had not desired to say anything more than his statement made before the inquiry officer.
In that factual background it was held :  "It will appear from this that he did not want to take any more part in the enquiry than to have the matter adjudged on the basis of his reply and the documents which were against him.
This is what he had stated in the penultimate sentence of his own statement and in the earlier part, he had unequivocally admitted the facts which had been placed in charge against him.
His explanation was two-fold, namely that he continued to absent himself because he thought that leave might have been extended and secondly that his proceeding to go on fast was in the interest of democracy and the country as a whole and also to improve the Police Force.
The pleas of the petitioner are quite clear; in fact he admitted all the relevant facts on which the decision could be given against him and therefore it cannot be stated that the enquiry was in breach of any principle of natural justice.
At an enquiry facts have to be proved and the person proceeded against must have an opportunity to cross examine witnesses and to give his own version or explanation about the evidence on which he is charged and to lead his defence.
In this case, the facts were two fold, that he had stayed beyond the sanctioned leave and that he had proceeded on a fast as a demonstration against the action of the authorities and also for that he called the upliftment of the country etc.
These facts were undoubtedly admitted by him.
His explanation was also there and it had to be taken into account.
That explanation is obviously futile, because persons in the Police Force must be clear about extension of leave before they absent themselves from duty."
11.
Such is not the position here.
In this case the delinquent officer intended to have a full fledged enquiry and he participated therein.
Thus, the learned trial Judge cannot be said to have committed an error in holding that the entire proceedings was vitiated in law.
12.
The report of the enquiry officer also clearly shows that apart from the materials which were brought on records, the enquiry officer had taken into consideration other documents.
Had a list of documents been supplied to the petitioner, the Enquiry Officer was bound to confine himself to the documents referred to in the list.
In any event, the enquiry officer could not have taken into consideration any documents behind the back of the writ petitioner.
13.
In State Bank of Patiala & Ors. v. SK Sharma, 1996(3) SCC 364, the question which came up for consideration was as to whether substantial compliance of the provision of law serves the purpose.
In that case instead of supplying copies of the documents, same had shown to the delinquent officer.
It was in that situation held by the Apex Court that principles of natural justice had not been violated.
In the instant case, as indicated hereinbefore, the mandatory provisions of the regulations have not been followed.
The enquiry officer's report is also vitiated in law.
14.
Whether a delinquent officer has been prejudiced or not by non-supply of the documents is esentially a question of fact and varies from case of case.
Non-supply of list of documents and the list of witnesses undoubtedly and undisputedly causes prejudice to the delinquent.
15.
It is now well settled that disciplinary proceedings must be held in a fair and impartial manner.
It is equally well settled that he who makes the procedural sword must perish with it.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by one of us in Shri Swapan Ray v. Indian Airlines LImited & Ors., 1996(1) CHN 147.
16.
It is true that the learned trial Judge has directed re-instatment of the petitioner with full back wages.
Once a disciplinary proceedings is set aside on the ground of gross violation of the principles of natural justice, the delinquent officer would be deemed to be in service and will be entitled to the entire salary.
However, in view of the decision of the Apex Court in State of Punjab & Ors. v. Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy (supra), it is directed that the matter be remitted back to the disciplinary authority to start the enquiry proceedings from the beginning so that the same may be held in terms of Regualtion 36 i.e. a copy of the list of the documents and witnesses shall be supplied to the writ petitioner whereupon a fresh enquiry may be held.
17.
With the aforementioned modification this appeal is dismissed but in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.