V K Bali, J (Oral) - Municipal Workers Union (Registered) through its General Secretary Shri Khilar Chand Gupta has filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana, to count the service of its employees rendered by them on work charge basis prior to their regularisation for the purposes of qualifying service within the meaning of rule 2(j) read with rule 8 of the Punjab Municipal Employees (Pension and Provident Fund) Rules, 1994, read with rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II.
2.
While giving the facts, it has been pleaded that an employee, namely, Raju was employed in work charge basis on November 12, 1982, and his service was regularised on the post of Mali/Beldar on March 3, 1992.
He retired from service of the Corporation from the post that he was holding on November 30, 1997.
Inasmuch as he had served for a period of about 15 years, he was entitled to post retiral benefits, which were not made admissible to him as the period spent by him on work charge basis was not counted.
Reliance for the aforesaid relief has been placed on a Full Bench decision of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab, AIR 1988 Punjab & Haryana 265.
3.
The writ was admitted on April 20, 1999, but till date no reply has been filed.
4.
On an earlier occasion, Mr. Takkar appeared on behalf of the respondent-Municipal Corporation and had prayed for filing a formal reply in this case.
Even a formal reply has not been filed nor any one has put in appearance on behalf of the respondent-Municipal Corporation.
5.
In view of the law settled by a Full Bench of this Court in Kesar Chand's case (supra) work charge period of an employee has to count for purpose of counting qualifying service for pension.
Following the Full Bench decision aforesaid, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the Municipal Corporation to count work charge period of every employee and if by so counting the period of a concerned employee becomes qualifying service for purpose of earning pension, the same be paid to him.
This being a general direction, a specific direction with regard to employee Raju is separately issued to the same effect.
Let arrears of pension of Raju be calculated in accordance with the rules and made over to him within 6 weeks from today.
The petition is thus allowed in the manner aforesaid.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.