GS Singhvi, J - Feeling aggrieved by the decision of the respondents not to consider her candidature for recruitment as Science Mistress (Medical) on the ground that she does not possess the qualifications enumerated in the advertisement issued by the Chairman, Department Selection Committee (Teaching), Punjab, the petitioner has invoked writ jurisdiction of this Court for quashing the impugned decision and also for directing the respondents to select and appoint her on one of the advertised posts.
2.
Notice of this petition was issued to the respondents on 29.1.1999 and on our asking, learned Deputy Advocate General had accepted the same.
On that day, the Court had directed the respondents to file written statement which four weeks.
As on date, a period of three months has elapsed but written statement has not been filed, therefore, we shall decide the petition by assuming that the averments made therein are correct.
3.
A perusal of the writ petition shows that the petitioner possesses the following qualifications :-  "Academic" : i) B.Sc.
with Chemistry, Botany and Geography.
Professional : ii) B.Ed."
She applied for recruitment as Science Mistress (Medical) in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P3.
She pleaded for consideration of her candidature in general category and also as a dependent of Ex-Serviceman.
She appeared for interview as a general category candidate with roll number 070101-0265114 and as a dependent of Ex-Servicemen with roll number 070101-0165148.
As her roll number did not figure in the lists of selected candidates notified in the newspapers dated 20111997, she made representation to the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching) Punjab pointing out that her merit was higher than the candidates selected in the category of dependents of Ex- Servicemen and, therefore, she has a right to be placed in the select list.
She was then informed of the reasons for her non-selection, namely, that she does not fulfil the qualifications enumerated in the advertisement.
4.
Shri Rajesh Malik argued that the decision of the respondents not to consider the petitioner should be declared as erroneous and nullified with a direction to them to treat her eligible for the post of Science Mistress (Medical) because she fulfils the academic qualifications prescribed under the Punjab Education Class II (School Cadre), Rules, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Learned counsel submitted that the respondents could not have determined the petitioner's eligibility on the basis of the qualifications specified in the advertisement because the same is ultra vires to the Rules.
Learned Deputy Advocate General could not relevance (advance ?)
any convincing argument to justify the action of the respondents to advertise the posts with qualifications other than the one prescribed under the Rules.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective omissions.
There is no dispute between the parties that petitioner falls in the category of the dependents of Servicemen being the daughter of Flight Lieutenant (Rtd.)
Shri Surjan Singh.
It is also not in dispute that the basis of her academic and professional notifications (qualifications ?
), she is entitled to be awarded 4322 marks on the criterion evolved by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The controversy between the parties centres around the issue whether she fulfils the qualifications prescribed for recruitment of the Science Mistress (Medical).
There can be no denying that the Rules framed by the Governor under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution are binding on all including the Government and that any action taken in violation of such rules is liable to be treated as non-est.
If we examine the petitioner's case in the light of this proposition, it becomes crystal clear that the decision of the respondents to reject the candidature of the petitioner is liable to be nullified.
A bare reading of the Rules shows that the qualifications prescribed under the rules for recruitment of Science Mistress (Medical) are B.Sc.
namely, Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology.
As against this, the qualifications specified in the advertisement are B.Sc.
with Physics, Chemistry, Biology/Biological Science with BEd.
It is, thus, clear that the qualifications incorporated in the advertisement are inconsistent with those prescribed under the Rules.
A candidate who has passed B.Sc.
with any two of the four subjects i.e. Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology is eligible to be appointed as Science Mistress (Medical).
However, as per the requirement of the advertisement, he/she cannot be treated eligible.
In our opinion, the qualifications prescribed under the statutory rules must prevail over those specified in the advertisement because the government and its functionaries are not entitled to make recruitment de hors the qualifications prescribed under the statutory rules.
As a logical corollary, it must be held that the rejection of the petitioner's candidature, notwithstanding the fact that she possesses the qualifications prescribed under the Rules, will have to be declared as nullity.
6.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and declare that the petitioner is eligible to be selected and appointed as Science Mistress (Medical).
The respondents are directed to consider her candidature (on merit).
If she is found meritorious, then the order appointing her shall be issued by the competent authority.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed within one month of the submission of certified copy of this order which the registry is directed to issue dasti on payment of fee prescribed for urgent applications.
Petition allowed.