Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These two writ petitions have been taken together for hearing.
Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the facts as averred by the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 1392 of 1999 (Pritam Singh v. Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, and others, 2000(1) SCT 1116 (P&H)) may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner is working as a Junior Specialist with the Punjab State Electricity Board.
He alleges that a post of Assistant Engineer falling to the share of Technical Subordinates Grade-I, who are members of Scheduled Castes, has been lying vacant since the year 1991.
He is eligible for promotion to this post.
The Board is filling up the posts of Assistant Engineers from other categories.
However, this post is not being filled up with the sole object of accommodating Mr. Upkar Singh, who, though senior to the petitioner, is not eligible, as he does not possess 10 years experience, which has been prescribed under the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965.
The petitioner prays that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to consider and promote him to the post of Assistant Engineer with effect from January, 1997.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Punjab State Electricity Board the factual position has not been disputed.
It has been admitted that a post of Assistant Engineer, falling to the share of Technical Subordinates Grade-I belonging to the category of Scheduled Castes "is lying vacant since the year 1991."
It has been admitted that the petitioner possessed Four Years Diploma in Mechanical Engineering and had completed the requisite 10 years of service on January 29, 1997.
It has been further admitted that he has also passed the Punjabi Examination and cleared the Departmental Accounts Examination and the Safety Code Test.
The petitioner's averment that his case had been duly recommended by the Chief Engineer has been controverted.
It has also been pointed out that promotion has to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
4.
Mr. Upkar Singh had not been initially impleaded as a respondent in this case.
He had filed a miscellaneous application in each of the writ petitions with the prayer that he be impleaded as a party.
These applications were allowed.
He was added as respondent No. 4 in each of these petitions.
He had filed a written statement in C.W.P.
No. 3167 of 1999.
Learned counsel appearing on his behalf had stated that a separate reply was not being filed in C.W.P.
No. 1392 of 1999 to avoid duplicity.
He prayed that the reply filed in C.W.P.
No. 3167 of 1999 may be read even in C.W.P.
No. 1392 of 1999.
This prayer has not been opposed by the counsel for the petitioners.
Thus, his reply may also be noticed.
5.
The fourth respondent has averred that he is better qualified than the petitioner.
He claims to have got "specialised training course from United States of Amneria (USA) in Operation & Maintenance...." He also alleges that he has worked in Roukela Steel Plant, Rourkela, and Punjab Ceramics Ltd, Bathinda, before his appointment as Junior Specialist with the respondent- Board in March, 1990.
He claims to have worked at these two places for 14 years and it was on the basis of this experience that he was selected and appointed in the respondent-Board on March 5, 1990.
In other respects the pleas taken by the respondent are primarily on the same lines as those by the respondent-Board.
6.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is : Can the Board keep the post vacant for an indefinite length of time ?
8.
The recruitment to the posts of Assistant Engineers is governed by the provisions of the 1965 Regulations.
Regulation 10(a), inter alia, provides that "10% of the cadre posts of A.Es.
in Thermal Plants (Operation and Maintenance) shall be filled up by provision on seniority-cum-merit from the technical subordinates Grade-I.....namely....Junior Specialists holding 3 or 4 years Diploma in Electrical, Mechanical or Electronics....with 10 years service as technical subordinates Grade-II and Grade-I, out of which a minimum of five years service should be in the capacity of technical subordinates Grade-I" It is the admitted position that in the year 1997 thirteen posts of Assistant Engineers fell to the share of the Technical Subordinates Grade-I Still further, it is also not disputed that in accordance with the rules applicable in the Punjab State Electricity Board, 2 out of these 13 posts had to be filled up from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes etc.
It is also the admitted position that one of these two posts was duly filled up.
The second post has remained unfilled since March, 1991.
9.
Undeniably, the employer is the judge of its needs.
If the employer takes the view that it is not necessary to fill up a post, it can take a decision in that behalf.
Considerations like financial crunch, work load etc. are relevant in this behalf.
If the employer takes a conscious decision and decides not to fill up an available post, the writ Court cannot normally force it to do so, despite the fact that a vacancy exists.
However, in a case where the vacancies are regularly filled up and it is not pleaded that the authority has taken a conscious decision to keep the post vacant, different considerations would arise.
In the petition it has been specifically averred that the Board has been regularly filling up the posts of Assistant Engineers.
This position has not been disputed on behalf of the respondents.
In this situation, the action of the respondent-Board in keeping the particular post, falling to the share of Scheduled Castes, vacant since March, 1991, cannot be said to be just and fair.
Still further, the only excuse given by the respondent-Board is that the candidates had submitted representations.
Admittedly, the representations have remained pending for fairly long periods of time.
No justification, whatsoever, for this long inaction has been given on behalf of the respondents.
In this situation, were are constrained to conclude that the Board was not filling up the post for the reason as alleged by the petitioner, viz., to accommodate the fourth respondent.
10.
Since the Board has been filling up the posts of Assistant Engineers and a vacancy falling to the share of the members of the Scheduled Castes is available, it is only fair that the Board proceeds to fill up this post without any avoidable delay.
We direct it to do so immediately.
In any case, the needful shall be done within one month from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
11.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that respondent No. 4 is not eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer.
On the other hand, Mr. Onkar Singh, learned counsel for the fourth respondent, submits that the experience of respondent No. 4 at the Rourkela Steel Plant, Rourkela, as also at the Punjab Ceramics Ltd, Bathinda, can also be taken into consideration.
12.
At this stage it does not appear to be necessary for us to go into this issue.
We shall only notice the provision in Regulation 10, which provides that for the purpose of Sub-regulation (a) of Regulation 10 "service means the services rendered by technical subordinates in the Thermal Plants only".
The Authority shall consider as to whether or not any service outside the Thermal Plants can be taken into consideration.
13.
No other point has been raised.
14.
In view of the above, both the writ petitions are disposed of with the aforesaid direction.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.