ML Singhal, J - Since in these regular second appeals, same question of law and fact is involved, I would dispose of both these appeals through this common judgment.
2.
Gurdip Singh was working as forest guard in Rayya Range in the year 1971.
One Puran Singh was also working as forester in that range.
There was a complaint by the Divisional Forest Officer, Amritsar that in connivance with some officials of the Forest Department including Gurdip Singh and Puran Singh, trees belonging to the forest department had been cut.
Charge against them was that they had been negligent in the performance of their duty and had also committed other acts of indiscipline.
They were charge-sheeted by the Divisional Forest Officer, Amritsar on 13.7.1971.
Their grievance was that the copies of the complaint had not been supplied to them and the reply submitted to the charge sheet by them was not considered, Shri Jagdev Singh, IFS Divisional Forest Officer, Jalandhar was appointed as enquiry officer; Enquiry was conducted in a manner prejudicial to them.
He found them guilty of the charges levelled against them.
In the meantime, Sh. Jagdev Singh was promoted as Conservator of Forests.
On promotion, he become their punishing authority.
A show cause notice was given to Puran Singh and Gurdip Singh by Shri Jagdev Singh as punishing authority calling upon them to show cause why they be not dismissed from service.
They furnished reply to the show cause notice.
According to them, their reply was not considered by the punishing authority and vide order dated 281976 he ordered dismissal of Gurdip Singh from service.
He ordered the compulsory retirement of Puran Singh from service and also that a sum of Rs. 2,240/- shall be deducted from his gratuity and 10% cut on his pension.
According to them the order was illegal and not sustainable.
Appeal of Gurdip Singh was dismissed by the Chief Conservator of Forests, Chandigarh vide order dated 27101977.
On appeal of Puran Singh, Chief Conservator modified the said order.
He ordered that there shall be no deduction on his pension.
Gurdip Singh filed suit for declaration challenging his dismissal from service passed by the Conservator of Forests, Jalandhar saying that the same was arbitrary, mala fide, against rules of natural justice, ultra vires, illegal, void and unenforceable and he be deemed to have always been in the employment of the forest department with full pay, powers and privileges of that position as if the said order had not been passed.
He challenged the order of the Chief Conservator of Forests at Chandigarh dated 27101977 dismissing his appeal.
It was alleged in the plaint that in his case enquiry officer became the punishing authority and he was punished by him.
Enquiry officer became judge in his own cause.
He submitted report indicting him, accepted that report and punished him which is against the principles of natural justice.
3.
Puran Singh Forest Guard-plaintiff who was indicted by the Enquiry Officer alongwith Gurdip Singh and was punished with the punishment of compulsory retirement from service and deduction of Rs. 2,240/- from his gratuity and imposition of cut on his pension filed departmental appeal, where imposition of cut on pension was set aside and rest of the order was maintained.
He challenged that order through suit for declaration on the same grounds on which Gurdip Singh has challenged his dismissal from service.
4.
Defendant-State of Punjab contested the suit urging inter alia that there was nothing wrong with the order of punishment passed upon him by the Conservator of Forests who held enquiry when he was divisional Forest Officer.
He became punishing authority on promotion to the post of Conservator of Forests.
5.
Defendant-State of Punjab contested the suit of Puran Singh on the same grounds.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed in civil suit filed by Gurdip Singh :  1.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in its present form ?
OPD 2.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 3.
Whether the impugned order dated 281976 dismissing the plaintiff from service is illegal, void, ultra vires etc. as alleged ?
OPP 4.
Relief.
7.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed in the civil suit filed by Puran Singh :  1.
Whether the suit is maintainable in the present form ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 3.
Whether the impugned order dated 281976 removing the plaintiff from service is illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional etc. as alleged ?
OPP 4.
Relief.
Subordinate Judge Ist Class, Amritsar decreed the suit of Gurdip Singh and she also decreed the suit of Puran Singh as well vide orders dated 3041980 in view of her finding that Sh. Jagdev Singh, Divisional Forest Officer was the enquiry officer.
He indicted Gurdip Singh and Puran Singh in the enquiry.
He became Conservator of Forests i.e. punishing authority of the plaintiffs- Gurdip Singh and Puran Singh.
In that capacity he accepted that report, gave them show cause notice calling upon them to show cause why they be not dismissed from service and he dismissed him (Gurdip Singh) from service.
Puran Singh was punished with the punishment of compulsory retirement from service and deduction of Rs. 2,240/- from his gratuity and imposition of cut on his pension, though imposition of cut on pension was set aside on appeal.
His action could not be free from bias as he acted despite objection by the plaintiffs that he should not act on the enquiry report when he had indicted them as enquiry officer and that there should be independent application of mind by some body else to the findings in the enquiry.
8.
Appeals of the State of Punjab were dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar vide order dated 491982.
9.
Aggrieved from the orders of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, State of Punjab has knocked the door of this Court through these regular second appeals.
10.
In these regular second appeals, the only question that arises for consideration is "Whether the enquiry officer could accept the enquiry report recorded by him when he himself became the punishing authority and take action on it and dismiss the respondent from service ?"
11.
Learned AAG for the State of Punjab submitted that as per rule 8 sub-rule (5) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1969, the punishing authority either could enquire into the charges itself or could appoint enquiry officer to enquire into the charges.
It was submitted that in this case, Shri Jagdev Singh, Divisional Forest Officer, conducted enquiry independently, without any bias and respondents were given full opportunity to defend themselves.
They gave reply to the charge-sheet.
Their reply to the charge sheet was considered by the punishing authority.
They gave reply to the show cause notice.
Their reply to the show cause notice was also considered by the punishing authority.
It was submitted that enquiry officer was only a fact finding body and not the punishing authority.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that if the enquiry officer gave finding indicting the delinquents and he as punishing authority accepted that finding and punished Gurdip Singh and Puran Singh plaintiffs, punishment would be bad in law being against the rules of natural justice.
In support of this submission, he drew my attention to Lachhman Dass v. Union of India and others, 1991(4) SLR 790 : 1991(3) SCT 688 where it was held by a Division Bench of this Court that "when the power to remove/dismiss an employee vests in the Cantonment Board and that power could be exercised by the Executive Officer and the Executive officer first performed the role of witness then that of enquiry officer and then that of punishing authority and passed dismissal order, Executive Officer being himself a witness to the occurrence should not have proceeded against the petitioner and dismissed him.
When the Cantonment Board had also the power to remove/dismiss the petitioner, action should have been taken by the Board.
Action taken by the Executive Officer was not proper."
13.
The facts of Lachman Dass's case (supra) are that Lachhman Dass who was in the employment of the Cantonment Board, Jalandhar as an octroi peon was found asleep during his duty hours on surprise inspection made by the Executive Officer of the Board.
As this matter constituted grave misconduct, an enquiry was ordered and held by the Executive Officer himself and the dismissal order was also passed by him.
Dismissal order was affirmed in appeal by the Cantonment Board and, thereafter by the General Officer Commanding-in-chief, Western Command, Shimla.
It was held that when action could be taken against the delinquent by the Board or by the Executive Officer who is its delegate, the rules of natural justice required that the action should not have been taken by the Executive Officer who had a real or apprehended bias.
14.
Learned counsel drew my attention to Mahesh Kumar v. State of UP and others, 1984(3) SLR 109 where it was held that if in the circumstances a reasonable person has a reasonable apprehension of bias, the decision of authority would be vitiated.
Only likelihood of bias is to be established.
Conservator of Forests recorded an adverse entry against a member of IFS Representation against such entry was made to the State Government.
Subsequently the Conservator of Forests who recorded adverse entry became Secretary of Forest Department.
Minister incharge rejected the representation on the basis of notings of such Secretary, though recommendations of the Secretary were recommendatory in nature but his opinion played a vital role in persuading the Minister to reject the representation.
It is immaterial that ultimate decision was taken by the Minister.
Secretary could not be judge of his own cause and was disqualified from dealing with the representation.
15.
There may not have been any bias in fact in the mind of Sh. Jagdev Singh, Conservator of Forests when he accepted the enquiry report and took action on it later as punishing authority but there could be apprehension of bias in his mind.
Quasi judicial authorities are also required to demonstrate that justice has been done by them.
16.
For the reasons given above, these regular second appeals are dismissed and the impugned orders dismissing Gurdkip Singh from service and compulsorily retiring Puran Singh from service and deduction of Rs. 2,240/- from his gratuity, are declared to be illegal and void and they shall be deemed always to have been in service of the forest department.
However, Conservator of Forests other than Sh. Jagdev Singh or if there be no other Conservator of Forests, Chief Conservator of Forests is directed to consider the enquiry report submitted by Sh. Jagdev Singh, then Divisional Forest Officer and accept it or reject it but after hearing the plaintiffs-respondents and the forest department and applying his mind thereto and if he chooses to accept the enquiry report, he will give show cause notice calling upon the respondents to show cause why they be not punished with any of the punishments set out in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishments and Appeal) Rules, 1969 and then decide upon after considering their reply to the show cause notice what punishment should be imposed upon them.
He will finalise the action to be taken on the enquiry report within six months of the receipt of copy of this order.
Appeals dismissed.