NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner was working as a Lecturer in English in AS College for Woman, Khanna, District Ludhiana (for short the College) which is a privately managed College affiliated to the Panjab University at Chandigarh.
She has done her MA in English, M Phil., PhD and claims to have teaching experience of about 23 years.
The post of Principal in the College fell vacant in July, 1995 and the same was advertised in the `Indian Express' and `The Tribune' on 2171995 and 2371995, respectively, inviting applications from all eligible persons.
Last date for receipt of applications was 1481995.
Response to this advertisement was rather poor and, therefore, the last date for the receipt of applications was extended upto 3181995.
Nine candidates applied for the post out of which only three appeared for the interview on 2011996.
Petitioner along with Mrs. Prem Handa and one Harjit Walia from Patiala were the candidates who were interviewed by the Selection Committee.
The Committee did not find any one of them suitable for the post and decided to re-advertise the same in order to attract more applicants.
The post was again advertised in `The Tribune' on 19121996 and 22.12.1996 and this time, too, the response was not encouraging and consequently the last date for receipt of applications was again extended by 15 days by issuing a corrigendum in the Press.
16 candidates applied for the post this time including the petitioner.
A Selection Committee was duly constituted consisting of the Chairman of the Managing Committee of the College, nominees of the Director of Public Instructions (C) Punjab and Vice Chancellor, Panjab University and some others.
Nine candidates including the petitioner appeared before the Selection Committee for interview on 461997.
It is pertinent to mention here that this time again no candidate was found suitable for appointment to the post.
After all the candidates had been interviewed the Committee initially decided to reject all the candidates as no one was found suitable and it also decided to re-advertise the post.
It appears that the proceedings of the Selection Committee had also been recorded but before they were finalised the Chairman and representatives of the Managing Committee emphasised before the Selection Committee that the College had been without a regular Principal for almost two years and that the students and the institution were suffering.
It seems that at their instance the Committee decided to select the best candidate from amongst those who were available.
It is common ground between the parties that the petitioner was selected as Principal and was appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700 at a starting salary of Rs. 4325/- because this was the salary she was already drawing as Lecturer in the College.
She was put on probation for a period of one year which period could be extended by another year.
In terms of the decision of the Selection Committee a letter of appointment was issued to the petitioner on the same day ie on 461997 and she was required to report for duty immediately.
She joined the post on 561997.
It is not in dispute that her appointment was approved by the Vice Chancellor of the University and also by the College Sub Committee.
The Director, Public Instructions, Punjab also granted his approval to the appointment/selection of the petitioner as Principal on probation.
Since the petitioner joined as Principal on 561997 the period of her probation was to end on 461998.
On 461998 a meeting of the College Sub-Committee was held in the office of the Principal of the College which was chaired by the Vice President of the Managing Committee in which the petitioner as Principal of the College was also present.
Item No. 4 on the agenda of this meeting was "Confirmation case of Dr. Kusum Narula Principal who was selected by the Selection Committee on 461997 and joined on 561997".
The Sub-Committee considered this item in the meeting and took the following decision :-  "The case of confirmation of Dr. Kusum Narula was discussed and resolved that the probation period be extended.
Further resolved that the annual increment be given w.e.f.
June, 1998."
In pursuance to the aforesaid decision the probation period of the petitioner was extended by another year and a copy of this decision certified to be true by the Secretary of the College was delivered to the petitioner on 461998 immediately after the meeting.
Her period of probation was now to end on 461999.
A meeting of the College Sub Committee (Governing Body) was held on 24.5.1999 at 5.00 P.M. in the office of the Principal of the College under the chairmanship of the President of the Managing Committee.
Item No. 4 on the agenda of this meeting was "Completion of probation period of two years of Dr. Kusum Narula as Principal on 461999".
Petitioner as Principal of the College attended the meeting but when item No. 4 was taken up she excused herself from the meeting and did not remain present.
The Committee took the following decision on item No. 4 :-  "The completion of probation period of 2 years of Dr. Kusum Narula as Principal on 461999 was presented in house.
When this item No. 4 of the agenda was taken up Dr. Kusum Narula left the meeting.
After discussion it was unanimously resolved `Services' of Dr. Kusum Narula as Principal of the College are no longer required.
However she may join as lecturer in English at AS College for Women, Khanna.
Further resolved that as per rules she may be paid one month salary in lieu of notice period.
Sh. Om Parkash Sachdeva, Secretary Governing Body of the College was authorised to implement the decision.
Further resolved that the next senior-most lecturer available in the college may be given the charge as officiating Principal."
In pursuance to the aforesaid decision the Secretary of the Governing Body of the College informed the petitioner by letter dated 26.5.1999 that her services were no longer required and she was being paid one month's salary in lieu of notice period and she was asked to join as Lecturer in English with immediate effect.
On receipt of this communication, the petitioner handed over the charge of the post of Principal to the senior-most Lecturer in the College and submitted her joining report as Lecturer.
It is against this decision that the present writ petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the same on the ground of arbitrariness.
It is also alleged that the order of termination amounts to removal from service and is, therefore, contrary to law.
It is further alleged that the order has been passed on the basis of some hidden understanding between the management of the College and Mrs. Prem Handa.
Before proceeding further, it is worth mentioning that Mrs. Prem Handa was one of the candidates for the post of Principal and when the petitioner was selected on 461997 she challenged her appointment in this Court by filing CWP 18121 of 1997 which is pending.
In this writ petition, it is alleged that the Selection Committee had rejected all the candidates and did not find any one of them suitable for the post.
She also attached a copy of the proceedings of the Selection Committee signed by its members.
Anyhow, we are not concerned with that writ petition.
2.
Before we deal with the contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is necessary to refer to the Regulations dealing with the probation of teachers in non-government affiliated Colleges.
Chapter VIII (E) contained in the Panjab University Calendar, Volume I, 1994 Edition, deals with the conditions of service and conduct of teachers in non-government affiliated Colleges.
Regulation 23 which concerns us is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "A teacher will ordinarily be appointed on one year's probation after which he will normally be confirmed if his work and conduct are found satisfactory.
It would be obligatory on the part of a Governing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period, whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended and in absence of such a notice the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period shall in no case be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment."
The word `teacher' in these Regulations includes Principal of a non-government affiliated College.
3.
While challenging the order terminating the services of the petitioner as Principal of the College, it was strenuously urged by Shri GK Chatrath, Sr. Advocate that before the expiry of the initial period of probation the petitioner was not served with any notice in writing as to whether she had been confirmed or her period of probation was being extended and, therefore, in the absence of such a notice the petitioner automatically became a confirmed employee of the College on the expiry of one year of probation in terms of Regulation 23 of the Regulations.
The argument indeed is that having become a confirmed employee her services could not be terminated as no longer required and that by the impugned order the petitioner has been removed from service which is contrary to law.
Shri SS Saron, learned counsel appearing for the Governing Body of the college on the other hand contended that the period of probation of the petitioner was extended in the meeting of the college Sub-Committee held on 461998 and a certified copy of the decision was delivered to her on the same day immediately after the meeting and, therefore, she had been notified in writing that her period of probation had been extended.
This, according to the learned counsel, is sufficient compliance of Regulation 23 and that no formal notice was required to be given to her.
From the rival contentions of the parties, the question that arises for our consideration is whether the petitioner became a confirmed employee on the expiry of one year of her initial period of probation.
Before we answer this question, it is necessary to refer to the legal position in regard to a probationer.
4.
It is by now well settled that when a first appointment is made on probation for a specific period and the employee is allowed to continue on the post after the expiry of that period without any specific order of confirmation, he is deemed to continue as a probationer unless there is something to the contrary in the Service Rules.
In such a case, an express order of confirmation is necessary to give the employee a right to the post and the mere fact that he is allowed to continue on the post after the expiry of initial period of probation will not confer on him a right to hold the post as a confirmed employee.
In such a case, the initial period of probation will be deemed to have been extended by necessary implication.
This, however, is subject to the condition that the Rules governing the service permit extension of the probationary period for an indefinite time and do not lay down a maximum period of probation.
However, where the service Rules prescribe a maximum period of probation beyond which it cannot be extended and the employee is allowed to continue in service beyond that maximum period then on the expiry of that period whether any order of confirmation is passed or not, he will be deemed to have been confirmed in service because in that event it would be reasonable to infer that he has been confirmed on the post by implication.
5.
Let us now examine the contentions of the parties in the light of the aforesaid legal position and also in the light of Regulation 23 of the Regulations which govern the probation of a teacher in a non-government affiliated College.
In terms of this Regulation which has been reproduced hereinabove, a teacher is ordinarily appointed on one year's probation after which he is normally to be confirmed if his work and conduct are found satisfactory.
A plain reading of the Regulation makes it clear that it is obligatory on the part of the Governing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of the initial period of probation that he has either been confirmed or else his period of probation is being extended.
The power to extend the period of probation is obviously there but that period cannot go beyond two years from the date of initial appointment.
The Regulation further stipulates that if the teacher is not given a notice in writing informing him as to whether he has been confirmed or his period of probation has been extended then he will be deemed to have been confirmed on the post.
In other words, the initial period of probation of a teacher is one year and before the expiry of this period the Governing Body has to decide whether it is going to confirm the employee or extend his period of probation.
In either event the teacher has to be notified in writing.
In the case before us, it is not in dispute that immediately after the meeting of the college Sub-Committee on 461998 a certified copy of the decision by which the period of probation of the petitioner had been extended was delivered to her on that very date which was the last day of her initial period of probation.
We have also perused the original record which was produced before us by Shri Saron and we find that the petitioner received a certified copy of the decision on 461998 and gave an acknowledgment in this regard.
She was, therefore, notified in writing that her period of probation had been extended.
It is true that no formal notice in this regard was given to her but, in our opinion, such a notice is not the requirement of the Regulation.
Moreover, she was present in the meeting and knew that her period of probation had been extended.
If she had not been notified that her period of probation had been extended then why did she wait to challenge the action of the college in the year 1999 when the meeting was held on 461998.
We are, therefore, satisfied that Regulation 23 had been complied with by the college and that her period of probation had been duly extended before the expiry of the initial period and she was accordingly notified in writing.
In this view of the matter it has to be held that the petitioner continued on probation after 461998 and that her period of probation was extended by another one year which was to expire on 461999.
Answer to the question posed in the earlier part of the judgment has, therefore, to be in the negative.
It is common case of the parties that the college Sub-Committee in its meeting held on 24.5.1999 in the office of the Principal unanimously resolved that the services of the petitioner were no longer required.
Since she was a probationer her services could be terminated as no longer required because the college did not find her work satisfactory.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in rejecting the contention of Shri Chatrath.
6.
It was then contended on behalf of the petitioner that the college Sub- Committee in its meeting held on 24.5.1999 did not consider the work and conduct of the petitioner and terminated her services as `no longer required' which order amounted to removal from service and since the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Teachers) Act, 1974 (for short the Act) were not complied with the impugned order of termination is illegal and liable to be quashed.
He placed reliance on a Single Bench judgment of this Court in The Managing Committee, RRMK Araya Mahila Mahavidyalaya, Pathankot v. The District Judge, Gurdaspur and others, 1989(1) RSJ 42.
We express our inability to accept this contention either.
In the case relied upon, the petitioner therein had been appointed for a limited period and later her appointment was converted into that on probation for one year with effect from the date of her initial appointment.
The probationary period was further extended by another one year.
On the facts of that case the learned Single Judge found that the services of the petitioner therein had not been terminated on account of her work and conduct being unsatisfactory because the Principal of the college had certified that the work of the petitioner therein was to the entire satisfaction of all concerned.
It was further found that the services of the petitioner therein had been terminated because the University to which the college was affiliated had pressurised the latter to reinstate another employee who had been employed on temporary basis prior to the appointment of the petitioner therein and whose services were dispensed with before appointing the petitioner therein.
It was in these circumstances that the learned Single Judge held that the order terminating the services of the petitioner therein amounted to an order of removal and it could not be passed without complying with the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the aforesaid Act.
This is not the case before us.
The college Sub-Committee met on 24.5.1999 and considered the item regarding `completion of probation period of two years of Dr. Kusum Narula as Principal on 461999'.
There was a number of complaints received against the petitioner and it is on account of those complaints that the Committee decided to terminate her services.
The original record was produced before us and we have also perused the complaints.
It is true that in the resolution passed by the college Sub-Committee it was not mentioned that her work and conduct was unsatisfactory and if it had been so mentioned the petitioner would have made a grievance that the order was stigmatic and, therefore, amounted to her removal from service.
The college Sub-Committee, in our view, rightly observed that her services were no longer required, so that there is no aspersion cast on the petitioner.
We, therefore, hold that the services of the petitioner were rightly terminated as no longer required during the period of her probation on the ground that her work was not satisfactory.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.