Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is a widow.
Her husband had started service as Lower Division Clerk with the Punjab State Electricity Board.
In November, 1981 he was promoted as a Cashier.
He unfortunately expired on August 3, 1997.
After his death the respondents sanctioned a pension of Rs. 900/- per month upto the year 2004, whereafter the amount of pension was to be reduced to Rs. 600/-.
The petitioner represented for the release of other retiral benefits, like gratuity, leave encashment and ex-gratia grant etc.
When the needful was not done, she approached this Court through the present writ petition.
She prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus, directing the respondents to make the payment along with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
2.
The respondents had initially filed a written statement controverting the petitioner's claim.
However, during the hearing it has been pointed out that an amount of Rs. 1,64,679/- has already been paid to the petitioner on account of leave encashment, the ex-gratia grant and the arrears which had fallen due to her by virtue of the revision of pay scales and the revision of pension.
It has been further stated at the Bar that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of an amount of Rs. 1,72,142/- on account of gratuity.
This amount has not been disturbed to the petitioner on account of the fact that an inquiry in respect of the embezzlement of an amount of Rs. 1,31,600/- is pending.
In the written statement it has been averred that "an amount of Rs. 94,000/- was withdrawn from cash chest of the Sub Division of the Board but the same was not deposited in the Bank though he (the petitioner) signed withdrawal in the remittance register in token of said withdrawal."
It has been further averred that "he has shown that a cheque of Rs. 24,600/- was received in the cash book and was accounted for but the same was not actually deposited in the Bank.
On this basis it has been averred that an inquiry in respect of the amount of Rs. 1,31,600/- is pending.
It has also been averred that another amount of Rs. 13,000/- was embezzled in the Zira Sub-Division.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
Even the petitioner is present in Court.
She has stated before us that inquiry may be conducted.
The house where she is living can be checked.
She would be able to explain each and every item in the house.
Her husband had not embezzled any amount.
On these premises learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the amount due to the petitioner should be ordered to be released.
5.
Mr. Sukhbir Singh, appearing for the respondents, has produced the Cash Book and the Remittance Register before us.
On a perusal thereof it is clear that the relevant entries have been tampered with.
After doing that, an endorsement has been made that a sum of Rs. 1,18,600/-.
"is hereby placed in the misc. advance of Sh. Kulbhushan Dutt, Cashier, in view of para 5 of RAP, Ferozepore and TEO prepared No. 1 of 2/98.
Sd/- Sub Divisional Engineer, AEE OP, Makhu."
The date on which the entry was made is not clear.
The basis on which this entry was made against the petitioner's husband has not been indicated.
Prima facie at this stage there is nothing on the basis of which it may said that the Department was entitled to recover any amount from the petitioner's husband.
Resultantly, we find no ground to justify the action of the Board in not releasing the amount due to the petitioner on account of gratuity etc.  6.
In view of the above, it is directed that the benefits, as due to the petitioner, shall be released within one month.
This would, however, be subject to the condition that in case after an inquiry, held in accordance with law, any amount is found due from the petitioner's husband, the Board shall be entitled to recover it from the petitioner.
She would, of course be entitled to participate in any inquiry they may be held.
She would be given a reasonable opportunity before any order for recovery etc. is passed against her.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.
Order accordingly.