Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has approached this Court with a prayer that a writ in the nature of Mandamus be issued "directing the respondents to count the ad hoc service rendered by the petitioner as Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) towards the seniority and after taking into account the ad hoc period towards the seniority, the petitioner be promoted to the post of Executive Engineer from the date his juniors have been promoted.....".
This petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court consisting of Hon'ble Justice HS Brar and Hon'ble Mr. Justice B Rai vide order dated February 19, 1998.
It was held that the petitioner's claim for seniority had been rejected by the department as far back as May 26, 1997.
The writ petition was highly belated.
On merits it was held that the petitioner was "only posted against the post of S.D.O.
(C) in his own pay scale.... vide order dated 2621997 (Annexure P-1) and he was promoted to the post of S.D.O.
(C) only on 351976 (Annexure P-2) when he became eligible for the post...." Thus, the petition was dismissed.
The petitioner filed a petition for the review of this order.
Initially, it was listed before the Division Bench which has passed the order.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice B Rai having retired, on July 23, 1999 the petition was placed before HS Brar, J His Lordship was pleased to direct the issue of notice.
Thereafter, the case has been placed before this Bench for hearing today.
2.
We have heard Mr. RK Joshi, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Pawan Bansal appearing on behalf of the respondents.
We find no merit in this review petition.
3.
Mr. Joshi has contended that the petitioner had been promoted to the post of Sub Divisional Officer vide order dated February 26, 1973.
He had been appointed on regular basis on May 3, 1976.
Thus, the period of service from February 26, 1973 to May 3, 1976 should be counted as service on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer.
If it is so counted, he would become senior and shall be entitled to further promotion as an Executive Engineer with effect from the date persons junior to him were promoted.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the office order dated October 22, 1975 to claim that even the salary of the higher post has to be paid to the petitioner for the period from February 26, 1973 to May, 3, 1976.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned Counsel for the respondents.
4.
The first question that arises for consideration is - Was the petitioner promoted vide order dated February 26, 1973 ?
5.
To answer this question a reference may be made to the order by which the alleged promotion was granted to the petitioner.
This order is in the following terms :-  "The Punjab State Electricity Board is pleased to order the following transfers and postings in the interest of public service with immediate effect :- S. No. Name Present posting Proposed posting Remarks xx xx 2.
Surinder Kumar Pathak Sectional Officer Civil Works Sub Division, Hoshiarpur, with special pay of Rs. 50/- pm Nawanshahar under TCC No.
III."
Sectional Officer in his own pay scale against the post of SDO (Civil) Against vacant post 6.
A perusal of the above would show that the petitioner was working as a Sectional Officer, Civil Works, Sub Division, Hoshiarpur.
By the order, he was proposed to be posted as Sectional Officer in his own pay scale against the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) with special pay of Rs. 50/- per month at Nawanshahar.
The petitioner was not promoted to the post of Sub Divisional Officer.
He was not asked to perform the duties to the higher post.
The posting was as Sectional Officer.
Consequently, there was no promotion which may entitle the petitioner to claim that he enjoyed a higher status or was entitled to the seniority or pay.
7.
Faced with this situation, learned Counsel has referred to the order issued on May 3, 1976.
This was the order by which the petitioner was posted as SDO, Civil Works, Sub Division, Hoshiarpur.
Even in this order his original posting was shown as Sectional Officer (Civil) and not as Sub Divisional Officer.
It was for the first time by order of May 3, 1976 that promotion was granted to the petitioner.
The order passed on February 26, 1973 was merely an order of posting.
It was not an order of promotion.
The petitioner was a Sectional Officer.
He had continued to be a Sectional Officer.
Only for the purpose of drawing his salary he was posted against the post of Sub Divisional Officer.
Thus, the claim that he had been promoted as Sub Divisional Officer is wholly misconceived and baseless.
In this view of the matter it is clear that the order passed by the Division Bench calls for no review.
We are also satisfied that the petitioner's claim for seniority was rejected by the Board in the year 1977.
His representation having been rejected as far back as the year 1977 the petition having been filed in 1996 was rightly held to be highly belated.
Mr. Joshi contends that the petitioner had represented even thereafter and that his representation was finally rejected in the year 1996.
The contention is misconceived.
Repeated submission of representations does not condone the delay which had already taken place.
8.
We find no merit in this review petition.
9.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.