VK Bali, J (Oral) - Shrigopal Sharma who retired from the post of Administrative Officer through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to hold him entitled to leave preparatory to retirement for 180 days on full party as per note 3 below Rule 8.116(iii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part 1.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner was appointed as Clerk with effect from 23.12.1947.
Vide his request made on that behalf, he applied for premature retirement on 19111979.
He was permitted to prematurely retire with effect from 31.12.1980.
As per age, he was otherwise to superannature on 2391983.
Rules 8.116(iii) with all its notes read thus :-  (iii) leave preparatory to retirement may be allowed upto 180 days on full pay provided it is due.
Note 1.
See proviso to Rule 821(a) and explanation I below Rule 8.21.
Note 2.
The leave granted as leave preparatory to retirement shall not include extraordinary leave.
Note 3.
In cases where Government employee who is required to retire; or who himself chooses to be retired; before the age of superannuation, may be allowed the leave due and admissible to him as indicated below, provided it does not extend beyond the date on which he attains the age of superannuation :-  (i) Either leave preparatory to retirement upto 180 days on full pay, if it is due; or (ii) Earned leave upto 120 days with permission to combine it with any other kind of leave, if due."
3.
It could not be disputed during the course of arguments by the learned Counsel representing the State that under note 3 of Rule 8.116, the petitioner is entitled to the relief asked for in the petition but inasmuch as vide instructions Annexure R1.
dated 2511978, attached to the written statement, the petitioner shall not be entitled to the relief asked for by him as such a relief could be granted only at the time when the petitioner was to superannuate from service.
4.
The court after perusing the record and hearing the learned Counsel representing the State is convinced that instructions Annexure R-1 cannot be pressed into service to deny the relief claimed by the petitioner.
The instructions cannot overrule the rules.
That apart, the instructions as such are general and naturally deal with grant of encashment of the leave on retirement or superannuation.
Such a relief is normally granted on superannuation and it is in that context that general instructions came into being wherein conditions qua entitlement have also been mentioned.
It is significant to note that under the conditions spelled out from Clauses (a) to (e) nothing at all has been said with regard to entitlement of the person who is given premature retirement or who seeks the same.
The court is of the firm view that instructions Annexure R-1 cannot be pressed no service to oppose the relief asked for the petitioner in the petition.
As mentioned above, if by virtue of statutory rule, an employee is entitled to a particular relief, the same cannot be denied to him, otherwise, on the basis of instructions.
The instructions, in other words, cannot replace the statutory rule.
5.
In view of what has been said above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to allow to the petitioner leave preparatory to retirement for 180 days on full pay as per note 3 below Rule 8.116(iii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rule.
Volume I, Part 1.
Let the amount due to the petitioner be released within four weeks from today.
Petition allowed.