RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioners herein, namely, Dharam Pal and Mohinder Singh, were working as Laboratory Attendants (in short Lab.
Attendants) in Sanjay College, Ateli, in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940.
While they were working as Lab.
Attendants in the aforesaid College, they were regularised w.e.f.
September 1, 1994 and March 9, 1994 respectively, by the College authorities vide separate orders dated May 8, 1995, which have been appended as Annexures P-2 and P-3.
This College was taken over by the State Government and the terms of takeover are mentioned in the communication dated September 10, 1996, copy Annexure P-4.
Condition Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 8 thereof are in the following terms :-  "2.
The Staff subject to the suitability may be appointed temporarily for a period of six months and their regularisation in Government service will be subject to the approval of Haryana Public Service Commission.
3.
The Staff of the College will be considered in Government Service from the takeover date only and their seniority will be fixed in accordance with the Government Rules only but there will be no change in their inter se seniority in the College.
4.
The pay of the taken over employees will be regularised according to Government rules/instructions and will be in accordance with the posts of government side.
8.
The college on being taken over by the Government should not be over- staffed and only such staff should be kept as is justified on the basis of actual work-load/norm fixed for different categories of staff."
2.
Vide order dated July 4, 1997, copy Annexure P6, the petitioners in terms of the take over deed dated September 10, 1996, were appointed in the said College on purely temporary and ad hoc basis w.e.f.
November 7, 1996.
Against the petitioners' names, it has been mentioned that they were being appointed as Lab.
Attendants.
It may be observed here that vide communication dated May 20, 1997, copy annexure P-5, from the Director, higher education, Haryana, to the Principal of the Government College, Ateli (The College which had been taken over), the Director had asked that the Head of the Institution is the appointing authority of class IV employees and therefore, the Principal was asked to take immediate action regarding the appointments.
It was pursuant to that the order dated July 4,1997 copy annexure P-6, was issued by the Principal appointing the petitioners as Lab.
Attendants on temporary and ad hoc basis.
It may be observed that the Lab.
Attendant is a class IV post.
Thereafter, by separate orders both dated December 31, 1998, copies annexures P-7 and P-8, the petitioners, whose designation was mentioned as Lab.
Attendants were regularised on the recommendation of the duly constituted screening committee.
3.
The petitioners claimed from the college authorities that since they were matriculates and the pay scale of matriculate Lab.
Attendant in the Government services was Rs. 950-1500, they were entitled to that pay scale.
The Principal of the College vide annexure P-11 dated December 29, 1997 recommended the case of the petitioners to the Director, Higher Education, for the grant of pay scale of Rs. 950-1500.
Then some correspondence ensued between the Director and the Principal.
Vide order dated March 3, 1999, copy Annexure P-14, the petitioners' designation was changed from Lab.
Attendant to class IV employees.
The reason given in this order is that the Principal had appointed a Lab.
Attendant in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 against the post of Lab.
Attendant, which is totally against the rules because no post of Lab.
Attendant had been sanctioned.
The petitioners were only appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940, for which the post had been sanctioned.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that once the petitioners had been regularised as Lab.
Attendants by the College authorities prior to the take over and after the take over the petitioners having been taken as such firstly on temporary basis and later on regular, the question of changing their designation could not arise at this stage, which would detrimentally affect their service career inasmuch as their nature of duties which they may perform as Lab.
Attendants would change as class IV employee and they can be asked to do any menial job.
Further, the petitioners though class IV employees, but working as Lab.
Attendants would be entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 which as a class IV employees upon designation as peon they may not be entitled to.
He further submitted that as per the ordinance regarding the conditions of service relating to non-teaching staff of non-Government recognised colleges, it has been provided that for each Laboratory, there should be at least one Lab.
Attendant and it has further been averred in the writ petition that in the College where the petitioners are working, there are four laboratories but there are only two Lab.
Attendants, i.e., the petitioners.
5.
The case of the respondents, on the other hand, is that there is only one sanctioned post of Lab.
Attendant in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500, which is being held by one Sat Pal and, therefore, the petitioners cannot continue on the post of Lab.
Attendants as there are no sanctioned posts of Lab.
Attendants.
Further, it has been submitted that by changing the designation of the petitioners, their pay scales which they were enjoying i.e. Rs. 750-940 is not being reduced.
They were class IV employees prior to the takeover and even now they remain class IV employees.
6.
It may be observed here that in the written statement in paras 3 and 4 of the preliminary objection, it has been averred as under :-  "3.
That only one post of Lab.
Attendant was sanctioned by the Govt. against which Sh. Satpal Singh was appointed.
Hence, no other alternative was left with the department except to change the designation of the petitioners, as the petitioners have demanded the grade of Rs. 950-1500 which was sanctioned to matriculate laboratory attendant.
4.
That prior to taking over of Sanjay College, Ateli, the petitioners were appointed only for four months on purely temporary basis out of college amalgamated fund.
The petitioners were appointed by the Management of Sanjay College, Ateli at their own against the non-sactioned posts."
7.
So far as the question of the petitioners having been appointed in the College, only four months prior to taking over against the non-sanctioned posts.
Suffice it to say that not only the petitioners were regularised by the college authorities but also they were initially taken by the Government authorities after the takeover of the College as Lab.
Attendants firstly on temporary ad hoc basis and then they were regularised also which fact has been mentioned in the earlier apart of judgment.
Otherwise also, in view of the Division Bench judgment of this court in C.W.P.
No. 4610 of 1996 (Harpreet Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others) rendered on May 25, 1998, even if the petitioners had been appointed against non-sanctioned posts in the College, there is no such condition in the takeover deed that those who had been employed against the unsanctioned posts would not be absorbed.
After the takeover of the College, the only conditions were that their suitability etc. would have to be adjudged and further they will be initialy appointed for about six months period on temporary ad hoc basis and then they would be a regularised and they would be at the bottom of the employees in the same categories who may already be in existence.
A Division Bench of this Court in Harpreet Kaur's case (supra) takes care of the first submission of the learned counsel for the respondents.
So far as the other submission is concerned that the petitioners had been appointed by the Principal in the scale of Rs. 950-1500 at his own level, the same does not seem to be correct statement of facts.
The Principal never appointed the petitioners in the aforesaid pay scale and rather asked the Government to give approval to the grant to the petitioners the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 which is evident from communication dated April 29, 1998, copy Annexure P-13.
It has not been specifically denied on the part of the respondents that for each Lab.
in the college, one Lab.
Attendants is required.
Even if the petitioners are retained as Lab.
Attendants apart from one Sat Pal, there will be three of them and yet the requirement may be of one more Lab.
Attendant as there are four Laboratories in the College.
Be that as it may, once the petitioners have been absorbed as Lab.
Attendants, the change in designation does affect them adversely as the nature of duties may change and on redesignation they may not be entitled to the pay scale which a matriculate Lab.
Attendant may be getting in the Government service.
We also not oblivious of the fact that the respondents, as per their written-statement, have changed the designation of the petitioners on the ground that the petitioners are claiming the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and quash the order dated March 3, 1999, copy Annexure P-14.
The respondents are further directed to consider the case of the petitioners for the grant of pay scale admissible to them as matriculate Lab.
Attendants, which is admissible to them in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.