Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India by the petitioner is to the inaction on the part of the respondents in reimbursement of the medical bills submitted by the petitioner with a prayer for issuance of Mandamus directing the respondents to pay the said amount.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Head Clerk in Public Works Department 'B&R), State Government of Haryana.
He had joined the service on 13.11.1963 and was transferred to Karnal in the year 1996.
Vijay Kumar, son of the petitioner, aged about 17 years, stated to be dependent upon the petitioner, developed some heart problem.
He was shown to the local Government doctor and thereafter the petitioner took his son to the GB Pant Hospital, Delhi, where he had to be admitted from 821996 to 751996.
It was found that two valves of the heart of the son of the petitioner were damaged and required immediate surgery.
The surgeries were performed on him and he was finally discharged from the hospital on 751996.
According to petitioner GB Pant Hospital is an approved hospital for treatment of Haryana Government employees and as such no prior permission of the Haryana Health Department, Chandiarh was required.
The copies of the medical bills submitted totaled Rs. 1,52,69419 to the department vide Annexures P.6 to P.8, annexed to the writ petition.
The petitioner retired from service on 3111998 but till date the amount claimed by the petitioner for the afore-stated treatment has not been reimbursed to the petitioner, thus, compelling him to file the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a reply.
The basic contention raised on behalf of the respondents is that the petitioner's case does not fall within the ambit of the instructions/circular issued by the State of Haryana dated 19111988 under the head "Recognition of the specialist Institutions for the purposes of medical reimbursement to the Haryana Govt.
employees/pensioners."
It is also stated that GB Pant Hospital is not a recognised institution for by-pass coronary surgery but the State Government of Haryana and the petitioner had not sought prior approval/sanction of the competent authority to avail of such benefit in that hospital.
Rest of the averments have been vaguely denied.
4.
The controversy in this writ petition falls within a very narrow compass.
If GB Pant Hospital is taken to be a recognised institution then there is no other reason why the respondent should withhold the payment of reimbursement of the medical bills submitted by the petitioner.
The petitioner has specifically averred in the writ petition that the State of Haryana has issued different letters from time to time declaring unequivocally that GB Pant Hospital is a recognised institution for receiving treatment by the employees of the State of Haryana and the expenditure incurred for that purpose is subject to reimbursement by the Government.
In this regard he has placed reliance upon Annexures P.3 and P.4.
Vide Ex. P.3 the medical bill was forwarded with due certification by the concerned department for reimbursement.
Annexure P4 is the letter issued again, in context to the bills submitted by the petitioner, and the relevant extract clarified by the departments inter se reads as under :-  "2.
That the permission of Director of Health Department Haryana Chandigarh is not required for the purpose of treatment as GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi has been allowed for the purpose of Medical treatment.
It is requested that the Medical Bill of employee may be sent to S.E.
and the payment may be made.
Copy of the medical reimbursement bill attached."
In addition to this, another letter was written by the Superintending Engineer, Karnal Circle to the Chief Engineer, Haryana.
The relevant extract of the said letter reads as under :-  "However, in response to observation No. 1 and 2 of your office endst No. 441/AC dated 16197 the attention of your office is invited to Health Department letter No. 2(60) The III-79 dated 2480 vide which the GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi has been allowed for the purpose of medical attendance treatment of Haryana Govt. employees and their families, who are stationed at Delhi or happen to visit or pass through Delhi on official business."
The instructions referred supra have been reiterated by the respondents themselves in Annexure R2 to the reply filed by them.
Ex. R2 is the copy of the instructions issued by the Health Department, Government of Haryana on 2.5.1980 and para No. 3 of the said instructions is a mere reiteration and confirmation of what has been stated in the letter.
5.
The cumulative effect of the above instructions is that an employee of the Haryana State Government stationed at Delhi or who happen to visit or pass through Delhi on official business shall be allowed to take treatment from GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi.
In face of these documents and instructions it is difficult for the Court to come to the conclusion that GB Pant Hospital, is not a recognised institution for its employees by the State Government of Haryana.
The instructions issued by the Government are primarily for the welfare of the employees and they must be given somewhat larger construction so as to achieve their object and provide a meaningful expression to the spirit behind the instructions.
The stand of the department itself has been that the petitioner was entitled to the reimbursement of the medical bills submitted.
6.
The petitioner had apparently acted in good faith and upon the instructions issued contained in the above said letters.
To deprive the petitioner of the aforestated amount does not appear to be either fair or just.
The right to life includes right to live with dignity.
An employee who faces emergency arising from a serious disease has to rush for the medical aid.
So far such approach of the employee is within four corners of the instructions issued by the Government and the rules governing the subject, benefits must accrue in favour of the employee.
The instructions have been issued to give a benefit to the employee and not to come to the aid of the employer in denying a legitimate right of the employee in such cases.
At this stage it may be pertinent to make a reference to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case of State of Punjab v. Ram Lubhaya Bagga, JT 1998(2) SC 136 : 1998(1) SCT 716 (SC).
7.
The stand taken by the respondents in their reply is contrary to their own documents.
There is no dispute to the fact that the petitioner at the first instance had been to a Government doctor at Karnal and had to rush to Delhi keeping in view the emergency and threat to the life of his child.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated the petition filed by the petitioner is allowed.
The respondents are directed to reimburse the medical bills submitted by the petitioner in relation to the treatment of his son Vijay Kumar at GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi, which in any case is a Government Hospital, under the Ministry of Health, New Delhi.
The respondents shall pay the said amount in accordance with rules and instructions.
Petition allowed.