JS Khehar, J - The petitioner first served the Indian Army, wherefrom he retired on 181987.
After his retirement from the Army, he was employed as a driver in January 1989, by the Haryana Roadways.
In the same year, while on duty, the bus he was driving had an accident with a truck.
In the aforesaid accident, he suffered multiple fractures.
On his recovery, he was assigned the duties of a Yard Master.
The duties attached to the post of Yard Master are considered to be light and the petitioner was fit to discharge the same.
2.
The petitioner was required to be examined by the Civil Surgeon, Sonepat.
As per the medical report of the Civil Surgeon, the petitioner was declared unfit to drive a heavy vehicle.
On the basis of the aforesaid report, a letter was addressed to the petitioner informing him of his medical incapacity.
On the said basis, the petitioner was retired from service with effect from 12111996.
The retirement order specified that the same was passed on the instructions of the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, dated 2081992.
On the basis of the aforesaid instructions and in view of the assertion that no alternative post equivalent to the post of driver was vacant, the petitioner's request for giving him an alternative job with duties not as arduous as that of a driver was declined.
The claim of the petitioner for appointment against a lower post was also declined as no such lower post was available for accommodating the petitioner.
His request of appointment in the Workshop was declined as he did not fulfil the requisite qualification for appointment in the Workshop.
3.
Having been retired from service, vide order dated 12111996, the petitioner started to request the authorities to release the pensionary benefits due to him consequent upon his retirement on account of bodily infirmity making him incapacitated for public service.
The claim of the petitioner is that in spite of having fulfilled all formalities, he has not been released pension due to him as a consequence of his retirement from service on medical grounds.
4.
The retirement order itself relies on instructions issued by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, dated 2081992.
A perusal of the aforesaid instructions shows that the Transport Department devised a policy based on the decision rendered by the Apex Court in the case of Anand Bihari and Others v. Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation, Jaipur and Another, 1991(2) SCT 44 (SC) Civil Appeal Nos. 1859-63 of 1990.
A relevant part of the aforesaid policy adopted for drivers found medically unfit to continue in service is being extracted hereunder :-  "1.
If a driver has become unfit due to a disease not related to his employment, he should be retired from service on medical grounds by following the procedure under Rule 518 or CSR Vol. II if the employee himself submits the medical report or by following the procedure laid down under Rule 511 and 512 of CSR Vol. II in case the employer has got the employee medically examined and he has been declared unfit.
2.
In either of the situations whether the employee has himself submitted the medical report or the employer has got him medically examined, if the incapacity is related to the occupational hazards then first efforts should be made to find an alternative employment, may not necessarily be of the same scale of pay as the one he was holding earlier but it should be ensured that the employee is capable of performing that job.
In case he is given an alternative employment, he would be deemed to have retired from his earlier employment with whatever retirement benefits are admissible to him and the salary drawn by him on the re-employed job would be in addition to the retirement benefits, provided the pension plus the salary on re-employment does not exceed the last pay drawn.
3(i).
In case there is no job available and the General Manager certified to the effect, the employee should be paid along with the retirement benefits, an additional compensation.
(ii) Where the employee has put in 5 years or less than 5 years service, the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to 7 days salary per year of the balance of his service.
(iii) Where the employee has put in more than 5 years but less than 10 years of service, the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to 21 days salary per year of the balance of his service.
(iv) Where the employee has put in more than 10 years but less than 15 years service the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to 21 days salary per year of the balance of his service.
(v) Where the employee has put in more than 15 years service but less than 20 years service the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to one month's salary per year of the balance of his service.
(vi) Where the employee has put in more than 20 years service, the amount of compensation shall be equivalent to two months salary per year of the balance of his service."
According to the aforesaid policy, the first and foremost duty cast on the authorities (when a driver has been rendered unfit to discharge his duties) is to follow the procedure laid down in Rules 511 and 512 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, as applicable in the State of Haryana.
The aforesaid Rules are also relevant to determine the present controversy.
The same are, therefore, being extracted hereunder :-  "511.
An invalid pension is awarded, on his retirement from the Public Service, to a Government employee, who by bodily or mental infirmity is permanently incapacitated for the public service, or for the particular branch of it to which he belongs.
Note :- The amount of invalid pension shall not be less than the amount of normal family pension admissible under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
512.
In the case of partial incapacity (vide alternative certificate in Rule 526), a Government employee should, if possible, be employed even on lower pay so that the expense of pensioning him may be avoided.
If there be no means of employing him even on lower pay, then, he may be admitted to pension, but it should be considered whether, in view of his capacity for partially earning a living it is necessary to grant to him the full pension admissible under the rules.
Note :- The amount of invalid pension shall not be less than the amount of normal family pension admissible under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964."
The second duty of the employer is to find an alternative employment not necessarily in the same scale of pay as the one which the employee was holding prior to his medical infirmity.
In such a situation, the employee would not only be entitled to the salary of the post against which he is appointed but would also be entitled to his retiral benefits.
In case an alternative employment is not made available to accommodate the employee he is entitled to compensation in terms of paragraph 3 of the instructions extracted above dependent upon the number of years of service rendered by him.
Paragraph 3 expressly indicates that the compensation to be made available to such an employee would be in addition to the retiral benefits which are to be granted to him.
5.
The cumulative effect of the instructions dated 2081992 is that employee who has retired from service on medical grounds is entitled to pensionary benefits.
This entitlement submits irrespective of the fact that he has been allowed an alternative employment or compensation in lieu of the service rendered by him.
In the instant case, the petitioner has been declined alternative employment, either for the reason that no post is available to accommodate him or for the reason that he is ineligible for the available post.
In these circumstances, he was entitled to compensation envisaged under paragraph 3 of the instructions besides pensionary benefits.
Although the compensation has been released to the petitioner, no pensionary benefits have been released to him as yet.
6.
The petitioner's claim for pensionary benefits has been declined on the premises that he has rendered less than 10 years of qualifying service and as such is not entitled to pensionary benefits.
The question, as to whether, the employee who has been retired on medical grounds prior to having rendered 10 years qualifying service was entitled to pensionary benefits came up for consideration in Raghbir Chand v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) S.C.T.
503.
While examining the provision of Rule 511 extracted above, this court concluded that the aforesaid rule specifically dealt with retirement based on bodily or mental infirmity leading to incapacity for service.
Whereas the general rule for grant of pension related to retirement on attaining the age of superannuation wherein 10 years of qualifying service is a pre-condition for the grant of pensionary benefits.
In the aforesaid case it has been held that the general rule would have no applicability for the grant of pension as a consequence of retirement under Rule 511.
In other words, invalid pension stipulated for retirement on account of bodily or mental infirmity leading to incapacity for service does not require 10 years of qualying service for purposes of earning pensionary benefits.
We duly affirm the aforesaid legal position.
7.
In examining the case of the petitioner, it is clear from the order dated 12111996 that the petitioner had been retired as he had been declared unfit to drive a heavy vehicle.
In other words, he had been retired for reasons of bodily infirmity which incapacitated him to discharge his duties.
In the aforesaid view of the matter, we find the petitioner to be entitled to pensionary benefits.
The question to be determined is whether he is entitled to benefits determinable under Rule 511 or under Rule 512 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules as applicable in the State of Haryana.
In the instant case, in view of the admitted position that the petitioner is only partially incapacitated, his entitlement to the pensionary benefits is liable to be determined under rule 512.
We, accordingly, direct the respondents to determine the pensionary benefits due to the petitioner under Rule 512 within 3 months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this judgment.
Having determined the pensionary benefits due to the petitioner within the aforesaid stipulated period, arrears shall be released to the petitioner within one month thereafter.
In case the authorities do not release the pensionary benefits to the petitioner in the time schedule framed above, the petitioner will be entitled to interest at the rate of 18% per annum with effect from the expiry of the period of 3 months envisaged in the aforesaid time schedule till the eventual release of the pensionary benefits to the petitioner.
8.
The instant petition is, therefore, allowed on the terms and conditions stipulated in the foregoing paragraph.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.