Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the four years Bachelor of Technology (Computer Engineering) course in the MM Engineering College, Mullana District, Ambala, respondent No. 3 in the Sessions 1995-96, then affiliated to the Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar.
After having cleared the Ist Semester, the petitioner appeared in the 2nd semester examination in June, 1996 conducted by the said University.
The result of the 2nd Semester was declared on 26111996 and the petitioner was shown to have received a re- appear in three subjects, namely, Mathematics-II, Engineering Drawing II and Applied Chemistry I The petitioner applied for the re-evaluation of her answer books in the three papers and while the matter was yet pending, the affiliation of the College was shifted from the Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar, respondent No. 2 to the Kurukshetra University, respondent No. 1.
The petitioner thereafter represented to respondent No. 2 seeking the declaration of her result of the 2nd semester examination after re-evaluation but despite a number of representations in that regard, no result was forthcoming and on enquiry, the petitioner was told that her answer books were not traceable and the result would be declared as soon they were located.
As the petitioner's result after re-evaluation was not forthcoming, she, as a matter of abundant caution, re-appeared in two papers i.e.
Mathematics II and Applied Chemistry I of the 2nd semester and on the declaration of the result on 2951997, was shown as having passed in both these papers.
The petitioner, in the meanwhile, also took the examination of the 3rd and 4th semesters and cleared all the papers.
The petitioner's result on re-evaluation was declared by the Guru Jambheshwar University on 30.5.1998 and she was declared pass in two papers i.e.
Mathematics II and Applied Chemistry I but was shown as having failed in the paper of Engineering Drawing II.
As the petitioner had already cleared the 5th semester in the interegnum, she sought admission to the 6th semester examination, which was to start on 461998.
Admission was, however, denied on the ground that she had not cleared the 2nd semester examination till then.
The petitioner has, accordingly, filed the present petition pleading that as the result after re-evaluation had been declared after one and half years, she should not be prejudiced on that account and should be permitted to appear in the 6th semester examination without having cleared the 2nd semester.
2.
Vide interim orders of this Court dated 861998, the petitioner was permitted to appear in the 6th semester examination provisionally at her own risk and responsibility.
It is the conceded position that the petitioner has appeared in the 6th semester examination, though the result thereof is still awaited.
It is also the conceded position that the petitioner was also declared as having passed in the supplementary examination held for the paper Engineering Drawing II in May, 1998.
Mr. RK Chopra has also pointed out at the very outset that he had advised his client, the petitioner, to take the 6th semester examination once again after her success in the 2nd semester as a safety measure in case the writ petition as laid was unsuccessful.
The petitioner has accordingly taken the 6th semester examination twice, once under the interim orders of this Court before passing the 2nd semester and again on her own volition after having cleared the same.
3.
In the reply filed by the respondents, reference has been made to Clause 6 of the Ordinance and Courses of reading for the BTech.
Degree course and it has been pointed out that though a candidate could go from a lower to the higher semester by and large without passing the lower one yet the provision clearly postulated that a candidate had to pass the 2nd semester in order to be eligible for admission to the 6th semester and as the petitioner had not cleared the 2nd semester till May, 1998, she was not entitled to seek admission in the 6th semester.
4.
This case last came up for hearing on 24th May, 1999 and was adjourned to this date to enable the respondents' counsel to get instructions in the matter, in the light of the fact that the petitioner had, by now, passed the second semester and had twice appeared for the sixth semester examination, (though the result was awaited) and was presently studying in the 7th semester.
Mr Dahiya, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 has today put on record a letter written by the College to the University in which it had been highlighted that the petitioner had been permitted to attend the classes of the 6th semester without having cleared the second one on account of an affidavit that she had filed before the College, to the effect that she be permitted to join the 6th semester classes and in case, she was not able to clear the 2nd semester examination which had been taken by her in December, 1997 and June, 1998, her admission to the 6th semester would be deemed to be automatically cancelled.
It has, accordingly, been urged by the learned counsel that the petitioner's admission to the 6th semester in March, 1998, at the instance of the College, was wholly unauthorised as she had not cleared the 2nd semester examination up to that date.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition must fail.
It is the conceded position that the petitioner had appeared in the 2nd semester examination for the first time in June, 1996 and that she had received a `Re-appear' in three subjects namely Mathematics-II, Engineering Drawing-II and Applied Chemistry-I.
She had nevertheless chosen to re-appear in only two of the three papers i.e. Mathematics-II & Applied Chemistry-I and was declared pass in these two subjects on 29th May, 1997.
It is, therefore, apparent that the petitioner cannot take the benefit of her success in these two papers to claim regularisation of her admission to the 6th semester as she had admittedly not cleared the same in tis entirety.
Mr. Chopra's argument, therefore, that the University was remiss in not declaring her result within a reasonable time on account of some confusion with regard to her re-evaluation, would be to no avail as the petitioner had, on her own accord, appeared in only two of the three papers.
The delay in the declaration of her result would, therefore, have no bearing on the fate of this petition.
6.
It is the conceded position that the Ordinances of the University have statutory force.
Admittedly, the petitioner had not cleared the 2nd semester examination up to March, 1998 when she had been granted admission (on the basis of her affidavit) to the 6th semester.
Mr. Chopra has, however, strenuously urged that the petitioner had appeared for the 6th semester examination a second time after she had cleared the 2nd semester supplementary examination and as such, the petitioner should be granted the benefit of this circumstances as she was presently studying in the 7th and penultimate semester.
This argument too is misplaced.
The petitioner's admission to the 6th semester in March, 1998 was not authorised as on the date of admission, she had not cleared the 2nd semester.
In this view of the matter, the benefit of admission to the 6th semester cannot be given to her.
It is true that the petitioner would have to be relegated to the 6th semester once again, but in the light of the Ordinance on the subject and more particularly the fact that she had herself chosen to appear to two of the three re-appear papers in the supplementary examination held in May/June, 1997, she alone is to blame.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in this petition.
Dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.