Swatanter Kumar, J - Challenge in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 21st December, 1998 passed by the Punjab School Education Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board), which reads as under :-  "From Secretary P.S.E.
Board Mohali To  Manjot Singh House No. 6694, New Atma Nagar,  Naibowal,  Ludhiana.
Letter No. 347632-HPS-B-17 Ex.-2 Dated : 21121998.
Subject :- +2 examination - Cancellation of result of Roll No. 347632.
Regarding the above subject it is intimated that during +2 examination held in March, 1998, you changed the examination centre without the approval of this office at your own level.
Therefore, your result is being cancelled.
Sd/- 21121998 Superintendent (Ex.-2) for Secretary P.S.E.B."
The challenge to the impugned order is two fold.
Firstly, the said order is violative of the principles of natural justice and secondly, no fault or omission or commission is attributable to the petitioner, which could be said to be a reason rendering the petitioner liable for action taken by the respondent-Board.
2.
The facts falls within narrow compass.
The petitioner, who was appearing as a private candidate in the examination of 10+2 to be held in March, 1998 and submitted his examination form accordingly.
The petitioner was issued roll number on the basis of his application, being roll No. 347632.
On the roll number slip the petitioner was allocated Centre 20-E.
The petitioner took the entire examination at Arya College, Ludhiana.
The petitioner, who claims to have done very well in his examination and was awaiting for his result when on 21st December, 1998, he came to know that his result has been cancelled, compelling the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondent-board filed the reply and the basic contention raised is that Centre 20-E relates to Arya Senior Secondary School and not to Arya College, Ludhiana.
The petitioner had filled in the wrong Centre himself and the Superintendent of the examination was negligent in letting the petitioner appear at the Arya College, Ludhiana.
Resultantly, his result was cancelled.
4.
There is hardly any dispute to the fact that the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of being heard or to explain his case before passing the impugned order dated 21121998, Annexure P/2.
The contents of the impugned order clearly indicate that the petitioner could have offered an explanation to the respondent-board for his alleged commission.
The petitioner has explained in the present petition that the tampering in his Roll No. Card was done in front of him by the Superintendent of examination and he has acted in accordance with the instructions issued by the office and no fault is attributable to him.
If such an explanation would have been brought to the notice of the concerned authorities, the said authorities could have applied their mind and considered the case of the petitioner in its right perspective.
The impugned order not only suffers from basic infirmities but is also violative of settled principle of audi alterm partem.
In this regard reference can be made to the Full Bench of this Court in the case Ram Niwas Bansal v. State Bank of Patiala and another, 1998(3) SCT 550 (P&H) : 1998(3) R.S.J.
1.
During the course of hearing, the original record was also summoned in the Court.
5.
The respondent-board had issued a Roll No. slip as per their version by only filling up 20-E the Centre and rest of the roll number slip was left blank which the petitioner had filed in.
There is tampering in this document.
From the expression` Arya College Ludhiana,' Arya College has been secored out.
According to the petitioner this has been scored out by the office Superintendent.
The roll number slip itself could not have helped the petitioner.
For the alleged change of the examination Centre, it is the Superintendent of Examination Centre, who after examining/scrutinising the roll number slip permitted the petitioner to take the examination of Arya College, Ludhiana.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been permitted to take all the papers from that Centre after filling in the examination hall slip as well.
I find it very difficult to accept the argument of the respondent-board that the blank in the roll number slip are required to be filled in by the student and all the responsibility to take care and caution is fastened on the students and the respondent board and the Superintendent of the examination has no responsibility whatsoever.
I am of the view that the respondent-board cannot shift the entire burden of this procedural aspect of the examination exclusively on the student.
At best it will be a mutual responsibility.
It is not stated in the order that the petitioner had taken some undue advantage as a result of changing the Centre.
Nothing prevented the Superintendent of the Examination Centre to ask the petitioner to go to the other Centre.
At best it can be termed as a contributory negligence on the part of the student as well as the respondent-board and the Superintendent examination centre.
I am unable to see any valid reason for the respondent-board to act in the above manner so as to prejudice the petitioner to the extent that he will have to waste two years of his academic career.
6.
However, before parting with this file, I will certainly like to issue direction to the respondent-board that in order to avoid such incident in future due care should be taken by the staff of the respondent-board and in any case the roll number slip should be filled in by the office in its entirety as it contains no column which can be filled in by the school concerned or the student.
This direction shall be communicated to all concerned forthwith.
7.
For the reasons afforestated, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 21st December, 1998 is quashed.
The respondent Board is directed to declare the result of the petitioner in accordance with law.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, I would not award any costs to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.