Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Indian Army as a Sepoy on 12.1.1968.
On 6.6.1993, while posted in 329 F.D.
Ambulance Unit, which was involved in Operation Rakshak, the petitioner developed a back ache.
He was brought before a Medical Board on 10121993, which certified vide Annexure P-2, that his disability had been aggravated by military service.
The petitioner was accordingly categorised Medical Category BEE (B).
The petitioner nevertheless showed his willingness to continue in service, but he was boarded out with disability assessed at 20% with effect from 3171994.
The petitioner's claim for disability pension was accordingly forwarded by his unit to the CCDA (P), Allahabad, which declined the same vide letter dated 761995, (Annexure P-4), on the ground that the petitioner's disease was not attributable to nor aggrieved by military service.
The appeal filed by the petitioner was also rejected vide Annexure P-7 dated 1231998, on the ground that the disability assessed was between 15% to 19% i.e., less than 20% for five years.
The orders, Annexures P-4 and P-7 have been impugned by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondents and it has been pleaded that the CCDA(P) was the final authority to determine the petitioner's claim to a disability pension and as the authority vide its order dated 1971995 (copy not annexed) had found that the petitioner's disability was 15% to 19% and this finding has been endorsed by the Appellate Authority vide Annexure P-7, the petitioner's claim to disability pension was not tenable.
3.
The stand taken by the respondents cannot stand scrutiny.
It is the admitted position that the Re-Survey Medical Board had clearly opined that the petitioner's disability was to the extent of 20% and in that eventuality it was not open to the CCDA(P) or the Appellate Authority to record a contrary opinion without examining the petitioner.
While dealing with a similar situation, a Division Bench of this Court in Ujagar Singh v. Union of India and others, 1997(4) RSJ 587 : 2000(4) R.C.R.
(Civil) 342 following the Supreme Court's decision in Ex. Sapper Mohinder Singh v. Union of India (Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 decided on 14.1.1993), and in paragraph 3 of the judgment observed that :  "From the above narrated facts and the stand taken by the parties before us, the controversy that falls for determination by us is in a very narrow compass viz. whether the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) has any jurisdiction to sit over the opinion of the experts (Medical Board) while dealing with the case of grant of disability pension, in regard to the percentage of the disability pension, or not.
In the present case, it is nowhere stated that the petitioner was subjected to any higher medical board before the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) decided to decline the disability pension to the petitioner.
We are unable to see as to how the accounts branch dealing with the pension can sit over the judgment of the experts in the medical line and comment upon the extent of disability without making any reference to a detailed or higher medical board which can be constituted under the relevant instructions and rules by the Director General of Army Medical Core."
4.
In the light of above settled proposition of law, this petition is allowed, the orders, Annexures P-4 and P-7, are quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pay disability pension to the petitioner at the rate of 20% within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
No costs.
Petition allowed.