D Raju, CJ.
(Oral) - The above writ petition has been filed seeking to quash the order dated 1191998 filed as Annexure P-13 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 907-HP of 1996 and also quash the proceedings dated 12101992 filed as Annexure P-8, whereby the Government of India, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, fixed the criteria for determining the seniority of the incumbents to the post of Field Exhibition Officer appointed to grade III of the Central Information Service and also as a consequence thereof to quash the seniority list dated 181996 filed as Annexure P-12 which is a list fixing the inter se seniority of senior grade of Indian Information Service, Group `B' (Officers) as on 3061995 corrected upto 31.10.1993.
2.
The order of the Central Administrative Tribunal is challenged on the ground that the Tribunal below was in error in considering that the petitioner's claim before the Tribunal was a belated one and in this respect it has omitted to keep into account the fact that immediately after the proceeding dated 12101992 the petitioner has been making representations and it is only in 1996 when the seniority list came to prepared and circulated that the petitioner was really aggrieved and immediately he has moved the Tribunal below and, therefore, the reason assigned for rejecting the claim of the petitioner is not tenable.
Argued the learned counsel further, that the Tribunal below has not chosen to consider the other valid claim made on merits and this also vitiates the impugned proceeding.
In support of the claim made for the petitioner that his claim for seniority, as made by him, is justified in law, reliance has been placed by the learned counsel on the decisions reported in Devdutta v. State of MP, 1991 Supp(2) SCC 553, Wing Commander J Kumar v. Union of India, 1982(2) SCC 116, MS Makashi v. IM Menon, 1982(1) S.C.C.
379 and K Madhavan v. Union of India, 1987(4) SCC 566 besides inviting our attention to an unreported decision of the apex Court which was found to have been referred to and extracted in the order passed by the Tribunal in OA No. 1394/91 in what is known as Dharmana's case.
The relevant portion has been also extracted for the petitioner in paragraph 17(v) of the Petition.
The learned counsel at length invited our attention to all these materials including the judgments noticed above and also the decision of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Madras Bench) dated 16111989 in OA No. 44/89 and 514/89.
3.
We have carefully considered the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
As could be seen from the order of the Tribunal, as also from the material placed on record, the claim of the petitioner is that he should be given seniority from the year 1980 and not from the year 1986 as has been done by the authorities and the Tribunal below in paragraph 5, in our view, has given justifying reason to highlight the belated nature of the claim and the need to reject the same at this point of time.
The submission made before us that it is only after the representations made on the passing of the orders dated 12101992 the ultimate seniority list that is challenged has been made in 1996 and circulated, on which he is aggrieved, cannot be said to be a genuine or reasonable or plausible explanation to cover up the lapse committed by the petitioner.
The seniority list in question came to be finalised in the light of the directions and the guidelines and the criteria fixed by the Government of India in their proceedings dated 12101992.
The petitioner was alive and came to know of the orders of the Government of India dated 12101992 long before and as claim made representations also in this regard.
The grievance before the Tribunal below and before us is not so much that the inter se seniority fixed under the impugned list filed as Annexure P-12 is in violation or contravention of the criteria and the principles as well as guidelines laid down in the orders of the Government dated 12101992.
On the other hand, the grievance being that even the criteria fixed in the order dated 12101992 does not take into account the relevant principles for according protection or what it is called, the preservation of the earlier service when at times the post held by the petitioner was set to be not included in the cadre the orders passed in 1992 should have been challenged then and there.
That being the position, no infirmity or exception could be taken to the reasoning of the Tribunal below that viewed from the date of the Government order dated 12101992 the claim projected by the petitioner before the Tribunal below is belated.
The order of the Government dated 12101992 itself as found noticed therein, appears to have been passed taking into account the decision rendered by not only the Central Administrative Tribunal (Madras Bench) but also that of the Ernakulam Bench and that too after consulting the Union Public Service Commission, in this regard.
Since the fixation of inter se seniority was already sufficiently delayed and has to be and had been at last fixed pursuant to the orders of the Tribunal and the decision taken by the Government, it should not be allowed to be challenged after such a long time so as to unsettle the things which had, at least after a long lapse of time got settled and, therefore, the Tribunal was justified in declining to interfere in the matter.
It is the soundness of this reason which weighed very much also with us to decline to entertain this writ petition.
Otherwise, it would have the effect of making the seniority position of the officers nebulus and independent for a long time, hereafter also.
On this ground alone the order of the Tribunal could be sustained and held to be justified.
4.
Even that apart, the claim made on behalf of the petitioner does not seem to be justified even on merits.
The principles laid down in various decisions relied upon before us which in turn came to have been rendered in the light of earlier decision reported in 1982(1) SCC 379 (supra) also does not merit acceptance despite the fact that the Tribunal below has not chosen to exhaustively refer to the submissions that might have been made.
In our view, it could not be said that the Tribunal had not adverted to the merits of the claim, totally and that there was no adjudication at all in this regard.
The Tribunal has categorically referred to the factual issue that the applicant has been given seniority from 1986 when he was inducted into Central Information Service with the higher grade of Rs. 650-1200 and that the earlier service cannot be counted for such seniority as it was in a lower pay scale of Rs. 650-960 and such service in the lower scale is not covered by the order of the Government of India dated 12101992.
In the light of such staring factual position, which remained unchallenged, there was no need for the Tribunal for further elaborating on the submissions perhaps made in the abstract on the basis of general principles of law.
The decision reported in 1982(2) SCC 379 (supra) which is the sheet anchor of the decision in other cases, as also for the submission made for the petitioner before us, as could be seen from paragraph 31, particularly, the relevant portion on page 402 of the report, itself makes it clear that while fixing the seniority in the higher post it is not open to take into consideration any service rendered in the lower post and it is subject to the said reservation only the principles relating to taking into account earlier service have been laid down by their Lordships of the apex court in 1982(1) S.C.C.
379 (supra), and the said judgment also has to be understood and given effect to.
5.
Consequently, even on merits not only the Tribunal had decided the issue perfectly in accordance with law but we also see no error, patent in law as vitiating the order of the Tribunal to warrant our interference, in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with the decision of the Tribunal.
6.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and shall stand dismissed.
Petition dismissed.