Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner's father was working as an Assistant Administrative Officer with the Life Insurance Corporation.
He unfortunately expired on December 17, 1994.
The petitioner approached the Corporation with a request that he be granted appointment on compassionate grounds.
His claim was considered and rejected vide order dated May 18, 1998.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that the order dated May 18, 1998, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition be quashed and that the respondent Corporation be directed to grant an appointment.
2.
The Corporation contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been averred that petitioner and his brother are running a shop under the name and style of M/s Shiva General Store, Shops No. 9 and 10, Housing Board Colony, Ambala Cantt.
It has been further averred that the family has been paid terminal benefits amounting to Rs. 5,41,213/- besides the amount of insurance policies at the time of death of the petitioner's father.
3.
The facts as averred in the written statement have not been controverted by the petitioner.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Laler contends that running of shop is not an employment so as to entitle the Corporation to reject the petitioner's claim for the grant of appointment on compassionate grounds.
The contention is fallacious.
Normally all posts have to be filled up in conformity with the principle of equality as enshrined in Article 16.
An exception is made in a case where the bread winner dies in harness.
The instructions issued by the Corporation permit the grant of appointment on compassionate grounds so as to allow the family to tide over the crisis.
The purpose of granting appointment on compassionate grounds is to help the needy and not the greedy.
In the present case it is evident that the petitioner is well provided for.
The family was facing no penury.
4.
Faced with the above situation, Mr. Laler contends that according to the instructions issued by the Corporation a widow is entitled to get the employment even if she is gainfully working with some other organisation.
It may be so.
That is not the issue in the present case.
The mother of the petitioner has not approached this Court with the prayer that she should be granted employment nor she is entitled to it as, in fact, the family is well provided for.
No other point has been raised.
5.
In view of the above, no ground for grant of any relief under Article 226 is made out.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.