RL Anand, J - Shri Harinder Singh son of Shri Sohan Singh, resident of Vikas Nagar, Rajpura, District Patiala, has filed the present Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ or direction in the nature of certiorari, mandamus etc. setting aside the selection list prepared by respondent No. 2 and the impugned order Annexure P-1 and P-2, appointing respondent No. 3 to 10 without considering the superior claim of the petitioner and directing the respondents No. 1 and 2 to offer appointment as Lab.
Attendant to the petitioner forthwith.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that on 771992, respondent No. 2 advertised four posts of Lab Attendants and as per the condition of the advertisement, the last date of submission of the application was 3171992.
It is alleged by the petitioner that respondent No. 2 was to retire on 3181992.
His term was extended beyond 3181992.
In order to accommodate his bosses, respondent No. 2 appointed 26 persons to the post of Lab Attendant as against the advertised four posts.
As a result, the petitioner has given the challenge to the selection list prepared by respondent No. 2.
3.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The reply has been entertained.
The allegations have been denied and the stand of the State is that in the advertisement itself there was a scope for taking more persons.
Moreover, the present writ is liable to be dismissed for non-joinder of necessary parties as the petitioner has not impleaded all the selectees, who have been selected by respondent No. 2.
Also it was the stand of the State that there were thousands of applications which had necessited the State to take more persons than that of the advertised posts.
4.
With the above broad pleadings of the parties, I have heard the learned for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
So far as the position of law as propounded by the learned counsel for the appellant is concerned, I am with him.
It was a common case of the parties that the State advertised four posts and in these circumstances, the State Government could not take as many as 26 persons and such was the act which would definitely violate Article 16 of the Constitution.
In this regard reliance can be placed on 1992(1) SLR 157 : 1992(1) SCT 700 (P&H)(DB), Parkash Vir and others v. State of Haryana and others and 1993 Supp(4) Supreme Court Cases 377 : 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC), Hoshiar Singh v. State of Haryana.
With approval I can quote the observations of the Hon'ble Division Bench made in Parkash Veer's case (supra) which are as under :-  "The appointment beyond the 8 posts that were initially sought to be filled in is not legally sustainable.
Although the advertisement does say that the number of posts could be increased to any extent yet we are of the view that the number of advertised posts could be deviated from only marginally.
The original requisition was for 6 posts which was subsequently revised to 8.
To take the advertisement liberally and permit the appointment of any incumbent beyond the advertised posts would be to give a carte blanche to the authorities to perpetuate injustice and to act arbitrarily.
The right to be considered for selection for appointment to a public service irrespective of its nature or tenure is guaranteed to all citizens under Article 16 of the Constitution of India and its denial would be a violation of that right.
Public employment is not a largesse which is to be doled out to a favoured few and it is for this purpose that it is incumbent that before any public appointments are made all persons who are eligible for appointment must be given a chance to apply and to be considered."
The difficulty in this case which has arisen for granting any relief to the petitioner is that this petition is liable to be dismissed for non-joining of necessary parties.
The quashing of the selection list would definitely jeopardise the rights of 26 selectees who has already joined the service.
The petitioner has impleaded only 8 persons out of those 26 selectees as respondents No. 3 to 10.
A vested right had already been created in other 18 selectees who cannot be condemned unheard.
The petitioner has never taken any steps to implead those persons as parties in the present writ petition.
During the course of submission, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that directions be issued to the State to supply the list of remaining selectees so that they may be impleaded as respondents in this petition.
Will it be fair, at this stage, to allow the petitioner to implead the remaining selectees ?
The present writ was filed in the year 1993 and the selection was made in the year 1992.
If those selectees are now brought on the record, even the ordinary suit vis-a-vis them would be time barred.
Faced with this difficulty learned counsel for the petitioner submits that it is a violation of the fundamental right which has been brought to the notice of the Court.
In this view of the matter such violation should not go un-noticed.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner of course, may have weight but if scrutinised with the comparative mischief, it cannot be accepted in the present case in view of the peculiar circumstances.
It will not be proper to invoke the provision of Article 226 of the Constitution, at this belated stage after 7 years when the selection list was prepared by the respondent-State in November, 1992.
Much water in this case has flown under the bridges.
Equity is not in favour of the petitioner.
No need to mention that the petitioner was never selected by the selection committee.
He was interviewed and was given the chance.
Meaning thereby, that the petitioner tried his luck.
He looks to be a frustrated lot and has given challenge to the selection list when he himself could not be selected.
He has only impleaded 8 persons out of the 26 selectees.
A good number of persons out of the 26 selectees, has not come on the record and in these circumstances, I am inclined to hold that the present petition is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties and this objection goes to the root of the writ petition, which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed