Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was promoted as a Clerk vide order dated February 25, 1993.
In this order it was specifically provided that the officials are "required to qualify the typewriting in Hindi and English at a speed of 25/30 w.p.m.
within one year of promotion, failing which the annual increment will not be granted and in case they fail to qualify the test within the prescribed period, they are liable to be reverted to the post of Peon/Safai Karamchari from which they are promoted."
Despite the lapse of six years and the grant of various opportunities, the petitioner has failed to qualify the test.
Finally the notice dated June 14, 1999 has been given to the petitioner.
A copy of this notice has been produced as Annexure P16 with the writ petition.
He has been given "one more opportunity to clear the type test within fifteen days", failing which he has to "face consequences for non-compliance of.....offer of appointment."
Aggrieved by this notice, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
We have heard Mr. KK Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has made a two fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that there are three other persons, who have not qualified the test, but have not been given the notice as has been given to the petitioner.
Thus, the action suffers from discrimination.
Secondly, it has been contended that the petitioner has a physical handicap.
He should not be subjected to the requirement of passing a type test.
3.
As for the first submission, it may be noticed that the three persons, referred to by the petitioner, had been promoted vide order dated December 2, 1993.
A copy of the order, by which they were promoted, has been produced as Annexure P7 with the writ petition.
No condition requiring them to pass the test in typing had been laid down.
Thus, it cannot be said that the petitioner and these three persons were similarly situated.
In any event, even it is assumed that they have been allowed to continue as Clerks without passing the test in typing or without insisting upon a similar condition, it cannot be said that the wrong should be repeated.
It is well-known that a Clerk should be proficient in typing.
Only then he is able present proper notes.
The petitioner has been given repeated opportunities during the last six years.
Admittedly, repeated notices have been given to him to qualify the test.
He was given notice vide letters dated August 31, 1993, January 20, 1997 and another notice in May 1999.
Despite the grant of opportunities during the last six years, the petitioner has failed to qualify the test.
This by itself is indicative of his proficiency as a Clerk.
Still further, from the petition itself it appears that out of the three persons mentioned by the petitioner, two have already cleared the type test.
It is only Subhash Chander, who has not done it so far.
If the Department has allowed him to continue without qualifying the test, it may examine the matter.
However, that does not furnish a ground to the petitioner to claim that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Resultantly, the first contention is rejected.
4.
Mr. Jagia then contends that the petitioner is a handicapped person.
Thus, he is not in a position to do any type work.
5.
We have considered even this aspect.
According to the petitioner, the medical certificate was given to him by the Senior Medical Officer, Panipat.
This certificate has been reproduced in para 5 of the writ petition.
According to the certificate, the petitioner has a "deformity of right middle finger."
There is no detail regarding the extent of the deformity.
Assuming that the right middle finger is deformed, still the petitioner has nine fingers in his two hands.
It should be reasonably possible for any person to acquire proficiency during the period of six years.
If the petitioner has failed to do so, he has to blame himself.
6.
Mr. Jagia refers to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Hardev Singh v. State of Haryana, 1999(3) Service Cases Today 278.
Relying on this decision, he contends that the imposition of the condition regarding the type test was illegal.
7.
We have perused this judgment.
It is the admitted position that in Hardev Singh's case (supra) the order of promotion did not contain a stipulation regarding the type test.
In the rules a provision for knowledge of typing in Hindi and English was made subsequent to the date of promotion.
In this situation, it was held that the condition of type test could not have been imposed under the rules for person who had been promoted prior to the promulgation thereof.
Such is not the position in the present case.
It has not been shown that there were statutory rules governing the promotion from Class-IV to Class-III.
Secondly, the condition of type test had been imposed in the order of promotion.
In this situation, we find that the decision is of no assistance to the petitioner.
No other point has been raised.
We find no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.