SB Sinha, Actg.
CJ.
- This appeal is directed against the order of the Learned Single Judge dismissing the writ application filed by the appellant herein on the ground that the interview having taken place in the year 1991 and that the writ petition having been filed three years thereafter, the same could not be entertained on the ground of laches and was accordingly dismissed.
2.
According to the Petitioner the delay in filing the writ application had been duly explained, and thus, the Learned Trial Judge was not justified in dismissing the application in limine.
3.
It is the Petitioner's submission that by a Call Letter dated 13th April, 1991 the Petitioner was asked to attend the Office of the District Judge, Hooghly on 11th May, 1991 with Original Certificates.
The appellant had duly appeared and underwent the speed test of the examination of Typing.
While the petitioner was expecting to be called for interview, it came to the knowledge of the petitioner-Appellant that the Ld.
District Judge, Hooghly had invited applications from candidates whose residences are within the jurisdiction of District of Hooghly.
4.
The appellant being aggrieved with the said move of the Learned District Judge filed an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India on 18th February, 1991 to this Hon'ble Court which was allowed by an Order dated 19th September, 1991 with a direction that "the vacancy of the Bengali Stenographers shall be filled up from among the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange."
The Petitioner stated that she is one of the 23 candidates who appeared in the speed test and examination held on 11th May, 1991 and inspite of the order dated 19th September, 1991 passed in the writ application the petitioner was not considered for appointment and instead the Appointing Authority wrote a letter to the Employment Exchange that the candidates having been found not suitable to the posts of Bengali Stenographers, the Government had been moved to take up the matter with Public Service Commission for selection of suitable candidates.
Then some candidates filed a writ application which was disposed of by an order dated 18th August, 1994 with a direction that the appointments should be given to fill up the posts in accordance with the marks obtained by the candidates in the test held in June, 1991.
It is the petitioner's submission that she is similarly circumstanced like the petitioners in CO No. 3811(W)/92 which was disposed of by an order dated 18th August 1994 and has right to be considered for appointment in the post of Assistant Teacher for which she had appeared.
5.
According to the Petitioner the subsequent order in the writ application filed by four other candidates which was disposed of by an order dated 18th August, 1994 revives the cause of action to the applicant and therefore, the writ application by the order under appeal could not have been dismissed on the ground of laches.
6.
We cannot accede to the said submission.
7.
In the order dated 18th August, 1994 in CO No. 381(W) of 1992 the direction was as under :  "Having regard to the above I am of the view that the appointment should be given to fill up the posts in accordance with the marks obtained by the candidates in the test held in June, 1991 as reflected from the records produced by Mr. Mazumdar.
Accordingly, I allow the writ application and direct the concerned respondents to take steps to give appointments to the candidate including the petitioners in keeping with the result produced by Mr. Mazumdar in respect of the examination held in the month of June, 1991 and to make such appointment in accordance with recruitment rules as was then existing.
Such appointments are to be made within a period of one month from the date of communication of this order."
8.
The said order has been implemented in that the appointment has been made and four posts have been filled up.
9.
It is not the petitioner's case that any appointment has been made contrary to or in violation of the order passed by this Court on 18th August, 1994.
10.
It must be observed that a post cannnot be left vacant indefinitely nor directions can be issued to fill up the posts by candidates who had not been qualified based upon the marks obtained in the test held in June 1991.
11.
We are, therefore, in agreement with the view of the Ld.
Single Judge that the writ petition suffer from laches.
The Ld.
Single Judge has held that the interview did took place in the year 1991.
The writ petition filed after three years thereafter clearly suffers from laches and deserved to be dismissed.
12.
We find no merit in the writ appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Order accordingly.