Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner challenges the order dated May 18, 1998 by which respondent No. 4 was promoted as a Senior Environmental Engineer by the Punjab Pollution Control Board.
He prays that the order be quashed.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On September 21, 1976, the petitioner joined service with the Respondent- Board as a Junior Environmental Engineer.
On January 27, 1987, he was promoted as an Assistant Environmental Engineer.
On March 12, 1993, he was promoted as an Environmental Engineer.
At the time of entry into service, the petitioner had only passed a Diploma Course.
While in service, he passed the AMIE examination as also the ME examination.
The petitioner claims that his thesis for the award of Ph.
D is nearing completion and that his research papers have appeared in various journals.
3.
The petitioner alleges that a post of Senior Environmental Engineer had become available on March 12, 1998.
Prior to that date, the post had been held by deputationists.
The incumbent having been repatriated to the parent department, he had submitted a representation for his promotion on May 11, 1998.
Without considering his claim, respondent No. 4 had been promoted.
He also alleges that on March 18, 1997, a No Objection Certificate for de- reservation of the post had been wrongly given.
Since the petitioner was not promoted despite representations, he has approached this court through the present writ petition.
He maintains that he is eligible.
4.
According to the petitioner, the Board has framed Regulations called 'The Punjab State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution Employees Service Regulations, 1980.'
The conditions of service of the employees are governed by these regulations.
However, the post of Senior Environmental Engineer had been created after the promulgation of the Regulations.
The criterion for appointment to the post had been laid down by the Board.
An Academic qualification of degree in Engineering viz. BE (Civil/Chemical) with an experience of seven years as an Environmental Engineer was prescribed.
The petitioner alleges that while laying down the qualifications "the Board is deriving its power under Regulation 9(2) of the 1980 Regulations."
According to the petitioner, the said regulation does not permit the Board to prescribe qualifications for appointment by promotion.
The action of the Board in rejecting the petitioner on the basis of the qualifications is illegal.
On these premises, the petitioner prays that the appointment of respondent No. 4 be quashed.
5.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 viz. the Board and its Secretary.
It has been averred that the Regulations provide three modes of recruitment viz. 'direct', 'promotion' and 'transfer on deputation.'
It has been further averred that the petitioner "was selected/appointed against the post reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes" as a Junior Engineer.
The "post of Senior Environmental Engineer to which the petitioner is claiming promotion, does not find mention in Appendix C" to the 1980 regulations.
A post of Senior Environmental Engineer was created by the Board in its 62nd meeting held on April 22, 1988.
It was sanctioned by the Government vide memorandum dated May 20, 1988.
The second post of Senior Environmental Engineer was created by the Board in its 68th meeting held on June 2, 1989.
The Government had accorded sanction vide memorandum dated July 20, 1989.
As the posts were not included in the 1980 regulations, the Board had prescribed the qualifications/conditions of eligibility on September 22, 1989.
It was inter alia decided that the post shall be filled-up by promotion.
In case, no suitable person is available for appointment by promotion, the Board shall fill it up by direct recruitment.
Besides a degree in Engineering, the qualification of "atleast seven years' experience as an Environmental Engineer in the Board" was laid down.
Separate qualifications were prescribed for direct recruitment.
The qualifications are in strict conformity with the mandate of Regulation 9(2) of the 1980 Regulations.
With regard to the petitioner's claim, it has been pointed out that he had been promoted as an Environmental Engineer on March 12, 1993.
He would complete seven years service on March 11, 2000.
He was not eligible for appointment by promotion.
There was no other candidate belonging to the category of Scheduled Castes who may be fulfilling the prescribed qualifications.
Thus, the post was got de-reserved.
It was after examination of the matter that the permission was granted.
Reference has also been made to the instructions which provide that "the reservation in services will, however, continue to be subject to the condition that minimum qualifications prescribed for a post would not be lowered with a view to accommodating any candidate......" The respondents also maintain that it "being a single vacancy accruing in the year, the same could not be reserved as per the settled law."
It has been emphasised that respondent No. 4 had been promoted as an Environmental Engineer on May 23, 1985.
He was eligible.
Having been found suitable, he was promoted.
Rest of the averments as made by the petitioner have been controverted.
On these premises, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Ashwani Chopra, counsel for the petitioner contended that the action of the Board in prescribing the qualifications for the post of Senior Environmental Engineer was wholly illegal.
Even the de-reservation of the vacancy was wrong.
Secondly, the vacancy should have been given to the petitioner only.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 is bad in law.
The claim was controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
Before proceeding to consider the respective submissions, a few provisions may be noticed.
Section 12(3A) of the 1974 Act provides as under :-  "(3A) The method of recruitment and the terms and conditions of service (including the scales of pay) of the officers (other than the member- secretary) and other employees of the Central Board or a State Board shall be such as may be determined by the regulations made by the Central Board or, as the case may be, by the State Board : Provided that no regulation made under this sub-section shall take effect unless :- (a) in the case of a regulation made by the Central Board, it is approved by the Central Government; and (b) in the case of a regulation made by the State Board, it is approved by the State Government."
It is in exercise of the powers under this provision that the Board had framed the 1980 Regulations which were duly approved by the State Government.
The method of appointment to various posts covered by the 1980 regulations is laid down in Regulation 8.
Regulation 9 provides as under :-  "9(1) Qualifications - Qualifications for direct appointment to the posts under the Board shall be as laid down in Appendix 'C'.
(2) Qualifications for the posts other than those mentioned in Appendix 'C' which might be created by the Board after coming into force of these regulations shall be as laid down by the Board from time to time."
Still further, Regulation 13 is in the following terms:-  "Appointment by Promotion :- All promotions to posts under the Board shall be made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and no person shall have a right to be promoted to any post on the basis of seniority alone."
8.
On behalf of the petitioner, it is contended that Regulation 9(2) authorises the Board to lay down qualifications for appointment to the posts which have to be filled up by direct recruitment only.
In case of posts to be filled up by promotion, the Board is not competent to lay down the qualifications.
Is it so ?
9.
The 1974 Act was enacted by the Parliament.
While authorising the Board to frame regulations, it was specifically provided that approval of the appropriate Government shall be required.
In exercise of this power, the 1980 Regulations were framed.
These were duly approved.
Regulation 9 is one of the provisions.
A perusal of this provision shows that so far as posts to be filled up by direct recruitment are concerned, the qualifications have already been laid down in Appendix 'C'.
Clause (2) contains a further provision.
It provides for two things.
Firstly, it postulates the power in the Board to create more posts.
Secondly, it authorises the Board to lay down qualifications for these posts.
The necessary pre-condition for invoking this power is that the post is not mentioned in Appendix 'C'.
10.
Mr. Chopra contended that Regulation 9(2) only authorises the Board to lay down qualifications for direct recruitment.
11.
The contention is fallacious.
Regulation 8 postulates three methods of appointment viz. direct, promotion and transfer on deputation.
We find nothing in Regulation 9 which may warrant that the Board can create only such posts as can be filled up by direct recruitment or that it can lay down qualifications for only appointment by direct recruitment.
In our view, while promulgating Regulation 9(2), the State Government has authorised the Board to create additional posts, lay down method of appointment and the qualifications therefor.
Of course, the method of recruitment has to conform to the provisions of Regulation 8.
12.
Mr Chopra contended that under Regulation 13, the claim for promotion has to be considered only on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
The qualifications cannot be introduced.
13.
The contention is misconceived.
The employer has an undoubted right to prescribe qualifications for a post.
This right is subject to the condition that the qualifications must have a reasonable nexus with the job requirements.
The qualifications should not be fanciful or arbitrary.
In the present case, the prescribed qualifications are a degree in Engineering and seven years' experience as an Environmental Engineer.
In other words, for promotion to the post of Senior Environmental Engineer, a person should have worked for seven years in the feeder cadre.
The qualifications are not even alleged to be arbitrary or unfair.
These have a nexus with the requirements of the post of Senior Environmental Engineer.
The qualifications are reasonable.
The action of the Board in laying down these qualifications is in conformity with Regulation 9(2).
It is only from amongst the eligible persons that appointment by promotion can be made in accordance with Regulation 13.
Respondent No. 4 having been promoted as an Environmental Engineer in the year 1985 was far senior to the petitioner.
He had worked eight years longer than him.
He was eligible.
He had worked for more than 13 years by the date of the issue of the order of promotion.
As against this, the petitioner had worked for only five years.
In this situation, the action of the respondents was just and fair.
It was in conformity with the regulation.
It calls for no interference.
14.
Mr. Chopra contended that the Board had erred in getting the post de- reserved.
15.
The contention is misconceived.
It is the admitted position that when an eligible member of the Scheduled Castes is not available, the post can be de- reserved.
The instructions contain a mandatory provision that the conditions of eligibility "for a post would not be lowered with a view to accommodating any candidate."
It has not even been suggested that an eligible candidate was available.
Resultantly, no fault can be found with the action of the respondents.
16.
Lastly Mr. Chopra referred to the judgment of a Bench of this Court to which one of us (Jawahar Lal Gupta, J) was a member.
It is the decision in Pardeep Kumar Thakur v. Punjab Pollution Control Board and others, 1997(4) S.C.T.
345, CWP No. 19638 of 1996.
This was a case relating to the post of Scientific Officer for which the qualifications had been laid down in the 1980 Regulations.
It was held by the Bench that the Board could not add to those qualifications.
There is no quarrel with this proposition.
However, in regard to the posts which are not mentioned in the regulations, the ratio of the decision shall not be applicable.
When a new post is created, the qualifications therefor can be laid down.
This is precisely what has been done in the instant case.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
Keeping in view the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.