RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Head Constable Mohinder Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari seeking the quashment of the order dated 7.10.1992 Annexure P3 and order dated 6.11.1994 Annexure P5 passed by the punishing authority and the appellate authority respectively.
The petitioner further prayed that he shall be deemed to have been in service throughout with all consequential relief.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the police department on 22.6.1973.
He had been serving the department to the best of his diligence and honesty.
On 2241992 he became ill and proceeded for casual leave vide DDR No. 31 dated 2241992.
He was supposed to return on duty on 28.4.1992.
But due to illness he sent telegram to the department for the extension of leave on 28.4.1992 and the telegram was received in the office of respondent No. 4 on 2941992.
He remained under treatment from 28.4.1992 to 1761992 as he was advised rest.
On becoming fit for duty he returned on 1861992.
But he was declared absent for a period of 50 days, 20 hours and 40 minutes and this period of absence was beyond his control.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that the order Annexure P3 vide which he was dismissed from service is unsustainable in the eyes of law because the punishing authority while passing the impugned order did not take regard of the length of his service and his right to claim pension.
3.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents, who filed the written reply and denied the allegations made in the petition.
According to the respondents, the act of absence of the petitioner was the gravest act and in these circumstances the competent authority was justified to award any punishment to the petitioner including the punishment of dismissal.
The respondents have also taken the stand that a regular inquiry was instituted and after the accusation (conclusion ?)
of the inquiry the petitioner was found absent and the charge against him also stood proved.
It is also the stand of the respondents that the department did not receive any intimation about the alleged extension of leave as averred by the petitioner.
Rather report No. 52 was entered in the Roznamcha about the absence of duty of the petitioner.
4.
Before I deal with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, it will be appropriate for me to reproduce the operative portion of the order Annexure P3, which reads as follows :-  "Taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances particularly this gravest act of misconduct and indiscipline on the part of the defaulter being a member of disciplined force, I am of the considered view that such type of official should not be retained in force and proposed punishment of dismissal in this case would be quite reasonable and the same will meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, I dismiss the defaulter Head Constable Mohinder Singh No. 766/RTK from service with immediate effect."
5.
The appeal of the petitioner was also dismissed vide order dated 6.11.1994 passed by Deputy Inspector General of Police, in which he held as follows :-  "....I am of the considered view that there are no justified grounds for interference with the order of the punishing authority.
Thus the appeal is rejected......" 6.
The argument which has been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that the absence of duty of the petitioner is treated as the gravest act of misconduct, still the impugned orders cannot be sustained in the eyes of law as the punishing authority and the appellate authority did not take into consideration the mandatory provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 which enjoin upon these authorities to take into consideration before passing such type of order the length of service of the petitioner as well as his claim to pension.
7.
On the contrary, the submission raised by the learned counsel for the respondents is that it is not obligatory on the part of the punishing authority to take into consideration the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension because the order has been passed by taking into consideration the gravest act of misconduct and indiscipline of the petitioner, that is part (1) of Rule 162.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the respondents relies upon a judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex. Constable, AIR 1992 Supreme Court 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC).
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the considered opinion that the harmonious interpretation of the following words "In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension" has to be read with the earlier portion of the rule which covers both the eventualities.
Rule 162 talks of dismissal.
As per this rule dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
The awarding of punishment of dismissal can be in both the eventualities as mentioned in first part of Rule 162 and in these circumstances the rule making authority had covered both the eventualities when it had stated that in making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
9.
Reverting to the facts in hand, the impugned orders Annexure P3 and Annexure P 5 would show that the Superintendent of Police as well as the Deputy Inspector General of Police, i.e. the punishing authority and the appellate authority, did not apply their mind nor they took note about the length of service of the petitioner and whether he should be deprived of his right to claim pension or not.
The non-application of mind on the part of these authorities make these orders as illegal which are liable to be quashed.
10.
In this view of the matter, the present petition is hereby allowed with all consequential relief and the impugned orders Annexure P3 and Annexure P5 are hereby set aside with the observations that it will always be open to the punishing authority to pass a fresh order according to law which will reflect the mind of the competent authority as to whether it has applied its mind with regard to the length of service of the petitioner and his claim to pension.
It can still be open to the competent authority to consider whether the dismissal of the petitioner from service is the only punishment which can be awarded to him or some lesser punishment would meet the ends of justice.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.