VK Gupta, J - The point involved in this petition is very short.
The writ petitioner has been working as an approved teacher in Majdia Gana Bidyabhaban, PO Majdia (via Patuli), District Burdwan.
The post of Headmaster in that school having fallen vacant, the selection process got underway and the petitioner along with other eligible candidates participated in the selection process.
A panel was prepared and submitted to the respondent No. 3 for approval.
Vide the memo No. 3124, dated October 20, 1997 the respondent No. 3 granted his approval to the select panel as submitted to him by the school Managing Committee.
In this memo he accorded his approval to the names of three persons figuring in the select panel wherein the name of one Niranjan Biswas figured at serial No. 1 in order of merit and petitioner's name found place at serial No. 2 in the said select panel in order of merit.
Naturally, if the aforesaid Nirnajan Biswas did not accept the offer of appointment, petitioner's turn comes automatically and he being at serial No. 2 in the select panel in order of merit he has a right of appointment for the post of Headmaster.
The difficulty, however, arose because of two stipulations contained in Approval Memo (supra) which were to the following effect :  (i) That the appointment to the empanelled candidate in the approval memo should be offered and appointment process be completed in all respects on or before October 25, 1997; and  (ii) the validity of the panel was to expire after October 31, 1997.
2.
The only ground of attack to the aforesaid two stipulations contained in the approval memo as urged by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner in the Court today was about curtailing the validity period of the panel from one year from the date of according approval to just 11 days.
A reliance is placed on the Recruitment Rules as issued by the Government of West Bengal vide Memo No. 2066-GA dated October 27, 1995.
3.
Rule 6(E) of the Rules deals with the appointment of Headmasters in the Schools.
Clause (o) of Rule 6(E) clearly provides a period of one year as the validity period of a select panel and this period has to begin from the date the approval is granted by the District Inspector of Schools.
It also lays down that if the candidate appearing in the higher position in the panel fails to join within three months from the date of receipt of appointment letter, the next empanelled candidate has a right to being appointed on the post.
Clause (o) of Rule 6(E) reads as hereunder :  "On getting approval of the panel, the managing committee/ad hoc committee/administrator of the school shall issue appointment letter to the first empanelled candidate within 15 days through registered post card/registered in-land letter.
The panel shall remain valid for 1 year from the date of approval of the panel by the DIS (S.E.).
If any candidate fails to join within three months from the date or receipt of appointment letter or leaves the post within the validity of the panel, the next empanelled candidate shall be offered appointment.
Names of such candidates who do not join within three months from the date of receipt of appointment letter shall be struck off from the panel."
4.
Apparently, therefore, approval memo dated October 28, 1997 (supra) ran patently counter to the aforesaid Rule 6(E) of the Recruitment Rules.
In the affidavit-in-opposition filed on behalf of the respondents while admitting that the respondent No. 3 had curtailed the life of the panel from one year to just eleven days reliance is placed on the minutes of the meeting chaired by the Minister-in-Charge, Primary, Secondary and Madrasah Education held on August 8, 1997 wherein the Minister-in-Charge gave certain directions to the District Inspector of Schools with regard to the approval of the select panel in the light of coming into force of the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997.
As per this instruction, the District Inspectors of Schools were directed by the Minister-in-Charge to accord their approval to the panels latest by October 20, 1997 and that the last date of issuing appointment letters to the concerned candidates should be upto October 25, 1997 only.
Reliance is also placed on Section 9(2) of the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997.
It is contended by the respondents before me that it is in the light of the provision contained in Section 9(2) of the Act that the Minister-in-Charge has issued the aforesaid instructions.
Section 9 reads as hereunder :-  "(1) Effect of Recognition of the Commission:- Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in any contract, customs or usage to the contrary, appointments to the posts of teachers in a school shall be made by the Managing Committee, by whatever name called, or by the ad hoc committee, or by the Administrator, if any (where there is no managing committee), of that school on the recommendation of the Regional Commission having jurisdiction."
(2) Any appointment of a Teacher made on or after the commencement of this Act in contravention of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid and shall have no effect and the Teacher so appointed shall not be a Teacher within the meaning of clause (p) of Section 2."
5.
The 1997 Act admittedly came into force with effect from November, 1997.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the process for selection for the post of Headmaster got underway much before November 1, 1997.
In fact, as is apparent from the impugned approval memo itself the panel was accorded approval on October 20, 1997, i.e. eleven days before the commencement of the 1997 Act.
6.
It appears that the respondents have by mis-interpretation and mis- application of Sub-Section (2) of Section 9 of the Act illegally construed that even in respect of the selections having been completed before the coming into force of 1997 Act, Section 9(1) of the Act would be applicable and appointment orders could not be issued in respect of such candidates who had been selected and empanelled before Ist November, 1997.
All that Sub-Section (2) of the Section 9 provides and lays down is that appointment of any teacher made on or after the commencement of the Act in contravention of the provisions of the Act shall be invalid.
The reference to the expression "in contravention of the provisions of the Act" necessarily takes one to Sub- Section (1) of Section 9 of the Act which says and lays down that every teacher shall be appointed by the School on the recommendations of the Regional Commission having jurisdiction in the matter.
The constitution of the Central Commission and the Regional Commissions is contemplated in Section 3 of the Act and their respective jurisdiction have also been defined in that Section.
Undoubtedly a Regional Service Commission, on or after the commencement of the Act has the exclusively jurisdiction in the matter of appointment of teachers.
But it only means that appointment process, starting after the commencement of the Act should be in conformity with the provisions of the Act.
In other words, what it means is that after November 1, 1997 one cannot start a slection process de hors the 1997 Act.
It does not mean that if a selection process has already been completed before Ist November, 1997, the same having also stated much earlier than that, it should be set at naught and nullified because of the coming into force of 1997 Act.
Such intention of the Legislature is not discernible from Sec. 9(1) or 9(2) of the Act.
These provisions apply prospectively; they do not have any retrospective application.
Insofar as such selection process which clearly got underway much before the commencement of the Act, the same having been completed in all respects, and approval to the select panel having been granted by the competent authority, the provision contained in Section 9(1) of the Act, or for that matter any other Section of the Act, would have no applicability whatsoever.
Such panel, therefore, as has been approved by the competent authority prior to November 1, 1997 has got to be given effect to and implemented in all respects in accordance with 1995 Recruitment Rules.
If such Rules prescribed the validity period of the panel as one year, no executive instruction or any order of the Minister-in-Charge, in derogation of those statutory rules can curtail the validity period from one year to eleven days.
As I have already observed Section 9(2) of the 1997 Act did not all ever suggest that such could be the intention of the Legislature while enacting Sec. 9(2) of the Act.
7.
Based on the aforesaid observation therefore I have no hesitation in saying and holding that the stipulation in the Approval Memo dated November 20, 1998 curtailing the validity/life of the panel upto October 31, 1997 was patently illegal.
The life of the panel as per the Recruitment Rules of 1995 ought to have been for one year effective from November 20, 1997.
8.
Curtailing the life of the panel therefore from one year to 11 days was neither in accordance with Section 9(2) of the Act nor in conformity with the Recruitment Rules.
Since Section 9 of the Act did not have any effect on the validity and existence of the panel prepared, as duly approved by the competent authority prior to Ist November, 1997, any executive order or any stipulation in the panel confining or curtailing its validity period from one year to 11 days was patently illegal and unconstitutional.
By the curtailment of this period undoubtedly the rights of the empanelled candidates got adversely affected.
The validity of a panel for a particular period does confer upon the empanelled candidates a right of being offered the appointment during that period.
Curtailing the period illegally adversely affects such rights.
9.
It is the case of the petitioner that the first empanelled candidate Niranjan Biswas was given the offer of appointment but he did not accept the same.
The petitioner therefore contends that he being the second empanelled candidate, he has the right of being appointed on the post.
The writ application was filed within the period of one year from 20th October, 1997.
As per the Recruitment Rules the validity and life the panel was to be valid at least uptill 19th October, 1998.
That being the case, if the first empanelled candidate because of not joining despite the offer of appointment within its validity period, the petitioner had a right of being offered the appointment.
That right surely cannot be taken away or curtailed.
The right remained intact.
It could not be extinguished merely because the original validity of the panel has now expired.
We have to look to the validity of the panel at least uptill the date the petitioner approached this Court.
Till then the panel was valid and operative.
I, therefore, while allowing the writ application issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus calling upon the respondents to ensure that if the first empanelled candidate in the said panel did not join on the post of the Headmaster, petitioner should be offered this appointment within a period of four weeks from date.
All such consequences shall follow.
10.
The writ application is disposed of accordingly.
11.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.