AK Yog, J - Heard Sri BB Paul, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri KS Singh, learned Standing Counsel representing all the Respondents and the Writ Petition is finally decided with the consent of learned counsels for the parties in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of Court at the admission stage itself.
2.
The petitioner Munesh Kumar has come up before this Court by means of present Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India pleading, inter alia, that he was selected in the year 1988 for being appointed on the post of Constable in XV Battalion, PAC Agra; relevant documents have been filed by the petitioner as Annexure-1 to the Writ Petition.
As per practice a report was called for from the concerned authorities with reference to the character of the petitioner and consequently the Senior Superintendent of Police, Gautam Budh Nagar submitted his report on 2591998 alleging involvement of the petitioner in case Crime No. 100-A/97 under Sections 147, 148, 149, 307, 323, 504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, Police Station Rabupura, District Gautam Budh Nagar a copy of the said report has been filed as Annexure-2 to the Writ Petition.
3.
The petitioner further states in paragraph 6 of the Writ Petition that he has been falsely implicated in the said case, although the said report does not attribute any material role to the petitioner.
It will suffice to mention that in view of the letter sent from the office of the District Magistrate dated 2111998 (Annexure-9 to the Writ Petition), the appointing authority was intimated that there was no legal impediment in appointment of the petitioner in view of the provisions of the Government Order dated 2841958 (copy of which has been filed as Annexure-5 to the Writ Petition).
4.
It is surprising that no action has been taken by the appointing authority, namely, Respondent No. 3 in spite of having received said information from the office of the District Magistrate, Gautam Budh Nagar.
5.
Taking into account facts and circumstance of the present case, particularly the fact that delay in the matter is bound to cause irreparable loss to the petitioner, both physical and mental apart from stigma in society, I strongly feel that this is a fit case where the Writ Petition should be allowed at this stage.
6.
In the result, the Writ petition is allowed with direction to Respondent No. 3 to initiate action immediately and forthwith but not later than three months in view of the report dated 2111998 received from the office of the District Magistrate, Gautam Budh Nagar.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to communicate the order so passed in the matter by registered post acknowledgement due to the petitioner within one week thereafter on the address furnished by the petitioner along with a certified copy of this judgment produced before him by the petitioner.
7.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.