Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner Ghulam Nabi Sheikh appointed as Daily Wager on 181968 in Bemina Woolen mills, at Srinagar, was regularised against the post of Cobler from 141994 in the grade of Rs. 750-1000.
At the time of engagement of the petitioner as Daily Wager in August, 1968 and thereafter till the petitioner was placed on regular basis in the above pay scale against the post of Cobler, the petitioner at no point of time was asked to disclose his date of birth by his employer(s).
It was in his order of appointment (Order No. JKT/719/94 dated 6.12.1994), issued by Jammu and Kashmir Industries Limited-Annexure P1, that the date of birth of the petitioner was shown and mentioned as 2991941.
No sooner the petitioner got knowledge of the entry he made representation that his date of birth is 2941945 and placed his case thereto before the respondents.
Certificate of birth issued by the Municipal Authorities (Annexure P2) was also placed before the respondents.
The respondents refused to record his date of birth as 2941945.
The date of birth shown in the services records of the petitioner as 2991941, is against the facts.
No opportunity was given to the petitioner to put his case before the respondents.
Petitioner is an illiterate person and has no School leaving certificate/matriculation certificate to prove his date of birth.
2.
On these pleaded allegations the petitioner has prayed for being allowed to continue to serve in the office of his employer/respondents till 2942003, when he retires on superanuation after treating his date of birth as 2941945, in his service records.
3.
Respondents have filed reply.
The maintainability of the petition is challenged on laches.
The denial of opportunity to the petitioner to show his/age is refuted.
The relief sought by the petitioner is stated to be based on false and baseless facts.
It is averred that the date of birth, namely 2991941, has been recorded at the instance of the petitioner in his service records.
With a view to continue in service illegally and beyond superannuation age he has manipulated the certificate from the Municipality with date of birth recorded as 2941945.
The certificate has not been accepted, because, the entry in the birth Register has been at the directions of the Municipal Magistrate, Srinagar and not otherwise.
The certificate has been obtained after about 30 years of service with the respondent.
The correction of the age cannot be permitted at the fag-end of the service of the petitioner.
The petition is prayed to be dismissed.
4.
On motion considered and admitted.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner is working with respondents since 181968.
It is not also in dispute that the petitioner was working continously as Daily Wager from 6.12.1994, when petitioner was appointed as Cobler and placed in the regular pay scale from 1141994 against the available post.
In the appointment order of regularisation of the petitioner, the date of birth of petitioner is recorded as 2941941.
6.
Petitioner's specific case is that his date of birth is 2941945 and not 2991941.
The petitioner has based his date of birth dated 2941945 on the birth entry in terms of certificate of birth issued by the Registrar Births and Deaths of Srinagar Municipality.
Certificate Annexure P2, is based on directions of Municipal Magistrate, Srinagar in file No. 2215 of 1996 of Sub Judge, Municipal Magistrate, Srinagar.
The record is available with the file.
The record reveals that the petitioner moved an application before the Municipal Magistrate, Srinagar on 171996.
After proclamation and taking other steps, the application was accepted by the Court below and Registrar of Births and Deaths Srinagar Municipality, was directed to record the date of birth of the petitioner as 2941945 in the concerned register.
However, while giving the aforesaid direction, it is placed on record that the direction issued shall be binding only on the Registrar of Births and Deaths Srinagar Municipality and not on other public or private, Government or Semi Govt. departments.
Besides, it is a condition of certificate that the direction given by the Magistrate regarding entry of date of birth of petitioner as 2941945, shall not confer any right on the petitioner.
The non-applicant-Registrar of Deaths and Births on receipt of the direction, issued the prescribed certificate Annexure P2 in the prescribed form.
It is expressly mentioned in the certificate that entry regarding the date of birth as 2941945 shall not effect service records of the petitioner.
Obviously, the claim of the petitioner, that his date of birth as 2941945 should be recorded in his service records, on the basis of the Municipal Certificate (Annexure P2), is not valid.
At the most it is a piece of evidence which the competent authority has to consider in conjunction with other material and documents placed before him to arrive at a decision regarding the actual date of birth of the petitioner.
7.
In terms of the pleadings, the claimed date of birth of the petitioner as put forth (as above) by the parties is a moot question.
Whether 2991941 the date of birth of petitioner as recorded in his service records is correct or 2941945 birth date put forth by the petitioner after regularisation of his services, is correct, is a disputed question of fact, which would require to be enquired into and settled on inquiry after taking evidence and documents on record.
It involves a full dressed inquiry under normal civil law.
The contention, whether 2991941, the date of birth of petitioner is recorded with the employer since last three decades and whether the sought change at the fag-end of petitioners service with malafides to earn undue benefit by extension in superannuating age, are again disputed questions of fact and law.
Similarly the contention of the petitioner, that being a dailywager, there was no requirement of his disclosing age earlier to his regularisation during his three decades service with the respondents and that he was not given any opportunity to put his case before the respondents, are matters in view of counter assertions, not to be taken as proved facts and require to be determined on inquiry in the mode prescribed by applicable law.
8.
For the aforesaid reasons, the Writ petition is dismissed with liberty to petitioner to pursue alternative remedy to seek redressal of his grievance regarding age in-accordance with law.
9.
Record be returned to the court concerned.
Srinagar:  Petition dismissed.