THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner filed this writ petition to quash the order of the Director, Higher Education, Haryana dated 2151996 vide Annexure P-23.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of the writ petition may briefly be stated as follows.
The governing body of SD College advertised two posts of Lecturers in Chemistry in the year 1984.
The petitioner and the 4th respondent applied for the said post among others.
The interview had been held on 10th of October, 1984 in which the petitioner was selected for the said post and the candidature of the 4th respondent was rejected.
Accordingly, the petitioner joined the service on 12111984.
Out of two advertised posts, one was permanent while the other was a temporary one.
The temporary post was offered to Sunita Gambhir, who worked for few months.
The temporary post was again advertised in the year 1985 and interview was held on 1971985.
The 4th respondent also applied for the said post in pursuance of the advertisement in the year 1985.
In that selection, one Dr. Kamlesh Kumar Bansal was placed at Sr. No. 1 while the 4th respondent was placed at Sr. No. 2.
Dr. Kamlesh Kumar Bansal was appointed against the temporary post, but he served only for a period of 4/5 months and resigned.
Thereafter this post was offered to the 4th respondent who joined on 26.11.1985.
Since the petitioner was appointed earlier, she was shown senior and she was granted selection grade with effect from 11121991, whereas the 4th respondent was granted selection grade w.e.f.
26111992.
While so the 4th respondent made a representation in September 1994.
On the representation, the impugned order was passed by the Director of Higher Education which reads as follows :-  "Reference your memo No. 95-95/10151 dated 2931996 on the above subject.
It is intimated that on the basis of record, Smt. Usha Kuchhal, Lecturer is made junior to Shri I.C.
Goel, Lecturer.
Service Books and personal files of the two Lecturers are returned herewith."
3.
A reading of the said order clearly shows that it is not a speaking order.
Nothing has been mentioned how the petitioner can be made as junior to the 4th respondent who has been regularly selected and appointed even before the 4th respondent entered the service.
In the normal course, I would have directed the Director of Higher Education to reconsider the matter.
But on the facts of the case, I propose to dispose of the matter by considering the rules governing the service of the petitioner and the 4th respondent.
4.
There is no dispute that Calender Vol.
I of Kurukshetra University governs the service conditions of the petitioner and the 4th respondent.
The petitioner was appointed against the permanent post.
Rule 4 of Chapter 2 regulating the Recruitment and Conditions of Service and Conduct of the Employees in Non-Govt.
Colleges reads as under :-  "An employee appointed against a regular/permanent post may be kept on one year's probation after which period he will normally be confirmed if his work and conduct are found satisfactory .....
The probationary period shall in no case be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment; provided further that probation shall not be extended more than once."
5.
In the case of the petitioner the probationary period normally would have come to an end by 12111985.
But it appears that the probationary period of the petitioner was extended for another one year.
The period would come to an end on 12111986.
There is no further order extending the period of probation.
On the other hand, the rules do not provide for extension of period beyond two years as can be seen from rule 4 which has been extracted above.
The period of probation cannot be extended for more than once and it cannot also be extended beyond two years.
On 12111986 the petitioner completes the period of two years and thereafter no order has been passed extending the period of probation.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that for all practical purposes, it must be deemed that the petitioner completed her period of probation and deemed to have been confirmed employee in the absence of any order extending the period of probation.
Therefore, it must be taken that the petitioner is a confirmed employee of the College.
6.
The learned Counsel for the respondents contended that the petitioner was on extra-ordinary leave as on 12111986.
Therefore, her services could not be deemed to have been confirmed, but the fact remains that extra-ordinary leave was sanctioned to her because she was in family way.
Simple because the extra-ordinary leave has been granted to her, it cannot be said that she was out of service.
She is deemed to be in service for all intents and purposes.
When her services had not been dispensed with and when she continued in services, she must be deemed to have completed the period of probation satisfactorily i.e. on completion of the period of two years.
It has been held by the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 S.C. 1210 as follows :-  "The initial period of probation of the respondents ended on October 1, 1958.
By allowing the respondents to continue in their posts thereafter without any express order of confirmation, the competent authority must be taken to have extended the period of probation upto October 1, 1960 by implication.
But under the proviso to rule 6(3), the probationary period could not extend beyond October 1, 1960.
In view of the proviso to rule 6(3), it is not possible to presume that the competent authority extended the probationary period after October 1, 1960, or that thereafter, the respondents continued to hold their posts as probationers."
7.
Thus it is clear that the services of the petitioner shall be deemed to have been confirmed from the date when she completed the period of probation of two years ie on 12111986.
There is no dispute of the fact that the 4th respondent completed the period of probation on 26111986.
Thus by no stretch of imagination, the 4th respondent can be treated as senior to the petitioner.
Therefore, he cannot be declared as senior to the petitioner.
The order of Director of Higher Education cannot, therefore, he sustained.
The impugned order is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
8.
The writ petition is allowed, the impugned order dated 2151996 (Annexure P-23) is hereby quashed and the petitioner is declared to be senior to the 4th respondent and she is entitled to all the consequential benefits.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.