VK Bali, J - Amarjit Singh a Sub Divisional Officer (Electrical) in Kurukshetra University through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents to grant him pay scale of the post of SDO with effect from 2831995 i.e. the day he was promoted on the said post and was performing the duties of the SDO, as also to grant him retiral benefits treating him as SDO for all intents and purposes.
2.
The facts on which the reliefs as mentioned above are sought to rest, reveal that the petitioner joined his service as an Electrician on 84196 and was promoted as Junior Engineer/Sectional Officer on 711973.
The Executive Council by a resolution dated 2831995, as per the case of the petitioner, upgraded the post of petitioner as SDO in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
It is further the case of the petitioner that orders of his promotion as SDO were issued and he joined on the post of SDO on 18.4.1995 F.N.
and since then he has worked on the post of SDO without any interruption.
Petitioner made a representation for grant of pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 on 3091992 and repeated the said representation on 311997 and 27.2.1997.
However, the representation was rejected on 1141997 by Annexure P-5.
Despite the rejection of the representation, as referred to above, petitioner made four more representations Annexures P-6 to P-9, respectively.
But vide orders dated 24111997 he was informed that he shall be retiring from service of the Kurukshetra University on 3111998 on attaining the age of superannuation.
After this as well, the petitioner made two representations Annexures P-10 and P-11 and when the same brought no tangible results, the present writ petition for the reliefs as already mentioned above was filed.
3.
Pursuant to the notice issued to the respondents, they have entered defence and contested the claim of the petitioner.
It has, inter alia, been pleaded in the written statement that in April, 1995 the post held by the petitioner as Junior Engineer was upgraded to that of Sub Divisional Officer in the grade of Rs. 2200-75-2800-100-4000 as a personal measure to him by the Executive Council.
It was resolved that the proposal be approved and that approval of State Government be obtained for creation of new post of SDO (Electrical).
The case was put up to the audit for admitting the payment of salary of the petitioner in the grade of Sub Divisional Officer i.e. Rs. 2200-4000 but the audit did not accept the same on the plea that the sanction of the State Government for creation of post as per Section 12-A of Kurukshetra University Act was not obtained.
Section 12-A of the Kurukshetra University Act reads as follows :-  "Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the University shall not create any teaching and non-teaching post or revise the pay scale of the teaching and non-teaching employees without obtaining the prior approval of the Government."
Petitioner was clearly informed vide office order Annexure P-1 that his salary as SDO (E) will be fixed as per University Rules.
Accordingly, the case was processed as per the University Rules for fixation of petitioner's salary.
As per Section 12-A of the Kurukshetra University Act, as reproduced above, the matter was referred to the Government through the Director, Higher Education.
The Director, in turn, requested for obtaining and conveying the approval of the State Government with regard to upgradation of the post of Junior Engineer to that of Sub Divisional Engineer as a personal measure to the petitioner.
The Director of Higher Education informed the University that the proposal for upgradation of post of the Junior Engineer to that of Sub Divisional Engineer has been rejected by the State Government as per Annexure R-1.
Under these circumstances, the petitioner was informed vide letter dated 1141997.
In these circumstances, it is further pleaded that the petitioner cannot be granted the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 and other retiral benefits by treating him as Sub Divisional Officer.
4.
We have heard he learned Counsel for the parties and, with their assistance, gone through the records of the case.
5.
It is proved on the records by various documents that petitioner was not promoted as such on the post of SDO (E).
The post held by him already was upgraded and he, of course, then discharged the duties of SDO (E).
There was no post of SDO (E) in existence as such and only a proposal was made to get the post already held by the petitioner upgraded.
The upgradation of the post was subject to the approval of the Government.
It has been proved on the record that ultimately the proposal fell through.
In this situation, this Court is of the firm view that petitioner cannot be given post retiral benefits as if he retired from the post of SDO (E).
As mentioned above, he was never promoted as such on the post under contention.
The Court is once again of clear view that in so far as the entitlement of the petitioner with regard to pay of SDO (E) during the time he worked as such is concerned, the same cannot be objected to on any ground whatsoever.
The petitioner concededly worked on the post and discharged duties of the post of SDO (E).
The pay that he was to get on the upgraded post was clearly mentioned in the order itself.
Having worked on the post of SDO (E), the respondents cannot deny him the pay of the said post, naturally for the period he remained on the said post.
6.
In view of what we have said above, whereas we reject the claim of the petitioner with regard to the post retiral benefits as he could not have retired from the post of SDO (E), we allow this writ petition to a limited extent.
We direct the respondents to make over to the petitioner the pay scale of SDO from the date he started discharging duties of the said post i.e. 18.4.1995 till the time he superannuated.
Ordered accordingly.
Petition partly allowed.