Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, Neeraj passed his Matriculation Examination from the Haryana School Education Board in the year 1996.
He, thereafter, took his +2 Examination in March, 1998 and in the result declared on 1961998, his case was shown as "Result Later".
The petitioner, thereafter, applied for taking the Common Engineering Entrance Test, 1998 to be held by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra-respondent No. 2 and 3 against one of the seats reserved for the B.C.
(A) Category Candidate.
He qualified the entrance test on which he filed an application on 2371998 for admission to the BTech.
Ist Year Course in Electronics.
The petitioner's form was accepted as being within time and as per the provisions of the Brochure, he appeared for the first counselling on 781998 in the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra and produced Annexure P-11 dated 481998, the provisional certificate showing his marks in the +2 Examination issued by the Haryana School Education Board, which indicated that he passed the qualifying +2 Examination.
The petitioner's candidature was accepted and he was permitted to deposit the fee on 791998.
The admission was, however, cancelled by the Principal of the College on the same very date and the amount of fee deposited by him refunded on the ground that he had not passed the 10+2 Examination upto 2371998.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner has come to this Court against the action taken against him.
2.
This petition was admitted after notice of option to the respondents on 7101998, and a direction was issued that the petitioner be granted provisional admission subject to the outcome of the petition.
This case has, accordingly, been listed for today and has been heard on merits.
3.
A reply has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4 and the broad facts pleaded by the petitioner have not been denied.
Reliance has nevertheless been placed on Chapter A-6 of the Information Brochure dealing with the submission of Application Forms, to plead that no certificate could be accepted after the last date prescribed for the receipt of application forms and though the petitioner has filed his application within time on 2371998, it was incomplete as the +2 pass Certificate and the Detailed Marks Certificate had not been appended therewith.
The fact that the petitioner was entitled to admission on merit on the basis of result of his entrance test, has, however, not been denied.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner's result of the 10+2 Examination as 'Result later' on 1961998 had been shown against his name without any fault on his part and on the application made to the School Education Board, the necessary rectification had been made and Certificate Annexure P-11 dated 481998 had been issued to the petitioner showing him as having passed the +2 Examination and this certificate had admittedly been produced at the time of counselling on 7th August, 1998.
I am of the view that this certificate was only evidence of that fact of the petitioner's clearing the examination and could have been produced even at the time of counselling as a formality was not more important than the substance.
5.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed and the provisional admission granted to the petitioner under the orders of this Court on 7101998 is directed to be regularised.
No order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.