GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - This is petition for directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to appear in Subordinate Accounts Service Examination.
2.
A perusal of the averments made in the petition shows that the petitioner is working as Copy Holder in Government Press, SAS Nagar, Mohali.
On August 30, 1994, he applied for permission to appear in S.A.S.
examination.
His request was turned down by respondent No.1 on the ground that employees on technical side are not eligible to appear in the S.A.S.
examination.
After two years and five months, the petitioner made another representation for being allowed to appear in S.A.S.
examination on the ground that Shri Radhey Sham, who was holding the post of Compositor at Government Press, Patiala, was permitted to appear in the said examination in 1994.
Having failed to evoke a favourable response, the petitioner has sought the Court's intervention for issuance of a direction to the respondents.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner conceded that in terms of the provisions contained in the Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class-II) Service Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as "the 1965 Rules") and the instructions issued by Government of Punjab in exercise of its powers under Rule 6 of those Rules, a person holding technical post is not eligible to appear in S.A.S.
examination but submitted that in view of the permission granted to Shri Radhey Sham, the respondents are bound to accord similar permission to the petitioner.
Learned counsel pleaded that the respondents should not be allowed to discriminate in such matters.
4.
Having given thoughtful consideration to the submission made by Shri Bedi, we are convinced that no relief can be given to the petitioner in view of the fact that under the 1965 Rules, a person holding technical post, like, Copy Holder, is not eligible to appear in the S.A.S.
examination.
Regulation No. 4 of the Regulations framed by the government in exercise of its powers under Rule 6 of the 1965 Rules reads as under :-  "4.
Subject to other conditions prescribed in these regulations the following officials of State Government (other than the officials of L.A.D.
who are eligible to appear in L.A.D.
Branch only) shall be eligible to sit in the Examination :- (i) Clerks/Assistants/Deputy Superintendent/Head Assistants/Superintendents in any Department of the State Government.
(ii) Junior Auditors/Upper Division Clerks.
(iii) Accountants in the offices of Block Development Officers and other offices.
(iv) Stenographers/Steno-Typists.
(v) Treasury Officers/Assistant Treasury Officers.
(vi) Treasurers.
(vii) Officials working in the State Sponsored Corporations Autonomous Bodies.
Provided that - (a) they possess a degree of a recognised university; (b) they have rendered at least 3 years service; and  (c) the Head of Department certifies that the candidates is efficient and likely to pass the examination.
Note : If will not be the liability of the State Government to absorb the officials working in the State Sponsored Corporations/Autonomous Bodies."
A bare reading of the above extracted Regulation shows that only ministerial employees and the persons holding the posts akin to ministerial posts are eligible to appear in S.A.S.
examination.
This naturally means that persons holding technical posts are not eligible to appear in the said examination.
Therefore, it is not possible to issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to appear in S.A.S.
Examination.
5.
The plea of discrimination raised by the petitioner merits rejection in view of the settled proportion of law that an illegal order passed in one case cannot be made basis for issuing a writ directing a public authority to pass an order in violation of the provisions of the statutory rules.
In this connection, we may usefully refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Chandigarh Administration and another v. Jagjit Singh and others, 1995(2) RRR 291 (SC) : JT 1995(1) SC 445 and M/s. Faridabad City Scan Centre v. Director General Health Services and others, JT 1997(8) SC 171.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.