Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner while working as a Medical Officer in Civil Dispensary, Basti, Guzan, Jalandhar, developed a serious kidney problem.
She was examined by a Specialist, who advised that as her kidney had been damaged beyond repair, she needed a transplant of the organ.
The petitioner was accordingly, admitted to the P.G.I., Chandigarh and underwent a transplant operation on 22nd April, 1996 and was discharged therefrom on the 3rd May, 1996.
She, thereafter, submitted her bills for reimbursement of the medical expenses and the bills prior to 31st December, 1997 were reimbursed.
The respondents, however, refused to reimburse her bills after that date.
She was, however, informed by a communication dated 14th September, 1998 Annexure P-12 to the petition, that in view of the Punjab Government instructions dated 31st December, 1997, the medical bills up to that date only were to be reimbursed.
The respondents also issued a letter dated 1st January, 1998 Annexure P-13 that there was to be no reimbursement of medical expenses for out-door patients w.e.f.
1st January, 1998, whereas the facility of reimbursement of expenses incurred as in-door patients would continue.
The petitioner was, accordingly, granted a fixed medical allowed at the rate of Rs. 250/- pm for her treatment.
She has, accordingly, come to this Court that she was entitled to full medical reimbursement even for expenses incurred by her as an out-door patient in the light of Punjab Services Medical Attendance Rules, 1940 the more so as the follow up treatment on account of a transplant of a kidney, was merely a continuance of the treatment that she had been receiving as an outdoor patient.
2.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pleaded that the Punjab Government had taken a decision vide Annexure P-13 that a fixed medical allowance of Rs. 250/- was to be given for out-door treatment and that there was to be no reimbursement of expenditure on account of out-door treatment.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion, that this petition deserves to succeed.
4.
This matter stands concluded in the petitioner's favour by a Division Bench of this Court in Ravi Kant v. State of Haryana, 1998(3) R.S.J.
705: 1998(4) SCT 206 (P&H); and also a Single Bench decision in Renu Saigal v. State of Haryana, 1998(4) RSJ 557 : 1998(4) SCT 565 (P&H);.
The principles were also applied by a Division Bench in a short order in Jagsir Singh Sandhu v. Punjab State Electricity Board, C.W.P.
No. 15938 of 1993, decided on 1st February 1999.
In all these cases, it was held that no distinction could be made between persons undergoing treatment as in-door patients and those receiving treatment as out-door patients.
The judgments aforementioned fully cover the facts of the present case.
This petition, is accordingly, allowed and it is directed that the respondents will reimburse the expenses incurred by the petitioner on her treatment as an out-door patient as a follow up to the transplant operation that she had undergone within a period of one month from the date that a certified copy of this judgment is supplied to the respondents.
It is also directed that as the petitioner's treatment is prolonged and very expensive, the bills tendered by her hereafter will be defrayed within one month from the date they are received by the respondents.
No order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.