Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two writ petitions were working as Staff Nurses in the State of Haryana at the General Hospital, Kaithal.
On May 31, 1998, they went on a strike alongwith a large number of other employees.
Vide letter dated July 3/8, 1998, they were "ordered to return to duty within 24 hours".
They were warned that in case of failure, "strict disciplinary action will be taken".
They still did not report for duty.
On July 9, 1998, the Director General of Health Services, Haryana issued the orders "in exercise of the powers vested.... by virtue of Rule 7(2)(b) of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 and Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India" for the removal of the petitioners from "service with immediate effect".
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioners have approached this Court through these two writ petitions.
The petitioners allege that they had reported back for duty on July 15, 1998.
The order of punishment could not have been served on them thereafter.
They further alleged that "a number of other members of nursing staff at Kaithal" who had also joined the strike and had even been taken in custody have been allowed to join duty and orders of termination "have not been served upon them till date".
They pray that the order of removal from service be quashed and that they be reinstated in service.
2.
Various contentions have been raised in the petition.
It has been inter alia suggested in the petition that the provisions of Articles 311(2)(b) were wrongly invoked.
However, at the hearing, no such plea has been raised.
Only two submissions have been made by the counsel for the petitioners.
Mr. Sudershan Goel has firstly contended that the action of the respondents in punishing the petitioners is violative of the instructions issued by the Department vide letter dated July 9, 1998.
Secondly, it is urged that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of discrimination as no action had been taken against the other employees who were similarly situated.
The details in this behalf have been given in paragraph 11 of the petition.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :  (i) Is the action of the respondents in ordering the petitioners' removal from service violative of the directions given by the Director General of Health Services vide letter dated July 9, 1998 ?
(ii) Does the action suffer from the vice of discrimination ?
Reg : (i)  3.
The Legislature had promulgated the Haryana Essential Services Maintenance Act, 1974.
The object was to ensure the maintenance of essential services, which shall clearly include the proper running of facilities for health.
The Act empowers the State Government to order persons engaged in certain employment to remain in specified areas and to "prohibit strike".
Section 4-A specifically provides that "if the Government is satisfied that in the public interest, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general or special order, prohibit strikes in any employment or class of employment to which this Act applies".
Any person who violates such an order is guilty of an offence for which he can be punished with imprisonment "which may extend to three years".
4.
In exercise of the powers conferred by the Act, the State Government had issued an order dated May 26, 1998 by which the nursing staff was prohibited from going on strike for a period of six months.
In spite of this order, the petitioners alongwith more than two thousand other members of the association had gone on strike w.e.f.
May 31, 1998.
Vide orders dated July 3/8, 1998, they were ordered to return to duty.
They were warned that in case of failure, strict disciplinary action shall be taken.
The petitioners had paid no heed and ignored the warning.
They continued on strike.
On July 9, 1998, the Director General, Health Services, Haryana, noticed that the strike by the employees had disrupted the provisions of essential services to the public.
It had caused "great hardship and inconvenience".
It was further noticed that the petitioners were "abetting, instigating, intimidating the nursing staff... to refrain from joint duty".
In view of this situation, he had felt satisfied that it was not possible to hold a regular enquiry and that the continued retention of the petitioners was "undesirable".
Thus, he ordered their removal from service.
These orders were forwarded vide letter dated July 9, 1998 to the Civil Surgeon, Kaithal for service on the petitioners.
It is undoubtedly correct that in this letter, it had been indicated that should the employees have returned to duty, the orders of termination may not be served upon them.
The translation of this document as produced by the petitioners is not accurate.
A perusal of the original order indicates that the real intention of the Director General was that in case, the employees had reported for duty before the orders were received by the Civil Surgeon, then these may not be served upon them.
In other words, the effort was that in case of employees who had obeyed the directions given by the earlier letter and reported for duty voluntarily, the order of punishment may not be enforced.
5.
It is the petitioners' own case that they had reported for duty on July 15, 1998.
Thus, the impugned orders which had been received by the Civil Surgeon on July 10, 1998 could have been validly served upon them.
The Director had clearly desired the Civil Surgeon to ensure that "in case any employee has reported for duty before the receipt of the order of removal, action may not be taken against him and order may be returned to the Directorate."
The clear implication was that the employee should have reported for duty before July 10, 1998 when the communication was received by the Civil Surgeon.
The petitioners had not reported for duty by then.
Thus, they were not entitled to any indulgence.
6.
Still further, even if the letter dated July 9, 1998 was to be read as claimed by the petitioners, the contention raised on their behalf cannot be accepted.
The intention of the Director was that in respect of the employees who may voluntarily report for duty, no action may be taken.
However, the circumstances of the case clearly indicate that the petitioners had not voluntarily reported for duty.
It appears that they had got the scent of the order dated July 9, 1998.
It was thereafter that they submitted an undated joining report.
Even though this report appears to have been dealt with in the office on July 16/17,1998, there is nothing to show that it had been actually submitted on July 15, 1998.
It further appears that an effort was made by the office to help the petitioners.
After the receipt of the joining report, the orders of punishment were returned by the Medical Superintendent to the Civil Surgeon.
However, this attempt was foiled by the Civil Surgeon and the Medical Superintendent was directed to serve the orders on the employees.
The needful was done on July 22, 1998.
7.
Keeping in view the above factual position, it is clear that the orders were rightly implemented against the petitioners and these did not violate any binding instructions.
8.
Resultantly, the first question is answered against the petitioners.
It is held that there was no violation of the directions given by the Director General, Health Services, Haryana to the Civil Surgeon.
9.
Mr. Goel has further contended that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination inasmuch as no punishment has been awarded to Smt. Asha and the seven other employees mentioned in paragraph 11 of the petition.
This contention is misconceived.
Two wrongs never make a right.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners had resorted to an illegal strike.
They had struck work in spite of the notification dated May 26, 1998 by which they had been debarred from going on strike.
The petitioners had neglected to perform their duties.
Counsel for the petitioners did not rightly make any attempt to justify the action of the petitioners.
In this situation, even if it is assumed that no action has been taken against various other persons, it cannot be said that the orders passed against the petitioners are vitiated.
Still further, it also deserves notice that according to the petitioners, Smt. Asha etc. were in jail till July 25, 1998.
The competent authority may have felt that they were unable to report for duty on account of their internment.
In this situation, we cannot sustain the plea of the petitioners that the action was violative of Article 14.
Resultantly, even the second question is answered against the petitioners.
10.
It appears that with the material advancement, man is losing in moral values.
The 19th Century had given the World - Florence Nightingale - the lady with the lamp.
This English nurse was the founder of `nursing as a profession of women'.
She gave care and comfort to the sick and suffering humanity.
In the 20th Century, when man has made material progress, we have nurses who go on strike.
Instead of giving care and comfort to the patients in the hospitals, they show a callous difference (indifference ?).
In the first decade of the present Century, the King of England had conferred on Florence Nightingale `The Order of Merit'.
Keeping in view the change in attitude, it is not surprising that in the last decade of the Century, the State of Haryana has been forced to order the removal of striking nurses from service.
11.
It is only by doing our daily duty that we become entitled to get our daily bread.
An undisintegrated attention to the sick is the first requirement and the foremost duty of a nurse.
Any neglect is a serious crime.
When we sacrifice duty to fulfil a desire, we betray a serious and sacred trust.
The petitioners and others of their ilk were employed to take care of the sick.
They sacrificed the duty and have betrayed the trust.
There is no equity in their favour.
They deserve no sympathy.
12.
We hope and trust that the orders passed by the Department would serve as an example to the employees everywhere.
Let it be clearly understood that the Court shall not help those who do not perform their duties.
Those who ignore this message shall do so at their own peril.
13.
In view of the above, we find no merit in these petitions.
These are, consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petitions dismissed.