GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus for directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Art and Craft Teacher.
2.
A look at the Advertisement Annexure P-1 published in the Newspaper (The Tribune) dated 1211996 shows that the last date fixed for receipt of applications was 1521996.
In the application submitted by her in pursuance of the advertisement, the petitioner gave out that she will appear in the final examination to be held in May, 1996.
It appears that without scrutinising her application with a view to determine her eligibility to be considered for selection, the Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching), Jalandhar, issued letter of interview, Annexure P-5, and the petitioner was, in fact, interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee.
She has now sought the Court's intervention for directing the respondents to appoint her on the ground that respondent No. 4, who was secured less marks than her has been declared selected ignoring her candidature.
3.
In the short reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the petitioner is not eligible to be considered for selection because as on 1521996 she had not acquired the prescribed training qualification.
The original application form submitted by the petitioner has also been produced before us to show that the petitioner had not even appeared in the Teachers Training Examination up to May, 1996.
4.
After hearing Shri Arora and Shri Khosla, we are convinced that the non- consideration of the petitioner for appointment as Art and Craft Teacher does not suffer from any legal error.
In Ashok Kumar Sharma and another v. Chander Shekhar and another, 1997(2) SCT 123 (SC) : JT 1997(4) SC 97, their Lordships of the Supreme Court relying upon the observations in Mrs. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan, 1993(2) SCT 279 (SC) : JT 1993(1) SC 220, held that the date of eligibility of candidates must be determined with reference to the date specified in the recruitment rules.
If no such date is specified in the rules then the date specified in the advertisement should be taken into consideration for judging the eligibility of the candidates.
In case the rules are silent and the advertisement also does not stipulate the particular date then the last date fixed for receipt of the application constitutes the touchstone for determination of eligibility of candidates.
5.
Applying the ratio of the decision referred to herein above, we hold that the petitioner, who had not passed the prescribed examination upto 1521996, was not eligible to be considered for selection.
Hence, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.