THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner filed this writ petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the petitioner for the post of Riding Inspector in pursuance of interview held on 2/3rd March, 1988.
2.
The petitioner in pursuance of an advertisement for the post of Riding Inspector applied for the same.
The petitioner was invited for interview and he was directed to report for physical measurement and proficiency test.
After the test and interview the petitioner and other candidates were informed that the result of selection would be conveyed later on.
As the petitioner was not informed, he made a representation on 6.7.1990 about the result.
Since to reply was given, he made another representation on November 25, 1991 and the Director General of Police informed the petitioner on December 30, 1991 that the Departmental Selection Committee had not selected him for the post of Inspector (Riding Master).
Thereafter he again made a representation on 29.10.1992 and again on 441993.
The petitioner did not receive any reply.
Thereafter the petitioner filed this writ petition seeking appointment as Riding Inspector in the Police Training College, Phillaur.
3.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, it was averred that 21 applicants including the petitioner appeared before the Departmental Selection Committee at Police Training College, Phillaur on 231988 for physical tests and none of them was an Ex- Cavalary Officer and was found not qualified in the Cavalary Regiment for Instructor's Certificate and, therefore, none of them including the petitioner could be appointed.
Thereafter on the recommendations of the Departmental Selection Committee, the Principal, Police Training College, Phillaur was requested to find out a suitable person through Equestrian Federation of India for appointment as Inspector (Riding Master).
Accordingly, on the basis of the recommendations of Colonel Commandant, Lt. Amlook Singh, who served in the President's Body Guard was considered by the Department Selection Committee and he was appointed as Inspector (Riding Master) on 781990.
Therefore, according to them, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that the 4th respondent was appointed by way of a back-door entry and, therefore, his appointment is liable to quashed.
But the fact remains that the none of 21 candidates who appeared before the Departmental Selection Committee, was found suitable for appointment as Inspector (Ridding Master) and the petitioner was also informed by the Director General of Police, Punjab, in 1991 itself.
Though the interview took place in 1988, the writ petition was filed in 1993.
Even after the appointment of the 4th respondent on 781990, the petitioner waited nearly for three years and filed the writ petition in June 1993 only.
Thus the petitionr is guilty of delay and laches in approaching the Court and on this ground alone, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
5.
Further when the Departmental Selection Committee found that the petitioner was not eligible to be appointed as Inspector (Ridding Master), he cannot, as a matter of right, claim to be appointed to the said post.
6.
After going through the record, I am of the opinion that the writ petition is devoid of any merit and the same is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.