HS Bedi, J - By the impugned order dated 26th August, 1998, (Annexure P-5) the petitioner was disqualified from appearing in any University Examination for the period of two years, that is, 1998 and 1999 under Regulation 5 of the Panjab University Calender (Volume II) of 1995, on the ground of use of unfair means in the BA Part-II Examination held in April, 1998.
2.
The grievance made by the petitioner was that he had preferred an appeal against the impugned order to the Vice Chancellor on 5th September, 1998, which was still pending and had not been disposed of.
3.
The respondent-University has filed written statement.
It has been explained that the Vice Chancellor had referred the petitioner's appeal to the Unfair Means Committee under the rules.
The said Committee examined the appeal and passed a speaking order, which is set out in paragraph 7 of the written statement.
The committee has found regarding the material in question, that the petitioner has set up a new story in appeal.
During the unfair means proceedings, he had changed the statement that he had earlier made and now, again he had come out with different version.
Therefore, the defence taken in appeal has been disbelieved.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends, on the basis of the decision of this Court in the case of Shiv Charan Singh Gill v Panjab University Chandigarh and others, 1996(4) R.S.J.
168 : 1996(1) SCT 417 (P&H) that it cannot be said that he had used the recovered material for the purpose of copying in the examination so as to justify the punishment under Regulation 5.
5.
The decision in Shiv Charan Singh's case (supra) is based on its own peculiar facts.
There, the candidate was found to be holding "in his hand" the recovered material at 1130 am while he was attempting the answer to the last question.
The Court found, on comparison of the contents of the material with that of the answer written by the candidate that there was no similarity.
Therefore, the charge was rejected on the ground of improbability.
The facts of the case in hand are different.
Here, during the examination, eleven photostat printed slips, relevant to the subject of the examination were found concealed in the answer-book of the petitioner.
This established the charge of mala fide possession of the said material.
Actual use for copying from it is irrelevant.
6.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case we find no reason to interfere with the findings recorded by the Unfair Means Committee, and the decision of the Vice Chancellor  7.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.