GC Garg, J - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 2846-C, 2847-C and 2848-C of 1998, as in all these petitions, the point involved is the same,  2.
Applicant-respondents were appointed as Sub Overseer Mistries on daily wages somewhere in the year 1986-87.
They were not regularised on Class-III posts.
They thus filed applications before the Central Administrative Tribunal in the year 1991.
They also obtained interim order dated 2791991 whereby the petitioners herein were directed to pay them according to order dated 12.7.1990 in the grade of Rs. 1320-2040 provisionally.
3.
At the time of hearing of the applications by the Central Administrative Tribunal, it was sought to be argued that the applicants have been given the grade under the orders of the Tribunal but increments have not been released to them.
It was also argued that during the pendency of the applications, the grade of Rs. 1320-2040 has been revised to Rs. 1400-2300 and the applicants are entitled to the same, which benefit had been denied to them.
Still another grievance of the applicants was that their services in group `C' posts of Sub Overseer Mistries have not been regularised.
4.
This claim of the applicants was contested by the Union of India through General Manager, Rail Coach Factory, Kapurthala.
However, at the time of hearing, perhaps the matter was not gone into in detail for the stand taken by learned counsel for Union of India and in view of the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Ram Kumar and others v. Union of India & Ors. 1996(1) SLJ 116.
The Tribunal, therefore, without going into the details of the controversy raised in the applications, disposed of the three applications by a common order, operative part of which reads as under :-  i) "The applicants in the three OAs.
have been given the revised scale of Rs. 1400-2300, but without increment.
They will be given increments from the date this scale was given to them and they will be entitled to the arrears so made out.
ii) The respondents will adjust them against the Class III post in the Rail Coach Factory, Kapurthala and regularise them on the post and till then, the pay ordered to be paid above will be protected."
It was also ordered that the applicants will be entitled to the benefits of the recommendations of 5th Pay Commission when enforced.
5.
It is this order passed in the three applications, which is under challenge in these three writ petitions at the instance of Union of India.
6.
During the course of hearing, Mr. Puneet Jindal appearing for the Union of India submitted that the applicants could not be ordered to be regularised in Class III posts of Sub Overseer Mistries in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300 as ordered by the Central Administrative Tribunal as after the expiry of 180 days of their initial appointment, they were granted the grade of Rs. 950-1500 and designated as Artisans.
They continued as such till the interim order was passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal on 1271991.
It was also submitted that reliance placed on Ram Kumar's case is misplaced as the facts of that case are different and the said decision is not a binding precedent as it is based on concession.
It was further submitted that in the absence of post of Sub Overseer Mistries in the cadre, the Central Administrative Tribunal could not order the Rail Coach Factory to regularise the applicants on posts or in a cadre which do not exist and lastly it was argued that in the matter of regularisation only administrative instructions are to be adhered to and the Tribunal or the Court cannot direct creation of a new cadre or post especially when there was no work of Sub Overseer Mistries in the Establishment.
7.
It was at this stage submitted by learned counsel appearing for the applicant-respondents in these writ petitions that as is clear from para 6 of the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal, controversy raised in the applications by the applicants was not gone into on merits, the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal may be quashed and the matters remitted to it for decision on the applications afresh in accordance with law and after hearing the parties concerned.
8.
Mr. Puneet Jindal, learned counsel appearing for the UOI had no objection to this course being adopted.
9.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and having regard to the respective stand and especially the fact that the controversy raised was not disposed of by the Central Administrative Tribunal on its own merits but was disposed of on the concession made by the learned counsel for the Union of India, we allow these writ petitions, quash the orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal and remit the matters to it for disposal of the original applications of the applicants afresh in accordance with law and after hearing the counsel for the parties.
10.
Parties through their counsel have been directed to appear before the Central Administrative Tribunal on 20.4.1999.
11.
It is also ordered that Union of India will be at liberty to move an appropriate application before the Central Administrative Tribunal for modification/clarification or vacation of the interim order dated 2971991 passed by it.
With the above directions, these writ petitions stand disposed of.
Petitions disposed of.