Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner took the class X examination conducted by the CBSE New Delhi from the Shri Guru Ram Rai Public School, Dehradun (UP) in the year 1997 and on the declaration of the result vide Annexure P-1 dated 361997 was shown to have obtained a compartment in one subject.
The petitioner thereafter appeared in the supplementary examination in the said subject and was declared successful on the declaration of result on 891997 vide Annexure P-2.
The consolidated result was accordingly notified vide Annexure P-3 dated 1091997.
The petitioner had in the meanwhile applied for admission to Shri Mahavir Jain Model Senior Secondary School, Hoshiarpur Road, Phagwara (Punjab) and was admitted in the 10+1 Class without demur.
He also appeared in the 10+1 examination and cleared the same in the year 1998.
It is the conceded position that 10+1 examination is held at the School level.
Respondent No. 3 thereafter forwarded the application of the petitioner for registration by the Punjab School Education Board- respondent No. 2.
This registration was declined vide Annexure P-6 dated 22.6.1998 on the ground that the petitioner had got a compartment in Class X while studying in Dehradun and was thereby not entitled to admission in Class XI in the Punjab State.
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court impugning the order, Annexure P-6 as also the instructions Annexures P-8 and P-9 dated 271997 and 7.4.1998 respectively under which the action had been taken.
The case of the petitioner is that no distinction could to be made between students, who had obtained a compartment in the Class X examination in Punjab and Chandigarh, and those from outside these two areas.
2.
On notice of motion, a written statement has been filed by the contesting party i.e. respondent No. 2, the Punjab School Education Board.
A reference has been made to Sub-Regualation (iii) of Regulation 5 of 1990 which provides the conditions for eligibility for admission to the 11th class and inter alia stipulates that compartment/re-appear candidates of the matriculation (Class X) examination from Schools situated in UT Chandigarh and Punjab affiliated to CBSE, New Delhi shall alone be eligible for admission to Class XI.
It has accordingly been pleaded that as the petitioner had got a compartment from a School situated outside the UT Chandigarh and the Punjab, he was not eligible to get registration.
Reference has also been made to Clause 12 and Part B of Annexures P-8 and P-9 in this connection.
3.
Mr. Jasbir Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has urged only one point before me.
He has pointed out that the distinction between two similarly situated schools inasmuch as both were affiliated to the CBSE was wholly uncalled for and no justification could be pointed out in the written statement as to why this distinction has been made.
4.
Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2, has raised two arguments in reply; firstly that the classification was founded on an intelligible differentia, which had a rational relation to the object which was sought to be achieved by the instructions and secondly that respondent No. 2 was fully justified in taking into account the geographical location of the Schools situated in the State of Punjab and the UT Chandigarh and could make a distinction in their case.
5.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
Clause 12 of Annexure P-8 and Part B of Annexure P-9 are reproduced above.
Clause 12 of Annexure P-8  "12.
Those students who got compartments in Matric/11th class/12th class examination from other Boards (leaving schools situated in Punjab and Chandigarh affiliated to CBSE) such students are not eligible for admission, such students are not to be admitted under any circumstances.
Part B of Annexure P-9  Students of the following category are not eligible for admission: Those students of other States/Boards who have compartments/reappears in their Matriculation (except those affiliated to CBSE and situated in UT Chandigarh and Punjab) are not eligible for regular admission in +1.
Similarly the students of other States/Board having compartments in +1 and +2 are not eligible for admission in +2.
Such students should not be given regular admission under any circumstances."
To my mind a School situated in Dehradun (UP) and affiliated to the CBSE can by no stretch of imagination be treated in a manner different than Schools situated in the State of Punjab and UT Chandigarh also affiliated to the CBSE No justification has been pleaded in the written statement (and even in the course of arguments) beyond making a bald assertion that the distinction was in order.
Mr. Gur Ratan Pal Singh's argument with regard to the geographical location is also without merit as the broad test would be that both sets of Schools stand affiliated to the CBSE meaning thereby that both have identical standards of education.
The location of the school is, therefore, a matter of no consequence.
6.
This petition is accordingly allowed, condition No. 12 in Annexure P-8 and Part B of Annexure P-9 in so far it declines admission to candidates, who have obtained compartment in the CBSE Class X examination from Schools situated outside the State of Punjab and UT Chandigarh and stand affiliated to the CBSE is held to be bad in law as being arbitrary and is accordingly quashed.
It is further directed that the petitioner's provisional admission to the 10+2 examination vide order of this Court dated 531999 in C.M.
No. 5018 of 1999 will be deemed to be regularised and the result would be declared alongwith that of other candidates.
No costs.
Dasti Order.
Petition allowed.