NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of three civil writ petitions No. 13795, 13840 and 14098 of 1998 in which common questions of law and fact arise.
Since arguments were addressed in civil writ petition 13840 of 1998, facts are being taken from this case.
2.
By a notification dated 27.3.1998 the Punjabi University, Patiala (for short the University) had been authorised to hold a Competitive Entrance Examination (PMET) for the selection of students for admission to the MBBS/BDS/BAMS (Ayurvedacharya) course for the session 1998 in all the State and private Medical/Dental/Ayurvedic Colleges situated in the State of Punjab and listed in the notification.
The University accordingly issued the prospectus for the PMET prescribing the eligibility for the test and other conditions for admission to the courses.
The last date for the submission of the applications was 1551998 and the test was conducted on 661998.
The prospectus carried the list of all the State and private Medical, Dental and Ayurvedic Colleges in the State and the number of seats available in each college was mentioned against the name of each college.
The number of seats available with each of respondents 4 to 7 was sixty (60).
Clause 7 of the prospectus prescribes reservation in the State and private Medical, Dental and Ayurvedic colleges.
Since we are concerned with the admissions to the private Dental Colleges (respondents 4 to 7) the provision regarding reservation in such colleges is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "Seats will be reserved for constitutionally reserved categories in the private Medical/Dental and Ayurvedic Colleges in the State of Punjab as noted below and to the extent mentioned against each :-  (i) SC/ST 25% (ii) Backward Class 5% Petitioners who belong to the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes took the test and their merit in the BDS course as determined by the University in their respective categories is as under :-  Petitioner No. Name R No. Marks obt.
Category (Code) BDS Merit No. 1.
Jagjit Singh Sarao 6276 505 BC(C) 12 2.
Ms. Gurpreet Kaur Thind 14431 505 BC(C) 11 3.
Sandeep Dinkar 14286 358 SC(B) 43 4.
Harjot Kumar 16504 357 SC(B) 45 5.
Ms. Ramandeep 13532 342 SC(B) 52 6.
Baldev Singh 14402 355 SC(B) 51 7.
Ms. Shruti Ghai 16843 340 SC(B) 64 8.
Ms. Maninder Raju 14451 334 SC(B) 73 They were not admitted to the BDS course and their grievance in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is that respondents 4 to 7 have filled up all the seats from amongst the candidates belonging to the general category and that no candidate from the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes has been admitted, even though 25% of the seats were reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and another 5% for the Backward Classes.
3.
In response to the notice issued by this court respondents 4 and 5 had put in appearance through their counsel but none appeared at the time of arguments.
Respondent 5 has filed a reply in which it is pleaded that it was not necessary for this respondent to admit students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and that the provision for reservation contained in the prospectus was only an enabling provision.
Reliance has been placed in the reply on the observations of the Apex Court in Unni Krishnan's case reported in JT 1993(1) SC 474.
4.
Having heard counsel for the petitioners, I am of the view that the writ petitions deserve to succeed.
In the prospectus issued by the University, there is a provision for reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes.
A perusal of clause 7 as reproduced in the earlier part of the order makes it clear that 25% seats had been reserved for SC/ST candidates and 5% for Backward Class candidates in all the private Dental Colleges in the State.
This provision is mandatory and if eligible candidates belonging to the reserve categories were available the respondents had no option but to admit them as per their merit in the PMET.
This provision cannot be described as an enabling provision and nor does it give any discretion to the colleges to admit or not to admit the students belonging to the reserve categories.
Respondents 4 to 7 are private Dental colleges in the State of Punjab and are governed by the provisions of the prospectus issued by the University.
It is well settled that the terms and conditions notified in the prospectus issued by the University are binding on all concerned in the matter of granting admissions and these have the force of law and the respondents cannot be allowed to act in contravention thereof.
It was, therefore, incumbent upon these respondents to admit SC/ST candidates to the extent of 25% of the seats available in these colleges and another 5% seats had to be given to the candidates belonging to the Backward Classes.
No doubt, there is a provision in the prospectus that the seats left vacant in any reserve category owing to non-availability of eligible candidates were to be filled up from the eligible candidates belonging to the general category on merit but in the cases before us the candidates belonging to the reserve categories like Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes were available and it is not even the case of the respondents that it was because of the non- availability of such candidates that the seats were given to the candidates from the general category.
5.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed and respondents 4 to 7 directed to admit students against the seats reserved for Backward Class candidates on the basis of their merit as determined in the PMET.
Counsel for the petitioners stated that some seats are still lying vacant.
If that is so, the respondents may admit the students from the reserve categories against those seats.
If, however, no seat is available the respondents will cancel the admissions of such number of candidates in the general category having the lowest merit as are equal to number of seats reserved for SC/ST candidates and Backward Class candidates.
It goes without saying that before cancelling any admission, the respondents will serve the affected candidates with a show cause notice and observe the principles of natural justice.
Petitioners will have their costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/- in each case.
Petitions allowed.