Arun B Saharya, CJ.
- The petitioner is seeking a writ of mandamus for directing the respondent-University to add up the marks secured by her in the additional optional paper of Hindu and for issuing a fresh mark-sheet for the `Giani' examination held in September 1995.
2.
According to the petitioner, she had submitted the examination form as a private candidate.
She opted for Hindi as the additional optional language paper, and appeared in the examination in all the papers.
In the result, she was decalred pass.
But, in the mark-sheet dated Dedcember 3, 1996 (Annexure P1), in each of the six compulsory subjects, she was given 42, 48, 57, 44, 50 and 56 marks respectively, totalling up to 297 out of 650 marks.
The column for additional subject was left blank.
She requested the respondent- University to rectify the mistake by application dated January 6, 1997 (Annexure P2), notice of demand dated September 3, 1997 (Annexure P3), followed by another notice dated January 14, 1998 (Annexure P4).
When the University did not respond, she sought redress of her grievance by moving this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
3.
On notice of motion, the University filed its written statement dated March 30, 1998, taking up the stand that the petitioner did not mention the additional optional Hindi paper in the examination form, though she was required to do so under the rules; that she had wrongly and illegally managed to appear in the Hindi test; and that the same was rightly excluded from the result.
It was also pleaded that her examination form was not traceable, and that the tabulation sheet "belies the petitioner's version about her having mentioned `Hindi' subject as her optional subject in the examination form."
4.
By our order dated May 4, 1998, we directed the respondent-University to produce in Court the original record.
Rather than belying the petitioner's version, it fully supported the case of the petitioner.
Besides the marks that were recorded for each of the compulsory subjects in six different columns, corresponding to those shown in Annexure P1, in the seventh column 31 marks were awarded for the additional optional subject.
In two other columns, the total score of 328 marks of all the seven subjects and second division was recorded.
Later, it appears that 31 marks written in the 7th column, and the total of 328 marks and second division entered in the other columns, were encircled and scored out.
After deducting these 31 marks, the total was changed to 297 marks; and in place of second division, third division was awarded.
The tabulation-sheet clearly shows that the petitioner had appeared in the examination for all the seven subjects and 31 marks were awarded to her in the additional optional subject of Hindi, which was later deleted.
5.
Thereafter, the University has filed additional written statement dated July 10, 1998, reiterating the stand that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of 31 marks in Hindi, as she did not give the option for taking the additional subject in her examination form; and that she is trying to take advantage of the non-availability of her examination form.
The petition is opposed on the additional plea of delay of about 3 years.
For this purpose, reliance is sought to be placed upon a Note made in the Result-cum-Detail Marks Certificate, which reads as follows :-  "In case of discrepancy/error, the Result-cum-Detailed Marks Card should be returned to this office within a week from the date of its receipt.
No application will be entertained thereafter."
6.
At the time of hearing, learned counsel for the respondent has strenuously pressed the aforesaid pleas taken in the additional written statement.
We do not find any substance in it.
7.
The University has taken the spacious plea that the examination form is "missing".
Why the petitioner was allowed to appear in the test in Hindi subject ?
When and how her examination form was lost ?
What action has been taken against its own officials/employees who are responsible for it ?
No explanation is forthcoming.
Since the Examination Form of the petitioner could be and is not produced by the University, it must be presumed that the same if produced would be unfavourable to the respondent-University.
We find no justification for the ipse dixit of the University, placing the entire blame upon the petitioner.
On the other hand, we find no reason to disbelieve the statement made in paragraph 3 of the writ petition that the petitioner did give her choice of Hindi subject for the additional optional language paper in the examination form.
8.
The allotment of marks in the examination is regulated by Rules 7 to 12, contained in Volume IV of the Punjabi University Calender, which are reproduced in paragraph 9 of the writ petition, in the following terms :-  "7.
One hundred marks shall be allotted to each question paper except in the case of additional paper for which the marks shall be fifty.
8.
The minimum number of marks required to pass shall be 40% in each of the six papers xxxxxxxxxxxxxx.
9.
The candidate shall receive no credit for marks obtained in the additional optional paper unless he has obtained at least 33% marks in which case these marks shall be added to the total and the fact of his having passed in the additional paper shall be mentioned in his certificate.
10. x x x x x x x  11.
Successful candidates who obtain 60% or more of the aggregate number of marks including the additional paper shall be placed in the first division; those who obtain 50% or more but less than 60% marks shall be placed in the second division, and all below 50% in the thid division.
12.
Six weeks after the termination of the examination or as soon as may be, the Registrar shall publish the result.
Each successful candidate shall be granted a certificate stating the examination passed by him and the division in which he has passed."
9.
The entries made in the tabulation sheet conclusively establish that the petitioner had secured 31 out of 50 marks, which is far more than 33% marks, in the additional optional Hindi paper.
This entitles her to get the credit for those marks, and the same should be added to the award of the total marks, in accordance with the afoesaid rule 7 and rule 9.
On the conjoined reading of rules 11 and 12 also, she is entitled to restoation of the award of total 328 marks in the second division.
Accodingly, she is entitled to the grant of a corrected Certificate stating that she has passed the `Giani' examination in the second division.
10.
Lastly, we find no substance in the plea of delay also.
The marks-sheet (Annexure P1) that was issued to the petitioner is dated December 31, 1996.
Promptly, for correction of the error, within a week, she returned it together with the application dated January 6, 1997 (Annexure P2).
There was nothing more that she was requied to do.
Then, she sent a Notice of demand dated September 3, 1997, followed by another Notice dated January 14, 1998 (Annexures P3 and P4).
But, the University failed to do the needful.
There is no delay or laches on the part of the petitioner.
11.
Therefore, we direct the respondent-University to issue to the petitioner, within one month of the receipt of the certified copy of this judgment, the Detailed Marks Sheet-cum-Certificate stating that she has passed the `Giani' examination with 328 marks in Second Division.
12.
The writ petition is allowed, with Rs. 5500/- as costs.
Petition allowed.