RM Prasad, J - In this writ petition the prayer is to quash the order dated 1931997 (Annexure-1), whereby and whereunder the petitioner has been superannuated from the service with effect from 3131997.
2.
It was contended by Mr. Pandey, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner that the petitioner has wrongly been superannuated from service with effect from 3131997 by treating 58 years as the age of superannuation.
According to him, age of superannuation is 60 years.
3.
The petitioner had initially joined the Indian Oil Corporation which was later on amalgamated with Indian Refinery Limited.
Both the said Companies were Government Companies.
According to the petitioner, the age of superannuation in the India Oil Corporation is 60 years and in view of clause 10 of the amalgamation order, contained in Annexure 2, his conditions of service remained unaffected after the amalgamation.
As such, according to the learned Counsel, the petitioner cannot be made to superannuate at the age of 58 years.
4.
I am unable to accept the said submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
It is true that under Clause 10 of Annexure 2, the terms and conditions of the employees of the erstwhile Company were to remain the same but it was to continue until the terms and conditions are duly altered.
Admittedly, by resolution dated 1st July, 1967, the age of superannuation of all such employees was brought on par and 58 years was fixed as the age of superannuation.
5.
Mr. Chatterji, learned Counsel appearing for the Corporation, submitted that this writ petition is fit to be dismissed on the sole ground of gross delay and laches as the petitioner, in fact, attempts to challenge the resolution dated 1st July, 1967 as a consequence whereof Annexure 1 was issued, whereas the present writ petition has been filed after lapse of almost 30 years.
Further, it was submitted by Mr. Chatterji that the petitioner having accepted the said resolution relating to his service conditions of the last 30 years cannot now assail the validity of the action taken pursuant thereto by superannuating him on completion of 58 years of age.
In this regard learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that in view of the fact that the cause of action for challenging the age of superannuation of the petitioner arose only after Annexure 1 was issued on 1931997 and, as such, there is no substance in the submission of Mr. Chatterji.
He also submitted that no order altering conditions of service can be passed without giving an opportunity of hearing.
In support of this, he placed reliance on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of HL Trehan v Union of India, reported in AIR 1989 SC 568.
6.
I do not find any substance in the said submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
The reliance placed by the petitioner on the said decision of the Supreme Court, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, is wholly misplaced.
It is not the case of the petitioner that he was not aware of the aforementioned resolution determining the age of superannuation of an employee since it was passed and that he came to learn about it only after Annexure 1 was issued.
Moreover, the condition relating to amalgamation of the two Companies clearly provided that the terms and conditions of employment of such employees are to continue as it was in the erstwhile Company until the same are duly altered by the amalgamated Company.
7.
Further, learned Counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out any evidence in support of his claim that in the erstwhile Company the age of superannuation of such an employee was 60 years.
8.
Accordingly, I do not find any merit in the writ application and the same is dismissed, but without costs.
Application Dismissed.