THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner in this writ petition was appointed as Demonstrator (Pottery) in the erstwhile State of Punjab on 7.1.1960.
He was promoted as Technician Pottery in 1963.
Thereafter his services were transferred to Himachal Pradesh Khadi and Village Industries Board on formation of the State of Himachal Pradesh.
He applied for the post of Technical Supervisor in Punjab Khadi and Village Industries Board, Chandigarh in pursuance of an advertisement and on being selected he joined as such on 1831977.
The petitioner retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on 31st October, 1992.
2.
While the petitioner was in service a resolution was passed by the Board in 1984 introducing the pensionary scheme for the employees of the Board.
A letter has been addressed to the employees on 29.2.1988 seeking options from the employees of the Board to avail the benefit of pensionary scheme.
Subsequently another resolution was passed on 29111994 deciding to implement the Pension Scheme to the employees of the Board.
Regulations have been framed by the Board in 1995 making the Pension Scheme applicable to all the employees who retired within five years prior to 2641994 on condition that the employees who opt for the Pension Scheme have to refund the share of the Board towards the contributory Provident Fund with interest which the employees have drawn at the time of their retirement upto the date of refund so as to make them eligible for Pension Scheme.
The petitioner opted to be governed by the Pension Scheme, but no action has been taken by the Board.
Therefore, the petitioner filed this writ petition seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him the pensionary benefits after counting the past service rendered by him on depositing the Board's share of contributory Provident Fund with interest @ 6% P.A.
3.
In the written statement it was contended that the Board is contemplating to extend the Pension Scheme only to those employees who retired after 2641994 and the matter would be placed before the meeting of the Board and the Government's approval has not been obtained to the Regulations and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to issuance of writ or mandamus.
4.
There is no dispute of the fact even in the year 1984 a resolution was passed extending the facility of Pension Scheme to the employees of the Board and to send the draft proposal to the Government for its approval.
There is also no dispute of the fact that a circular was issued by the Board on 2921988 seeking the option of the employees for the extension of Pensionary scheme.
On 2931995 (vide Annexure P-3/T) the Board has passed the following resolution :-  "The Board also decided that the pension scheme be also made applicable on those employees who had retired after 2641989; 5 years prior to the cut off date of 2641994 of pension scheme.
Such employees will have to complete all formalities in this regard and return the amount of Board's share, received as CPF alongwith interest.
They will also be entitled to pension scheme with effect from the following month."
5.
The Board also framed Regulations called Punjab Khadi and Village Industries Board Employees (Pension) Regulations, 1994 vide Annexure P-4.
In the said Regulations, the pensioner has been defined as an employee, who has retired from the Board on or after 2641989 and he is eligible for, or is drawing pension under these Regulations.
Regulation 3(iii) of the said Regulations reads as follows :-  "The employees who have retired from the service of the Board on or after 2641989, five years prior to the cut off date i.e. after 2641994 and employees retired afterwards, upto 3131995 will have to exercise option in Form `A'.
The option shall be final and irrevocable.
Such retired employees will make refund of the Board's CPF share plus interest thereon drawn by them at the time of retirement, upto the date of refund, to be eligible for Pension Scheme.
In pursuance of these Regulations, an option form has been sent to the retired employees by the Board in Form `A' which is Annexure P-6/A The petitioner also made representations on 1371995, 26.7.1995 and 21.8.1995 requesting that the pensionary benefits may be extended to him and he is prepared to complete all the formalities.
6.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that the matter is still under consideration of the Government cannot be accepted in view of what has been stated above.
The Board has already framed Regulations extending the benefit of the Pension Scheme to the employees who retired within five years prior to 2641994.
The learned Counsel for the respondents contended that Board wants to implement the Scheme only with effect from 2641994 since the Financial Adviser of the Board has written a letter on 23.3.1996 that the Board will be put to loss if the Pension Scheme is extended to the employees who retired prior to 2641994, but the fact remains that the Board has already framed Regulations which created a vested right in the employees who retired on or after 2641989.
The retired employees have also been intimated and were asked to exercise the option.
Therefore, it is not open to the respondent-Board to say that the matter is still under consideration.
Since a vested right has already been created in the petitioner, he cannot be deprived of the benefits of the pensionary scheme.
7.
The learned counsel for the respondents further argued that the Regulations have to be approved by the Government and no approval has been accorded by the Government.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot take advantage of the Regulations.
This contention of the learned Counsel for the respondents is also devoid of any merit since the Board promulgated the Regulations with effect from 26th April, 1994 after obtaining the approval of the Government.
8.
It is pertinent to note that the Government in its letter dated 10121993 advised the Board to take a decision at its own level in regard to implementation of the Pension Scheme for the employees of the Board.
Therefore, this contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that the approval has not been obtained in regard to adopting the pension scheme is without any force.
Further if the Government has not sanctioned and approved the Regulations, they would not have been published and the employees would not have been asked to submit their options in regard to adopting the Pension Scheme.
Nothing has been placed on record by the respondents to show that the Regulations have not been approved.
On the other hand, the material placed before me clearly shows that the Board has written a letter not only to the retired employees seeking their options, but also sent option forms in the format prescribed.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents argued that the Regulations have been kept in abeyance pending further consideration on the advice of the Financial Adviser.
The learned counsel for the respondents has specifically stated across the Bar that so far the Board has not taken any decision and the matter has not been considered by the Board afresh.
Therefore, it is to be taken that there is no change in the Regulations.
If there is any change in the Regulations, the respondents would have certainly placed before the Court some material in this regard.
Since the respondents have not placed any material before this Court, it is to be taken that the Regulations are still in force.
10.
In view of what has been stated above, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to opt for the Pension Scheme on the condition of his refunding the contribution of the Board towards the Contributory Provident Fund alongwith interest.
11.
I accordingly allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to grant pension to the petitioner from the date of his retirement subject to the condition that the petitioner shall deposit the share of the Board towards the Contributory Provident Fund with interest @ 12% P.A.
from the date of his retirement till the date of such deposit.
On making deposit as stated, the petitioner will be entitled to get pension from the date of his retirement to which he is entitled to as per the Regulations.
The petitioner shall deposit the share of the Board's contribution alongwith interest within three months from today.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.