TS Doabia, J - Date of birth of the writ petitioner is Ist of April 1937.
He was permitted to work up to 30th of April 1995.
He was held to have superannuated on that date.
His pension paper case was forwarded to the Accountant General of Jammu and Kashmir State.
Accountant General formed an opinion that under the rules petitioner's date of birth being on Ist of April 1937, he should have been retired on 31st of March 1995.
His retention in service upto 30th of April 1995 was found to be contrary to the service rules.
Consequently a direction was given that salary to the extent of Rs. 4126 be recovered from the petitioner.
As a matter of fact this is subject matter of challenge in this writ petition.
On the strength of the decision given by the Division Bench of this court in case reported as Ali Mohammad v. State of J&K and ors., 1989 KLJ 8, petitioner submits that where an employee is not given notice of his date of retirement, and he remains in service, then salary drawn by him cannot be recovered.
Relevant observations made in para 4 are being noticed:  "4.
Mr. Nazki submitted that he gives up the first prayer as regards the date of retirement of the petitioner and concedes that he had to retire on 3151984 as stated by the respondents.
With this concession, the main controversy gets resolved.
Now it is to be seen as to whether respondents can recover the amount from the petitioner which he had received as his salary after the due date of retirement.
Admittedly, the petitioner is an illiterate person and belongs to inferior service.
He was not expected to know his actual date of retirement.
It was the duty of the competent authority to give him a notice of 18 months before his actual date of retirement.
The respondents have frankly conceded in their objections that inadvertently such notice was not given to him.
That being so how could they recover any amount from him which was received by him as his salary.
He has received this amount not as gratis but as wages for the labour put in by him.
`Begar' stands since abolished and there is, therefore, no justification for recovering any amount from the petitioner received by him in lieu of his labour.
The period of overstay which occurred not due to any mala fide intention of the petitioner, but on account of negligence of the competent authority has, therefore, to be treated as his re-employment.
He has already put in the labour for such period and also received his wages for the same which were due to him.
That being so, there is no administrative hitch in treating the period of overstay of the petitioner as re-employment.
For financial convenience the competent authority shall have to pass an order accordingly."
Case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the ratio of the decision referred to above.
There was no misrepresentation on his part.
Respondents allowed him to continue in service.
Therefore, petitioner having worked for that period, he should be given his pensionary benefit without deducting the amount referred to above.
Let this now be done within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date a copy of order passed by this court is made available by the petitioner to the respondents.
Disposed of accordingly.