VK Bali, J (Oral) - Yashvir Kumar through present petition filed by him under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash Annexure P-4 dated 1691997 by styling the same to be without justification and also contrary to the declared policy of the State.
He also seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent No. 3 to accord necessary approval to his appointment on the post of P.T.I.
2.
The facts on which the relief referred to above has been asked for need a mention.
Respondent No. 4 advertised one post of PTI on 181997.
Pursuant to advertisement referred to above, petitioner applied for the post.
His case is that he was called for interview on 1681997 and once again on 2681997.
It is further the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 3, District Education Officer was present in the interview committee being its member.
In the interview referred to above, petitioner was selected to the post of PTI and accordingly appointment letter was issued to him.
However, when his case was sent for approval on 1691997, respondent No. 3 while mentioning in his letter that inasmuch as the petitioner possesses higher qualifications than the one advertised, no approval to the appointment could be given.
The petitioner brought to the notice instructions of the Punjab Government wherein it is mentioned that when persons with the eligible criteria are not available, other persons having higher qualifications can be selected.
In support of his claim, the petitioner also cited a judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 5386 of 1997 decided on 1411998.
Meanwhile the petitioner had been continuously taking classes in the school but no salary was paid to him till 18.9.1997.
3.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court, the respondents entered defence and contested the claim of the petitioner.
Two separate written statements, one on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and the other by respondent No. 4 have been filed.
It is common case of the respondents that the petitioner was not possessing the requisite qualification even though he possessed C.P.Ed which is higher qualification than the one prescribed while issuing advertisement.
The relevant part of the advertisement reproduced in para 2 of the petition reads as under :-  "1 Trained P.T.I.
is needed.
Matric, C.P.Ed.
qualification upto Matric Hindi and Punjab is necessary.
Persons with higher qualifications will be preferred".
(Emphasis supplied).
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record of the case.
We are of the firm view that the respondents have not applied their mind to the controversy and thus wrongly rejected the case of the petitioner for approval to his appointment to the post of PTI.
It has been specifically mentioned in the advertisement itself that persons with higher qualifications will be preferred.
That being so, the stand taken by the respondents that inasmuch as the petitioner has high er qualification than one that was the advertised has to fall.
It has been argued by the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, that inasmuch as the petitioner had higher qualifications than prescribed for the post of PTI, the selection committee even did not consider others for the post.
This submission of the learned counsel is not substantiated from the pleadings.
5.
We allow this petition and direct respondent No. 3 to accord approval to the Appointment of the petitioner forthwith.
The petitioner has not been paid the salary for all the period he worked and the same shall be immediately paid to him.
This petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 5,000/- to be paid by respondent No. 3.
Petition allowed.