Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The respondent who has retired as a Joint Director (Statistics) from the Department of Agriculture had approached this Court with a prayer for the issued of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to grant him the selection grade of Rs. 1580-2000 in Junior Class-I Service with effect from January 1, 1978 and selection grade of Rs. 2100-2500 in the Senior Class-I Service with effect from May 17, 1983.
His claim was allowed by the learned Single Judge.
The State of Punjab has filed this Letters Patent Appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The respondent was appointed to the Punjab Agriculture Service Class-II on June 1, 1962.
He was appointed as a Field Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 250-750.
On May 6, 1968 the respondent was promoted as Statistical Officer.
As a result, his pay scale was raised from Rs. 250-750 to Rs. 350-1200.
Thereafter, the respondent was promoted to the Punjab Agriculture Service Class-I, with effect from November 17, 1971.
Vide order dated January 21, 1982 the respondent was promoted as Joint Director of Agriculture (Statistics).
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-4 on the record.
3.
Despite the above mentioned promotions, the respondent claimed that he was entitled to the grant of selection grade in Junior Class-I Service as well as in the Senior Class-I Service.
This claim was based on the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated March 3, 19980.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure P-7 on the record.
When the Department did not accept the respondent's claim he approached this Court through a writ petition.
The learned Single Judge found that the respondent fulfilled "the necessary conditions with regard to eligibility and entitlement of selection grade and has completed 15 years of service.
He became entitled to the selection grade according to policy decision of the State Government."
Thus, the writ petition was allowed and the authorities were directed to grant the selection grade to the respondent with effect from the date it was given to the other member of the Punjab Agriculture Service Class-II.
Aggrieved by this decision, the State of Punjab and its officers have filed the present appeal.
4.
On behalf of the appellants it has been contended by Mr. Chhinna that the view taken by the learned Single Judge is contrary to the instructions issued by the State Government.
This claim has been controverted by Mr. Brar, learned counsel for the respondent-writ petitioner.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Can the respondent claim selection grade in pursuance to the instructions issued by the State Government ?
6.
It would be appropriate to notice the relevant portion of the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated March 3, 1980.
It has been provided as under :-  "Selection grade will be provided in cases where the number of higher posts (all levels taken together) to which employee in a particular case can seek promotion is less than half the strength of that cadre or where there is no promotion post at all available to a cadre or service."
These instructions appear to have been issued with the basic object of helping such officers who have no avenue of promotion.
These are calculated to avoid stagnation.
According to these instructions, selection grade has to be provided in cases where the number of all the higher posts is less than half the strength of the basic cadre.
In other words, if there are 100 posts of Clerks and the total number of posts of Assistants, Deputy Superintendents, Superintendents etc. etc. is less than 50, then a provision for selection grade has to be made.
The second category of cases where selection grade has to be granted is when there is no avenue of promotion.
7.
What is the position in the present case ?
It has not been shown by the respondent that the number of higher posts as available at different levels is less than half the strength of the cadre to which he had been initially appointed.
Equally, it has not even been suggested that the respondent had no avenue of promotion.
Factually, the respondent having joined service in 1962 had got his first promotion in the year 1968 when he was promoted from the post of Field Officer to that of Statical Officer.
A copy of the order dated May 6, 1968 has been produced as Annexure P-2.
As a Field Officer the respondent was placed in the scale of Rs. 250-750.
With effect from May 6, 1968 he had been placed in the scale of Rs. 350-1200.
The next promotion was given to the respondent on November 17, 1971 when he was promoted to the Punjab Agriculture Service Class-I.
The respondent did not even stagnate there.
He was promoted as Joint Director on January 21, 1982.
Thus, from 1962 to 1982 the respondent had got three promotions.
There was no stagnation.
Thus, there was no ground to take the view that the selection grade has to be granted.
8.
Faced with the situation, Mr. Brar has placed reliance on the instructions issued vide letter dated October 29, 1984.
By this circular the instructions periodically issued by the State Government were merely reiterated.
In para iii, it had been provided that the "selection grade will not be admissible to an officer unless he has completed 15 years service.
The service should either be in the basic scale where appointment to the basic scale is from the point of fresh entry into service or as the sum-total of the employee's service in the basic scale and in the one scale next below".
Learned counsel for the Government has very fairly conceded that the instructions have not been happily worded.
However, the import is that the person who has not earned promotion for 15 years, should be granted the selection grade.
Such is not the position in the present case.
Mr. Brar submits that in para 4 it had been laid down that selection grade has to be given when a cadre comprises of only one or two posts.
Since the post of Joint Director (Statistics) is a solitary one in the cadre, the respondent was entitled to the relief as granted by the learned Single Judge.
Is it so ?
Para 4 of the instructions provides as under :-  "(4) No. 7/84/81-5FR/10191, dated the 7th December, 1981.
Selection grade 20% would be admissible subject to the minimum of one post.
Thus, in a cadre of comprising even one or two posts, the selection grade would be admissible to one post."
9.
The above was a reiteration of the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated December 8, 19981.
It only implies that the selection grade shall be admissible upto a maximum of 20% subject to a minimum of one post.
If there is a cadre of one or two posts, the selection grade would be admissible to one of the incumbents.
What is the position in the present case ?
10.
According to the respondent he was the occupant of the solitary post of Joint Director (Statistics).
Thus, the selection grade had to be provided.
The contention is misconceived.
It is only when the criterion as laid down for the grant of a selection grade is fulfilled that the above provision of the instructions can be invoked.
In other words, if it is established that a person is stagnating at a particular post for a long duration of time - 15 years in the present case - then provision for the grant of selection grade upto 20% of the posts subject to a minimum of one can be made.
Factually, the respondent had been promoted as a Joint Director (Statistics) in the year 1982.
Mr. Brar concedes that he had retired on superannuation in the year 1992.
He had not completed 15 years of service of service on that post.
There was no stagnation.
Thus, no ground for the issue of any direction for the grant of selection grade was made out.
11.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we cannot uphold the decision of the learned Single Judge.
It is, consequently, set aside.
The appeal is allowed.
The writ petition is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.