TS Doabia, J - The petitioner has come to this court with a plea that he was working as District Organizer.
He was later on transferred and adjusted as Field Publicity Officer.
The further fact is that the respondent-authorities formed an opinion that the petitioner had mis-appropriated some amount.
An enquiry was initiated.
Ultimately an order annexure A was passed.
This order reads as under :-  ".....Whereas the charges of misappropriation of funds in respect of various societies and organisation of a fraudulent society have been proved against Shri Abdul Hamid Shah, Field Publicity Officer in the scale of 280-520 (under suspension) while functioning as Supervisor in Anatnag District and taking a lenient view of the case, Shri Abdul Hamid Shah is re-instated with immediate effect with the following punishments:- i) He is reduced to the next lower post viz Rs. 220-430 and adjusted as Senior Assistant and his pay is fixed at Rs. 35200 per month in the reduced pay scale.
2) The misappropriated amount of Rs. 285-00 as detailed below is recoverable from the official along with penal interest @ Rs. 9% per annum from the date these amounts were embezzled by him.
a) Nowgam Shabbad Oilmen's ICS Ltd Rs. 200. b) Nadigam Oilmen's Ind Coop.
Society Rs. 8500 The above amounts together with the penal interest will be creditable to the respective societies.
3) The period of suspension is treated as leave without pay.
i) As per the above order, the petitioner was reduced to the next lower post as Senior Assistant.
ii) He was asked to deposit Rs. 28500. iii) The period of suspension was to be treated as leave what kind is due.
The petitioner came to this court.
Writ petition No. 14 of 1978 was filed.
The petitioner, however, withdrew the writ petition as he was given an assurance that his grievances would redressed if a representation is filed.
A representation was filed on 1931986.
An order was passed.
The order by which petitioner was put at lower post was vacated.
So far as order regarding depositing of Rs. 285-00 was concerned that was sustained.
So far as suspension period is concerned that period was ordered to be treated as leave of the kind due.
The further fact is that on 1891986 even the amount of Rs. 285/- deposited by the petitioner was ordered to be refunded.
Annexure E was passed.
This reads as under:-  "In continuation to this office order No. KVIB/752 dt. 1931986, sanction is hereby accorded to the refund of Rs. 285/- together with interest of Rs. 97/- accrued on the amount to Shri Abdul Hamid Shah, Head Assistant."
The petitioner submits that when nothing was found due from the petitioner and when a finding was recorded that the petitioner has not mis-appropriated the amount he having been given clean chit, no adverse order could be passed for the period of suspension.
The amount which he had deposited as mis- appropriated amount was not only ordered to be refunded but petitionr was paid interest also.
In this situation the petitioner is right in his submission that he should be restored back the position which he was holding before the enquiry was initiated.
A categorical statement has been made in the petition, that he was holding the post of District Organizer.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
The petitioner is held entitled to the post of District Organiser.
He is also held entitled to the other consequential benefits.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.