NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Petitioner was appointed a Medical Officer (Female) RHC Pohir, Department of SPM in the Daya Nand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana (for short the College).
One of the conditions mentioned in the letter of her appointment dated June 11, 1992 was that she was to communicate her option for a subject for doing Post Graduation (MD/MS) for which she had to appear in a Post Graduate Entrance test and secure the minimum eligible marks of 35%.
As per clause (7) of this letter a seat in the Post Graduate course was reserved for her in the speciality of her choice in the session commencing 171994.
This was, however, subject to her satisfactory completion of two years of service.
On her completing two years of service in July, 1994 she became entitled to appear in the entrance test for the Post Graduate course.
For some reason the College could not offer her a reserved seat and she was required to appear in the test in December 1994 January, 1995.
It is common case of the parties that when she appeared in the entrance test in January 1995 she did not secure the minimum eligible marks, she then made a claim that she should be allowed to take the entrance test for the next session commencing July, 1995.
When this claim was not accepted she filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for mandamus directing the College to reserve a seat for her in the Radio Diagnosis course for the sessions commencing July, 1995.
In pursuance to the interm order passed by this Court on July 4, 1995 she was allowed to appear in the Post Graduate examination in July, 1995 at her own risk and responsibility and subject to the result of the writ petition.
It is not in dispute that she cleared the test inasmuch as she secured the minimum eligible marks.
The prayer now made is that since she cleared the entrance test in July, 1995 she should be given a reserved seat.
2.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
It is stated that as per the practice of the College all Medical Officers and other doctors like the petitioner are offered a reserve seat provided they clear the entrance test for the Post Graduate course in the session commencing immediately after the completion of their two years service.
It is further averred that in no case has any candidate been allowed more than one chance to clear the test.
3.
I have heard counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, find no merit in this writ petition.
A perusal of the letter of appointment dated June 11, 1992 makes it clear that the petitioner was to be given one seat in the Post Graduate course in the subject of her choice provided she secured the minimum eligible marks of 35% in the entrance test.
It is also clear that this seat was to be offered to her the session commencing 171994 i.e. immediately after the completion of her two years service.
For some reason with which we are not concerned the petitioner did not appear in the entrance test for session commencing 171994 and instead the College permitted her to appear in the entrance test in December 1994/January 1995.
Admittedly, she did not clear the test inasmuch as she could not secure the minimum eligible marks as mentioned in the letter of her appointment.
The contention that since she had appeared in the entrance test the orders of this court and cleared the same, the College be directed to offer a seat to her in the Post Graduate course cannot be accepted for the reason that from amongst the candidates who cleared that test she was at number 5 whereas only one free seat was available which could be offered.
4.
Another argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that one Dr. WP Singh of the same department was given another chance to clear the entrance test after he had failed to secure the minimum qualifying marks in the first chance and, therefore, the petitioner be also given a second chance.
I am afraid, this argument cannot be accepted.
The reason why Dr. WP Singh was given a second chance has been explained by Dr. SB Khurana, Principal of the College in his affidavit dated 22121997.
It is stated that Dr. Singh is a member of a scheduled caste and when he appeared for the first time in the entrance test he secured 328% marks i.e. less than 35%.
Since he was a scheduled caste he was required to obtain a minimum of 30% marks as against 35% marks for general category candidates.
The fact that he was a member of the scheduled caste was not known to the College and, therefore, his candidature was rejected.
He then represented that he being a member of scheduled caste had qualified the test because qualifying marks for such candidates were only 30%.
This representations was accepted and he was in these circumstances allowed to appear for the second time in the immediately succeeding session of the course in June, 1993.
The case of the petitioner herein is quite different.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition fails and the same is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.