BJ Shethna, J.- The petitioner was superannuated, and his pension was also fixed and paid.
However, later on the Department felt that the pension was wrongly fixed, therefore, it started to deduct the excess amount paid to the petitioner by way of pension.
Not only that, they recovered from the gratuity also and not paid any amount of gratuity to the petitioner.
The amount which was earned by the petitioner by way of gratuity cannot be recovered for the dues of the amount over-paid to the petitioner even if it was paid by mistake.
2.
Mr. Tatia, learned counsel for the respondent Department, on the basis of Rule 295 (4)(a) of Rajasthan Service Rules, 1951 (for short `the Rules') submitted that the Government dues, outstanding against a Government servant at the time of retirement or found to be outstanding subsequent to the issue of final pension, may be recovered by the Government from the amount of pension/gratuity or both payable or paid to the Government servant or members of his family, as the case may be, irrespective of whether the consent of retired Government servant or members of his family has been obtained or not.
Such rule is clearly ultra vires to the principle of natural justice.
3.
Before recovering the amount, from pension or gratuity, the employee must be given an opportunity to show that there was no outstanding dues against him at the time of retirement or found to be outstanding subsequent to the issue of final pension.
The Government or Department, can take the decision only after hearing the employee and not in an arbitrary manner, ex-parte.
4.
Learned counsel Mr. Lodha for other respondents submitted that the excess amount paid to the petitioner could have been recovered from his pension without extending an opportunity of hearing.
In support of his submission, he relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of V Ganga Ram v. Regional Joint Director & Ors, 1997 (6) SCC 139 : 1997(3) SCT 72 (SC).
That was a case of a petitioner who was appointed as a Teacher who was entitled for only two increments but he was wrongly given more increments.
The recovery proceedings were initiated against him on the premise that he was not entitled to more than two advance increments.
The facts on hand in this case are totally different.
It is a case of a person who retired from service and his pension was also fixed.
Later on if the Department felt that by mistake he was wrongly paid more amount, then first it should have issued the notice to the petitioner to prove that it was rightly fixed.
The department could have taken final decision only after hearing the petitioner, and passed the order of recovering the amount from his pension or gratuity, if it was satisfied that earlier mistake was committed.
Hence, the above judgment of Supreme Court has no application to the facts of this case.
5.
In view of the above discussion, this petition is allowed.
The impugned orders challenged in this petition, are hereby set aside.
The gratuity amount which was recovered by the respondents, shall be paid back to the petitioner within three months from today.
The respondents are at liberty to fix the pension only after extending an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and take a just decision in accordance with law, within three months from today.
After hearing the petitioner, if the Department passes the same order, then they can recover the amount from the pension of the petitioner, otherwise not.
Petition allowed.