VK Bali, J - Tikka Ram and seven others through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seek issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash orders, Annexures P-10 to P-17 vide which they were relieved from their service with immediate effect on successful completion of their training.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioners were appointed as Waiter Trainee and Kitchen Helper Trainee from December 29, 1993 to January 18, 1994 vide orders, Annexures P-1 to P-8 respectively.
It is their case that they had successfully completed their training period and thereafter continued as full time employees but were paid only stipend of trainee.
Their services were abruptly terminated vide orders, Annexures P-10 to P-17 on the pretext that they had completed their training period, although a right to regular appointment had accrued to them prior to their termination in accordance with the Standing Orders.
3.
Mrs. Abha Rathor, learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contends that as per the appointment letters of the petitioners, they were to remain on training for a period of two years and if the training was not successfully completed, it could be extended for six months more.
Petitioners completed their two years training from December 29, 1995 to January 28, 1996 and the same was never extended.
The respondents, however, continued using the services of the petitioners as full time employees by paying them the same stipend as was paid to them in training.
The Standing Orders of the Haryana Tourism Corporation provide that Apprentices Act, 1961 would apply to the trainees and Section 3(d) of the said Act defines 'apprentice' to mean a learner who may be given a stipend during the course of his training and the employer will provide different categories of workman subject to the provisions of the said Act.
Section 7 of the said Act provides that the contract of apprentices training would terminate on expiry of period of apprentices training provided in the appointment order.
In view of this, petitioners having completed training period on August 16, 1995 had continued only as a temporary workers with the Haryana Tourism Corporation.
The respondents now after four years in November 1997 could not terminate the services of the petitioners on the pretext of completing training and, therefore, the orders deserve to be quashed.
It is then canvassed before us that to continue the workers for long as casual or temporary or as trainee is unfair labour practice.
4.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court, respondent - Corporation has entered defence and contested the cause of the petitioners.
It has been pleaded by way of preliminary objections that the petitioners have deliberately concealed the material facts from this Court.
In fact, the petitioners were appointed as trainees in different fields on the terms and conditions mentioned in their appointment letters Annexures P1 to P8.
Besides others, it was also mentioned in clause 3 of their appointment letters that on completion of the training, it would not be obligatory on the part of the management to offer them any employment and that they would be considered for regular appointment subject to availability of the posts.
Clause 3 of the appointment letter reads thus :-  "3.
On the completion of the training, it will not be obligatory on the part of the management to offer you any employment nor it will be obligatory on you to accept any employment in the Corporation.
You will, however, be considered for appointment on the same regular post subject to the availability of post, on the completion of your successful training."
5.
The petitioners were to be regularly appointed on successful completion of training subject to availability of the post and it was not obligatory upon the management to provide them any employment.
On the completion of their training and in the absence of any regular post to adjust them, the petitioners have simply been relieved from their training vide orders Annexures P10 to P17.
It is further the case of respondents that it was not possible for the Corporation to provide regular job to such a large number of trainees but still the Corporation was making in-depth study of the whole cadres and in case more posts are created, such trainees would be considered as per the rules in order of their seniority as trainee.
It is then pleaded that the provisions of Apprenticeship Act, 1961 for claiming regular appointment cannot be pressed into service as the trainees are governed under the provisions of Apprenticeship Act, 1961 only if a contract of apprenticeship is signed between the parties and the same is registered with the Apprenticeship Institute at Kanpur.
Section 22 of the said Act clearly provides that it shall not be obligatory on the part of the employer to offer any employment to any apprentice, who has completed the period of apprentice training.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, we are of the view that the petitioners cannot raise any legitimate grouse against the impugned orders.
Nothing else is required to be discussed in view of the categoric averments made by the respondent - Corporation that jobs on regular basis and the posts on which the petitioners were undergoing training, are not available and further that as and when there is vacancy, the petitioners shall be considered in order of seniority.
The provisions of Apprenticeship Act, 1961 or clause in the appointment letter pressed into service by learned counsel for the petitioners cannot possibly be appreciated nor in fact deserve to be appreciated in face of the stark reality that no job is available with the respondent - Corporation where the petitioners might be accommodated.
Assuming, the petitioners had been adjusted against regular posts, and on account of loss suffered by the Corporation, or for any other reason, such permanent posts had become surplus, could the petitioners legitimately contend that they must continue in service and the respondent - Corporation has no right to terminate the service of such workers ?
In our view, the answer to the question posed above has to be given in negative.
If the petitioners cannot ask for their continuance on the jobs, even though regularly appointed, as mentioned above, the same is also true when there is no job available with the respondent - Corporation.
We have been informed that similar writ petition No. 2921 of 1998 came to be dismissed by a Division Bench headed by JL Gupta, J on August 17, 1998.
A copy of the decision aforesaid has been placed on records of the case.
Learned counsel for the petitioners could not dispute that Baljit Singh and another had filed the writ petition aforesaid on the same facts and circumstances but she further stated that the provisions of Apprenticeship Act and Standing Orders of the Corporation were not discussed in the judgment aforesaid.
We have already mentioned that there is absolutely no necessity to go into the issue posed by learned counsel in view of the fact that respondent - Corporation does not have any vacancy available against which the petitioners may be accommodated.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.