HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner retired on 3061996 as the Medical Superintendent of the Mata Kaushalya Hospital, Patiala.
While in service the petitioner had been allotted Kothi No. 26-C within the hospital premises as an earmarked accommodation for the Medical Superintendent.
The petitioner who was building a house for himself at Nabha in the meanwhile did not vacate the official accommodation within two months as provided by Rule 10 of the Punjab Government House (General Pool) Allotment Rules, 1983 (hereinafter called the Rules) and in this connection made an application dated 18.12.1996 Annexure P-1 to the petition and thereafter on 1911997 to respondent No. 2 for permission to retain the house on nominal rent for a period of four months.
The petitioner, however, received no reply to these representations.
The petitioner nevertheless vacated the Government accommodation on 231997.
He then received a communication dated 2841997 Annexure P-4 to the petition that his gratuity was being released on him after making a deduction of an amount of Rs. 66,834/- as the rent chargeable against the petitioner for having remained in possession of the Government accommodation.
This action has been challenged by the petitioner in this Court by filing this writ petition.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and the respondents have filed various replies in response thereto.
It has been pleaded that the sum deducted from the petitioner's gratuity had been rightly deducted, more particularly as the representation Annexure P-1 had been rejected and vide Annexure R-2 he had been directed to vacate the Government accommodation but he had continued to hold on to it till 231997 and as such the Estate Officer PWD (B&R) Patiala had assessed double market rent against the petitioner as having been payable by him from 1.9.96 to 1397.
In the reply put in by respondents Nos. 3 and 4 it has been pointed out that the rent had been correctly assessed by the competent authority vide Annexure R-1 after taking into account the relevant data and in this connection reliance has been placed on R-2.
3.
Mr. AK Walia, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon Rule 917 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II Part I (hereinafter called the Pension Rules) and has pointed out that the withholding of a part of the retiral benefits for a recovery for overstaying in the Govt. accommodation after the permissible period of two months was not permissible.
In addition he had relied on Rule 10 of the Pension Rules to contend that under Sub Rules (5) and (6) of Rule 10 the Chairman of the House Allotment Committee could in special circumstances allow the retention of the house beyond the permissible period and by an amendment made on 4994, a similar authority had been conferred on the Govt. and as the petitioner had filed two representations Annexure P-1 and P-2 seeking retention of the accommodation for some time beyond two months no deduction could be made from the petitioner's gratuity.
4.
As against this Sh. HS Gill, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has argued that it was the admitted position that petitioner had stayed on in the Government accommodation till 2.3.97 despite the fact that his first representation had been rejected and as such the authority was fully justified in assessing the rent payable by the petitioner at Rs. 66,834/- and to deduct the same from his gratuity.
It has also pointed out that the representations Annexures P-1 and P-2 had not been addressed to the competent authorities i.e. the Chairman of the House Allotment Committee or the Govt., but as Annexure P-1 had been endorsed to the former, he had entertained and rejected the same.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
6.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner held the Govt. accommodation for about 6 months after the permissible period.
It is also evident that the representation filed by the petitioner was long after the permissible period had expired and the same had also been made to the authority not competent to grant the extension.
It is evident from Annexure P-1 and P-2 that these had been addressed to the Director, Health and Family Welfare and a copy Annexure P-1 had been endorsed to the Chairman of the House Allotment Committee, Patiala whereas no such endorsement had been made with respect to Annexure P-2.
From the reply it is clear that the representation Annexure P-1 had nevertheless been rejected by the Chairman, House Allotment Committee as it had been endorsed to him and a direction had been issued to the petitioner to vacate the premises.
To my mind, therefore, no advantage can be claimed by the petitioner on account of Annexures P-1 and P-2.
It is true that Rule 917 of the Pension Rules does not per se envisage deduction from the gratuity but it is equally true that the petitioner stayed on in the Government accommodation in violation of Sub Rules (5) & (6) of Rule 10 and is, therefore, not entitled to the discretionary relief under this Court's writ jurisdiction and on the contrary by deciding the matter in the manner suggested by the petitioner would perpetuate an illegality.
It is, however, clear that assessment of the house rent made by Annexure R-1 was an ex parte one with no notice to the petitioner.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the Order Annexure R-1 cannot be sustained.
The same is, accordingly, quashed with liberty to the respondents to pass a fresh order of assessment of the rent after notice to the petitioner.
A direction is further issued to the respondents to deposit the sum of Rs. 66,834/- in Nationalised Bank in a Fixed Deposit by the end of September, 1998 pending a fresh assessment of the penal house rent payable by him.
In case it is found by the Assessing Authority that the house rent assessed earlier was excessive, the petitioner would be entitled to the payment of the balance amount as determined and in case the assessment is found to be correct, the respondents will be entitled to recover the amount deposited in the Bank along with the interest.
The petitioner will approach the House Allotment Committee, Patiala with a copy of this judgment who will ensure that the judgment is complied with.
Dasti order.