Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - ML Narula, respondent was recruited as a Sub Divisional Engineer in December, 1969.
He claimed benefit of military service rendered by him.
His claim was accepted.
His presumptive date of appointment was fixed as June 19, 1965.
Having got this benefit he complained that his claim for promotion to the post of (sic) to him were promoted.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No. 2601 of 1987 with a prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his claim.
Vide order dated November 16, 1987 a Division Bench of this Court allowed the writ petition and directed the department to consider the officer's claim for promotion to Class I Service.
After consideration the respondents found that ML Narula was not suitable for promoton.
Aggrieved by this action he again approached this Court with a prayer for issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote him as Executive Engineer with effect from the year 1975 when persons junior to him were promoted.
2.
The State Government contested the claim primarily on the ground that ML Narula had not earned 50 per cent good reports.
It was found that the officer had 2-1/3 good reports, two average and 2/3 report has not been recorded.
It was also pointed out that he had been awarded the penalty of stoppage of one annual grade increment without future effect on account of an irregularity which had been committed by him.
On this basis it was declared that he was not suitable for promotion.
Resultantly the State maintained that no ground for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out.
3.
After hearing counsel for the parties, the learned Single Judge took the view that in accordance with the decision of the Division Bench in case KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) S.L.R.
1 the average report could not be considered as "inferior to good.....".
Resultantly the writ petition was allowed.
The State of Haryana has filed the appeal to challenge the decision of the learned Single Judge.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Firstly a word about the decision in KK Vaid's case.
This case related to the validity of the instructions issued by the State of Haryana vide letter dated August 13, 1983 by which it had been decided that extension beyond the age of 55 years may be granted only in such cases where more than 70 per cent of the last ten confidential reports are assessed as good or above.
It was in the context of the instructions regarding extension in service that the instructions issued by the State of Haryana were examined.
The view taken by the Bench was strictly for the purpose of deciding as to whether or not the instructions were valid in view of the provisions of Rule 326(a) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vo.
1 which provided for premature retirement.
The Bench did not consider the issue of suitability for promotion to a selection post.
Secondly the decision in Vaid's case has already been overruled by the Full Bench in Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 423 (P&H) In any event even on first principle we cannot say that average is not inferior to good.
It is well known that officers are graded according to their performance.
Normally the gradation ranges from outstanding, very good, good (sic) promotion to Class I Service is governed by the Rules.
6.
Faced with this situation learned counsel for the respondent has contended that even if the instructions issued by the Government are taken into consideration, the claim of the respondent could not have been rejected.
Learned counsel submits that only 4-1/3 reports had been recorded upto the date on which his claim had to be considered.
Out of these 2-1/3 reports were admittedly good.
The two reports were average.
Thus the actual reports which were good were more than 50 per cent.
This part of the case is not contested even by Mr. Bishnoi who has appeared for the appellants.
In this situation, while we are not in agreement with the reasoning adopted by the learned Single Judge, we are unable to find fault with the ultimate finding that the writ petitioner's claim had not been correctly considered.
It has also been pointed out that during the pendency of the case the respondent has already retired.
In this situation we find no ground to interfere.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.