Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The appellants, clerks in the Kurukshetra University, approached this Court with a prayer that they be placed in the scales of Rs. 420-700 with effect from April 1, 1979 and Rs. 1200-2040 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
The claim having been rejected by the learned Single Judge, they have filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
2.
Mr. Patwalia urges that the Clerks in the University were initially in the scale of Rs. 120-300.
As against this, the clerks in the Haryana Government service were in the scale of Rs. 110-250.
The pay scales of clerks were revised along with those of other categories of employees w.e.f.
April 1, 1979.
The clerks in the University as well as in the Government service were placed in the scale of Rs. 400-560.
This scale was further revised w.e.f.
January 1, 1986, and both categories of employees were placed in a uniform scale of Rs. 950-1500.
The counsel submits that since the appellants were initially in a higher scale than the clerks in the State Government, they had a right to be placed in a higher scale.
In particular, the counsel points out that the Clerks in the Haryana Agricultural University who were in the pay scale of Rs. 120-300 had been granted the pay scale of Rs. 420-700.
That being so, even the appellants deserved to be treated in a similar manner.
3.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that the Government had taken a conscious decision to place all the clerks in a uniform pay scale.
Thus, the persons working in the Kurukshetra University and those working in the State Government were placed in the uniform scales of Rs. 400-660 and Rs. 950-1500.
With regard to the employees working in the Haryana Agriculture University, it has been pointed out that the relief was confined to those who were in service prior to the notification dated June 6, 1980.
The other employees were placed in the scale of Rs. 400-660 only.
4.
The fixation of pay scales and the revision thereof is primarily the prerogative of the University and the Government.
The courts are not equipped to go into minute details.
Equally, mathematical exactitude is impossible.
The Courts have to broadly see as to whether the action of the authority is apparently arbitrary and unfair.
5.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the employees of the University were brought at par with those of the Government w.e.f.
April 1, 1979.
This notification had been issued in the year 1980.
Thereafter, they were treated at par when the pay scales were revised w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
Apparently, the action is just and fair.
Mr. Patwalia contends that since the appellants were in a higher scale of pay viz. Rs. 120-300 while the employees in the Government were in a lower scale of pay i.e. Rs 110-250, the action in treating the two unequals equally, was itself arbitrary and unfair.
6.
This contention cannot be accepted.
First, nothing has been pointed out to show that the appellants were in service at the time when the posts of clerks carried the pay scale of Rs. 120-300.
That being so, it appears to be safe to assume that they had entered the service when the posts were in the scale of Rs. 400-660.
If that be so, the appellants can have no cause for grievance.
Equally, their claim that the persons working in the Haryana Agriculture University having been granted the higher scale of Rs. 420-700, they are entitled to the same scale, cannot be sustained because even this benefit was confined to the persons who had joined as clerks prior to June 6, 1980.
Curiously, the appellants have not disclosed their date of initial entry into service anywhere in the pleadings.
In the absence of complete particulars, it cannot be said that the respondents had acted unfairly or arbitrarily in treating them at par with the clerks in the State Government.
7.
Faced with this situation Mr. Patwalia contends that the persons who were in a lower category i.e. the Class 'D' employees, had also been placed in the same scale of pay as has been given to clerks.
That does not give any cause for grievance to the appellants.
If lower category of posts are upgraded and the incumbents thereof are placed in a higher scale of pay, the appellants cannot have any cause for grievance till their pay scale is adversely affected.
8.
Mr. Patwalia submits that initially, the posts of clerks were filled up by promotion from amongst the class 'D' employees.
That may be so.
It is likely that persons working as Laboratory Attendants etc. were given some share of promotion in the cadre of clerks.
However, if the Government has considered it appropriate to up-grade their posts to Class III and placed them in a uniform pay scale which happens to be equal to that of clerks or other Class III posts, it cannot be said that the rights of the appellants have been adversely affected.
The grievance made on this account cannot be sustained.
9.
Mr. Patwalia submits that the Anomaly Committee had recommended that the clerks of the Kurukshetra University be placed in the scale of Rs. 420-700.
10.
No such recommendation has been produced on the record.
However, it does appear that the University had made a recommendation to the State Government.
Counsel for the appellants is not in a position to point out as to what decision had been taken by the Government.
Still, the State Government has not been impleaded as a party in the case.
Thus, there is nobody to inform the court as to what happened to the recommendation made by the University.
Learned counsel for the University states that he has not heard anything in the matter.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
It is all the more so in view of the fact that they pay scales of all the employees have since then been further revised on more than one occasion.
Resultantly, there is no injustice which may call for interference.
The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.