Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the respondents in ordering the reversion of the petitioners in these writ petitions from the posts of Multipurpose Health Supervisors to those of Laboratory Attendants legal and valid ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these five writ petitions which have been listed together for hearing.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in C.W.P.
No. 12319 of 1991.
Those may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Basic Health Worker on December 17, 1963.
While working as such, he was given training for the post of a Laboratory Assistant.
Vide order dated January 3, 1969, he was promoted to the post of Laboratory Assistant.
Thereafter, the petitioner was deputed for training as a Sanitary Inspector in the year 1972.
Having completed the training, the petitioner was appointed as a Health Inspector vide order dated April 29, 1977.
A copy of this order has been produced on record as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
The reappointment was made on purely ad hoc basis.
The petitioner could be reverted to his original post "without assigning any reason or a notice...." In pursuance to this order, the petitioner joined as an Inspector on May 13, 1977.
3.
In the year 1989, after revision of pay scales, the pay of the petitioner was fixed in the revised scale.
Copies of the orders passed in this behalf have been produced as Annexures P.3 and P3A Apprehending reversion, the petitioner approached this court through this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution with a prayer that the action of the respondents in proceeding to revert him from the post of Health Inspector (which had since been redesigned as Multipurpose Health Supervisor), be declared as illegal.
4.
In the connected petitions, copy of the order of reversion passed on July 29, 1991 was actually produced.
A prayer for the quashing of the order was also made.
5.
The Motion Bench granted an interim stay.
The writ petitions were finally admitted.
These have now come up for hearing.
6.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The fact that the petitioners have continued to work as Inspectors, has not been disputed.
It has, however, been averred that prior to the year 1984, the post of Health/Sanitary Inspector could not have been filled up by promotion.
This post has been redesignated as Multipurpose Health Supervisor.
The petitioners had not been appointed in accordance with the rules and, thus, the action of the respondents in proceeding to revert them was legal and valid.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
8.
On behalf of the petitioners, it has been contended that they have continuously held the posts of Inspector/Multipurpose Health Supervisors since the year 1977.
Reversion after the lapse of 21 years would be wholly unfair and arbitrary.
On behalf of the respondents, Mr Bishnoi has pointed out that statutory rules had been framed in the year 1984 and that the posts had to be filled up in accordance with the rules.
Since the appointment of the petitioners was not in conformity with the rules, they had no right to continue to work on the higher posts.
9.
Admittedly, there were no statutory rules in the year 1977 when the posts of Inspectors (which have since been redesignated as Multipurpose Health Supervisors) had become available.
The petitioners were admittedly appointed to these posts by the Director Health Services who was the competent authority.
These appointments had continued without any break or interruption till the year 1991 when the order of reversion was passed.
Reversion of the petitioners after a lapse of 14 years without giving any opportunity whatsoever was apparently unfair.
Still further, they have continued even thereafter by virtue of the interim orders passed by the court.
As of today, a period of more than 21 years has already elapsed.
Shall it be fair to now revert the petitioners to the posts of Basic Health Workers or Laboratory Assistants ?
7.
Nothing has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents to show that the petitioners are not qualified for the posts.
It has also not been suggested that they have not been able to perform the duties of the posts to the satisfaction of the authorities.
Still further, it appears to be unreasonable to revert the petitioners after the lapse of 21 years.
It has also not been denied that in the meantime, even persons who are junior to the petitioners have been promoted to the higher posts of Multipurpose Health Supervisors.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the specific averment in paragraph 8 of CWP No. 12424 of 1991 wherein it has been averred that the junior persons like S/Shri Shanti Sarup etc. were promoted vide orders dated March 22, 1991.
In the written statement, no explanation for ignoring the claim of the petitioners has been given.
8.
In view of the peculiar facts, it appears that the action in ordering the reversion of the petitioners was unfair and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
9.
Resultantly, all the writ petitions are allowed.
The orders of reversion are set aside.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.