THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner filed this writ petition seeking issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the orders dated 23.2.1998 and 27.2.1998 (Annexures P-13 and P-17) issued by the State of Punjab whereby the 2nd respondent was promoted as Deputy Inspector General of Prisons, Punjab and granted extension in service for a period of one year from 2821998 to 27.2.1999 and also issue a writ of quo warranto that the 2nd respondent is an unsurper of the office of D.I.G.
(Prisons) and Inspector General of Prisons, Punjab, after 2821998 beyond the date of superannuation and also issue a writ of mandamus directing the Ist respondent to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as D.I.G.
(Prisons) from the date he became eligible for the same and to consider him for promotion to the post of Inspector General of Prisons from the date superannuation of Inspector General of Prisons from the date of superannuation of the 2nd respondent i.e. 2821998.
2.
According to the petitioner, he was appointed as Assistant Superintendent (Jails) on 1101965 whereas the 2nd respondent was appointed as Assistant Superintendent (Jails) on 2091996.
The petitioner was promoted to the Punjab Prisons Service Class-I as Superintendent Central Jail/Asstt.
Superintendent of Jails on regular basis by an order dated 2041992 and subsequently he was given the deemed date of promotion from 121991.
The petitioner was posted against the post of Deputy Inspector General vide orders dated 1671996 and 11.9.1996.
Although be became eligible to promotion as Deputy Inspector General with effect from 1.2.1996, he was not promoted as such for one reason or the other.
Further according to the petitioner, the 2nd respondent was promoted as Superintendent Jails/Assistant Inspector General (Class-I) on 15.7.1993.
It is further averred that the vacancy in the post of Inspector General of Prisons, Punjab, had arisen on 3111997 on the retirement of Shri BS Sandhu and the 2nd respondent was given the current duty charge of the said post instead of filling the vacancy on regular basis as provided in Punjab Prisons State Service (Class-I) Rules, 1979.
According to the petitioner, he is senior to and is meritorious than the 2nd respondent in every respect.
He made the representation against the posting of the 2nd respondent as Inspector General of Prisons stating therein that the 2nd respondent is junior to him in service and that he has got a superior claim for the post of Inspector General of Prisons.
The petitioner also averred that he did not agitate his claim since the 2nd respondent was due to retire on 2821998 on attaining the age of superannuation, but he was given extension in service of one year which compelled the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
According to him, the orders of posting of the 2nd respondent as Inspector General of Prisons and his extension beyond the age of superannuation is contrary to rules and are liable to be quashed and he deserves to be promoted to the post of Inspector General of Prisons.
3.
The State of Punjab filed a written statement contending inter alia that though the 2nd respondent had actually joined service on 2091966, he was given the benefit of military service of a period of one year and 11 months.
Though the petitioner and the other affected parties objected to the grant of benefit of military service to the 2nd respondent, their objections were rejected by an order dated 23121986.
Neither the petitioner nor any other affected person challenged the same.
Therefore, the 2nd respondent became senior to the petitioner since he has been given the benefit of military service and the 2nd respondent was given the deemed date of promotion as Deputy Superintendent Grade-II with effect from 15.11.1976 and Deputy Superintendent Grade-I (Jails) with effect from 2131985.
Thus the petitioner became junior to the 2nd respondent.
Therefore, in the Gradation List issued as on 131998, the 2nd respondent was shown as senior to the petitioner.
The same has not been challenged and that the petitioner who belongs to a reserved category of Scheduled Castes was promoted to Class-I Service before the 2nd respondent.
The 2nd respondent though promoted as Superintendent Central (Jails) on 1941992, he was ultimately given deemed date of promotion with effect from 121991.
It is further averred that the petitioner was not promoted on the basis of his seniority, but only on the basis of reservation point in the roster and the 2nd respondent was promoted to Class-I Service as Assistant Inspector General (Prisons) on 121993 in his own pay scale and was ultimately given the regular pay scale on 15.7.1993 after being heard by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
After the judgment of the Apex Court in Janjua's case, the 2nd respondent made a representation that he should be declared senior to the petitioner in Class-II Service and the petitioner was promoted to Class-I Service only because of the reservation.
Notice of that representation was given to the affected parties including the petitioner who objected to the grant of relief to the 2nd respondent.
Their objections were rejected by the Government vide its order dated 1231997 which has not been challenged either by the petitioner or by any other affected person.
In consequence of that the 2nd respondent again became senior to the petitioner in Class-I Service.
On the retirement of Shri BS Sandhu, as Inspector General (Prisons) on 3131997, the 2nd respondent who was senior to the petitioner and was found fit to man the post of Inspector General (Prisons) was promoted on officiating basis.
Thus the 2nd respondent was discharging the functions as Inspector General (Prisons) with effect from 141997.
Meanwhile the Government considered the issue as to who should be promoted on regular basis.
The Government after consideration of the matter constituted a Departmental Promotion Committee which was convened on 1721998 and the Department placed the case of the petitioner and the second respondent for regular promotion.
The Departmental Promotion Committee after considering the matter at length concluded that the 2nd respondent who is senior-most member of the Class-I Service, should be promoted as Deputy Inspector and accordingly the Government issued the order (Annexure P-13) promoting him as DIG (Prisons).
Further in view of the earlier order, the 2nd respondentg was continuing to discharge the functions as Inspector General (Prisons) in the Department.
Since the 2nd respondent was to retire on 2821998, the question arose as to how should the post of Inspector General be manned thereafter.
Since the 2nd respondent was due to retire on 2821998 and the petitioner was to retire on 3151998 and as there was no other Class-I Officer with sufficient experience and seniority to man the post of Inspector General (Prisons) a decision was taken that the post of Inspector General (Prisons) should be manned by an officer of Prison Department only.
Since the post of Inspector General (Prisons) is highly sensitive as number of terrorists have to be detained not only from Punjab, but also from the neighbouring State of Jammu & Kashmir, it was felt that an experienced officer should man this sensitive post.
Accordingly the Government decided to permit the 2nd respondent to continue as Inspector General (Prisons) for a period one year with effect from 2821998 and the decision was taken in view of the exigency of service and there is nothing wrong in the same.
Therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and after going through the material placed before me, I of the view that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed for the following reasons.
There cannot be any dispute that the 2nd respondent was entitled to the benefit of military service rendered by him prior to his appointment as Assistant Superintendent (Jails) and he was given the benefit of his military service.
Before giving him the benefit of military service, all the affected persons including the petitioner were given notice and they filed their representations.
After rejecting their representations, the benefit of military service was extended to the 2nd respondent.
The same has become final as neither the petitioner nor any other person challenged the same.
Therefore, it is to be taken that the 2nd respondent is senior to the petitioner.
When once the 2nd respondent is treated as senior to the petitioner, it is not open to the petitioner to challenge the seniority of the 2nd respondent.
From the averments in the written statement it is clear that when the vacancy of Inspector General (Prisons) arose on the retirement of Shri BS Sandhu, a Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted and after considering the claim of the petitioner as well as the 2nd respondent, it was felt that the second respondent was entitled to be promoted.
Accordingly, Annexure P-13 was issued posting the 2nd respondent as Inspector General (Prisons).
The petitioner has not been able to show that the 2nd respondent was not entitled to be promoted as Inspector General (Prisons).
Both the petitioner and the 2nd respondent stand on the same footing and by virtue of adding the military service to the second respondent he became senior to the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, I do not think that there is anything wrong in promoting the second respondent as Inspector General of Prisons.
According to the petitioner, he was expecting to be promoted in the place of the 2nd respondent who was to retire on 2821998 on attaining the age of superannuation and since extension in service for a period of one year beyond the age of superannuation has been given by the Government to the 2nd respondent, his expectations have been thwarted.
It cannot be denied that the Government has got the power to extend the service of an employee beyond the age of superannuation depending on exigencies of service.
It is clearly brought out in the written statement that the post of Inspector General (Prisons) is very sensitive and he has to deal with the terrorists detained in the various prisons in the State of Punjab and also the terrorists of the neighbouring State like Jammu & Kashmir.
Continuity of service in a particular post for some time is essential for maintenance and proper functioning of the post.
The petitioner, admittedly, was to retire on 3151998.
It is also an admitted fact that Shri BS Sandhu retired on 3131997.
Since then the second respondent has been discharging the duties of Inspector General (Prisons).
To have the continuity of service and in view of the administrative exigencies, the State Government thought it fit to extend the service of the 2nd respondent for a period of one year beyond the age of superannuation.
It is neither doubted nor denied that the State Government has got the power to extend the service of an employee on reasonable ground.
The grounds for extending the service of the 2nd respondent beyond the age of superannuation have been made out in the written statement which are indicated above.
It is also clear from the averments in the written statement that there is no other officer eligible for being promoted as Inspector General (Prisons).
Even the petitioner was not qualified to be promoted as Inspector General (Prisons) since he did not possess the requisite experience.
It is no doubt true that the 2nd respondent also did not have the requisite experience to be promoted as Inspector General (Prisons), but relaxation has been given to him and he has been promoted.
If the 2nd respondent is allowed to retire on 2821998 and the petitioner had been promoted as Inspector General (Prisons) he would have served only for a period of three months since his date of retirement was 3151998.
Again somebody was to be promoted.
But the record shows that no other officer in the Department was eligible to be promoted.
Further the 2nd respondent has already been working for more than one year since retirement of Shri BS Sandhu, and has already gained experience as Inspector General (Prisons).
In the fitness of things and in view of the sensitiveness of the posting, and once it is admitted that the State Government has got the power to extend the service of an employee beyond the age of superannuation, I am of the opinion that the extension of service of the 2nd respondent for one more year cannot be said to be illegal.
5.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
6.
The result is that writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.