Sat Pal, J. The petitioners in this writ petition are employed as Surveyors in the Irrigation Department of Punjab.
The only point raised in this petition is that the petitioners are entitled to the same pay scale which the Surveyors working in the Industries Department of the Punjab State are getting.
2.
Mr. Amarjit Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submits that the surveyors working in the Soil Conservation Department filed CWP No. 650 of 1984 (Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab) claiming the same pay scales as given to Surveyors working in the Industries Department and the said writ petition was allowed on 27th July, 1993, copy of which is Annexure P.3 and in terms of that judgment surveyors working in the Soil Conservation Department were granted the same pay scales which were allowed to the surveyors working in the Industries Department.
He further submits that some of the surveyors working in the Irrigation Department filed Writ Petition bearing CWP No. 6699 of 1986 Wasawa Ram and others.
v. State of Punjab seeking same relief and the said writ petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge of this court on 17121997 in terms of the judgment rendered in the case of Balbir Singh (supra) Copy of the judgment dated 17th December 1997 has been annexed as Annexure A with this application.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having perused the records, I am of the opinion that the point raised in the present petition is fully covered by the decision of this court in the case of Wasawa Ram (supra).
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed in terms of the judgment dated 27th July 1993 in the case of Balbir Singh (supra) and it is directed that the arrears in terms of this judgment will be paid to the petitioners within 6 months from today.
The arrears shall, however, be limited to three years and two months prior to the filing of the writ petition (which was filed on Ist Nov 1995)  With this order both C.M.
No. 4056 of 1998 and CWP No. 15991 of 1995 stand disposed of.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition disposed of