Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral)- The petitioner had joined service as a Chowkidar on July 15, 1973.
This appointment was made after the petitioner's name had been duly forwarded by the Employment Exchange.
The appointment was on ad hoc basis.
While the petitioner was continuing as such his services were suddenly terminated on September 3, 1985.
Aggrieved by the order of termination, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He alleges that the order of termination was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
The appeals submitted by him were rejected without consideration.
Consequently, he prays that the writ petition be allowed and the order of termination as also the orders passed in the appeals be quashed.
2.
The respondents have filed a written statement to contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had got himself enrolled as a Volunter in the Home Guards and had remained absent from duty.
The petitioner could not serve at two places at the same time.
Thus, he committed a grave irregularity which tantamounts to misconduct.
Accordingly, his services were terminated.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner's services were terminated without the grant of any opportunity whatsoever.
He was never asked to explain his position.
Mr. Gurcharan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that the respondents had circulated a letter dated August 28, 1975.
A copy of this Circular has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
If an opportunity had been granted, the petitioner could have satisfied the authority that he was entitled to be enrolled as a volunteer in the Home Guards in pursuance of the Circular issued by the department itself.
He would have also been able to show that the department had not suffered any loss.
Learned counsel appears to be right.
At the lowest, an opportunity should have been given to the petitioner.
None having been given, the termination of the service for misconduct amounts to the imposition of a penalty.
It was illegal as no opportunity was granted.
5.
Mr. Gurcharan Singh, on instructions from the petitioner, who is present in Court, states that he is a poor man and in case he is reinstated, he would give up claim for arrears of salary.
6.
The attitude of the petitioner is absolutely just and fair.
7.
In view of the above, the impugned order dated September 3, 1985 as also the orders rejecting the appeals etc. are set aside.
The writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated as a Chowkidar forthwith.
He will be deemed to have continued in service.
However, he will not be entitled to the arrears of salary as he had not actually performed the duties of the post and he was voluntarily undertaken to forego the back wages.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.