RS Mongia, J - The petitioners, who all are Graduates (in fact Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are Law Graduates), are working as Superintendent Grade-I in Punjab and Haryana High Court at Chandigarh.
Their service conditions are governed by the statutory Rules, known as High Court Establishment (Appointment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
The next post in the hierarchy so far as the petitioners are concerned is that of Assistant Registrar.
Rule 8(iv) deals with the promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar, which is in the following terms :-  "8(iv).
Assistant Registrars : The post of Assistant Registrar shall be filled from out of the Superintendents Grade-1 who are Graduates and have experience of working as such for a period of three years".
Rule 24 of the Rules lays down that promotion from one grade to the next higher grade would be by selection excepting where there is a competitive examination.
There is no competitive examination in so far as promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar is concerned.
Rule 24 of the Rules is in the following terms :- "24.
Promotion :  Promotion in the High Court Establishment from one Grade to the next higher one shall, except in cases where competitive examination is prescribed, be by selection and no one shall have a right to claim promotion merely on the basis of seniority.
2.
Under the Rules, the Chief Justice of the Court has been vested with the powers to relax rules in favour of any individual.
Rules 38 dealing with the power of relaxation is in the following terms :-  "38.
Power to relax rules in favour of individuals : Where the Chief Justice is satisfied that the operation of any rule causes undue hardship in any particular case, he may by order dispense with or relax the requirements of that rule to such extent and subject to such conditions as he may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner provided that the case is not dealt with in a manner less favourable to the officer or official concerned than in accordance with the rules."
3.
The grievance of the petitioners is that Respondent Nos. 2 and 3, who are non-graduates (they are just matriculates) have been promoted as Assistant Registrars by invoking the power of relaxation.
This, according to the petitioners, is violative of the Rules inasmuch as when persons, like the petitioners who are Graduates were available, the persons, though seniors to them, could not have been promoted by relaxing the rule regarding the educational qualification.
The argument being that in presence of an eligible candidate in the cadre, no relaxation regarding qualifications should be given to any person for purpose of promotion though he may be senior to such an eligible person.
Various examples have been given by the petitioners that from time to time the Chief Justice has been promoting non-graduates Superintendent Grade-1 to the post of Assistant Registrar by giving relaxation.
4.
Notice of motion was issued.
Reply has been filed.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find no merit in this writ petition.
No doubt under the rules, educational qualification for promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar has been prescribed as Graduation, but under those very Rules i.e. Rule 38 (supra), power has been vested in the Chief Justice of this Court that if he is satisfied that operation of any rule causes undue hardship in any particular case, he may, by order, dispense with or relax the requirement of that rule for dealing with the case in just and equitable manner.
This power vests in the appointing authority, which is a high dignitary, and the rule itself contains self- imposed restriction on the power of the Chief Justice that before relaxing any rule he is to be satisfied that operation of any rule causes undue hardship in a particular case and to do justice to the individual the case is to be dealt with in just and equitable manner.
There is no fetter on the power of the Chief Justice in exercising the power of relaxation even in the presence of an eligible person, further, there is no fetter that the power cannot be exercised again and again.
It will depend on the circumstances of each case and each case has to be dealt with on its merits as to whether a particular individual requires the relaxation of service rule, which causes undue hardship to that individual.
For example, there may be a person, who is lacking the educational qualification and is senior-most having put in very long service with excellent record.
Simply because the person is not graduate his further chance of rising in the service career will be blocked, inasmuch as the rigour of the rule of educational qualification would certainly cause undue hardship to that individual and the rigour of the rule may be relaxed.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had cited Dr. Ami Lal Bhat v. State of Rajasthan, 1997(3) SCT 595, judgment of the Apex Court, to contend that in presence of the eligible candidates, no relaxation should be given to the unqualified candidates.
That case was a case of direct recruitment, in which quite a few candidates were over-aged.
By a general relaxation given to all such candidates, they were made eligible for appointments.
Taking into consideration the power of relaxation, the Apex Court observed that the power of wholesale relaxation was not envisaged by the Rules, which could be exercised in a given case only to mitigate the hardship to an individual.
Since there was wholesale relaxation, which was not to mitigate the hardship to any individual, the Apex Court had struck down the relaxation.
The case in hand is totally different.
It may be observed here that there is no specific challenge to the actual relaxation given by the Chief Justice to the private respondents.
For the foregoing reason, we find no merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.