HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Peon on 20121979 after having put in several years of military service.
After getting the benefit of military service, his seniority was to be determined from 1071975.
One Ram Kishan who had been posted as Daftri in the department was promoted as a picker on 12121995.
The petitioner being the senior-most peon represented to the respondents that he should be promoted as Daftri in place of Ram Kishan.
Vide order Annexure P-8 dated 411996, however, respondent No. 4 has been appointed as Daftri on compassionate grounds as her husband Santosh Kumar had died in harness on the basis of the government instructions Annexure P-9 to the petition which provided for appointment on compassionate grounds to Class III and Class IV staff provided they fulfilled the conditions laid down therein.
Annexures P-8 and P-9 have been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
Notice of motion was issued and a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents No. 1 to 3.
It has been denied that the petitioner was the seniormost peon in the office by stating that he was not entitled to count the period of his military service towards determining his seniority and that the same had been given to him in an irregular manner.
It has also been pointed out that the appointment of respondent No. 4 had been made on compassionate grounds due to the death of her young husband and as such, it had been necessary to accommodate her against the post of Daftri and that as no legal right to claim promotion vested in a government servant, the petition was without merit.
3.
It has been argued by Mrs. Abha Rathore, appearing for the petitioner that by virtue of the appointment of respondent No. 4 Smt. Anita aged 28 years as a Daftri, the promotional chances of the petitioner and other persons had been shut out for all times, there being only one post of Daftri in the district.
4.
As against this, Mr. Rathee has argued that the petitioner was not the seniormost peon and that in any case, the right to claim promotion was not a condition of service which required interference in case of any violation.
5.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
It appears to me that the case of the respondents that the petitioner was not the seniormost peon is only an attempt to defeat the petition.
From Annexure P-7 which as has been appended with the writ petition, it is apparent that the petitioner was, in fact, the seniormost peon in the office.
It is true as has been contended by Mr. Rathee that a government official has only a right to be considered for promotion but it cannot be overlooked that by the appointment of respondent No. 4 who is only 28 years of age, the only promotional avenue available to the petitioner and his colleagues has been shut out as they would have no chance of promotion before their retirement.
To my mind, therefore, all chances of promotion have been shut out and this action cannot be justified.
6.
Mrs. Rathore has then argued that the policy of appointment on compassionate grounds was arbitrary and, therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India  7.
This argument, to my mind, does not merit acceptance as this and other similar policies have been upheld by this Court as also by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various decisions.
8.
The question now arises as to the relief that should be made available to the petitioner.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 has been made on compassionate grounds, she being a widow of a deceased employee of the department.
I, therefore, find no reason to quash her appointment or direct that she be shifted to some other suitable place as has been contended.
On this, however, Mrs. Rathore has urged that the petitioner would be willing to be accommodated in any District in Haryana, in the post of Daftri or an equivalent post.
This petition is, accordingly, disposed of with a direction that appointment of respondent No. 4 shall not be disturbed but the petitioner's case will be considered for promotion in any district in the State and if found suitable, shall get his seniority from the date of the appointment of respondent No. 4.
He shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits as a result of this order.
No costs.
Ordered accordingly.