BP Banerjee, J - This application was filed before the tribunal by All India Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Railways Employees Association represented by the General Secretary and ten others for a relief to the extent that their cases of promotion were withheld to the higher posts.
The order of promotion on the basis of which the applicants No. 2 to 11 claim seniority is an order passed by which they were temporarily promoted as Head Commercial Clerks on condition that the said posting order was issued on temporary measure till the final pinpointing order.
It appears that thereafter there was no such order which has been brought to the notice of this court by which subsequently the temporary order has been converted into permanent.
The said applicants claim that they have acquired the right of seniority from the date of temporary promotion.
The tribunal entertained the application.
But it appears that the tribunal has overlooked the provisions of section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 under which a person aggrieved by any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a tribunal may make an application to the tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.
In the instant case we are unable to understand how the tribunal has entertained the application at the instance of an unregistered association and others.
2.
In Sand Carrier's Owners' Union v. Board of Trustees for the Port of Calcutta and ors. reported in AIR 1990 Cal.
176, held that unincorporated associations are not legal persons and as such, writ petition are not maintainable at their instance.
An association could be formed to protect the interest of consumers, tenants and other groups with the common interest.
But such group cannot move writ application.
No aspect of the administrative law has been changing more rapidly than the law governing standing and this standing barrier has been substantially lowered in recent years, but on the basis of the law relating to standing as in England or in America as also in India, it can be held without any difficulty that the writ petition at the instance of an unincorporated association itself who is not affected by any order to protect the interest of its so-called members, not maintainable.
The same view has been taken in R v. Darlington BC ex. p. Association in Darlington Taxi Owners, 1994 C.O.D.
424; The Times January 21, 1994 as well as R v. Tower Hamlets, LBC, ex.p.
Tower Hamlets Combined Traders Association 1994 C.O.D.
325.
3.
In case of a representative body, problem to do with standing may arise in such cases.
The first difficulty concerns the capacity of the body to commence legal proceedings.
This is distinct from the issue of standing.
In the above two cases, the English Court took the view that an un-incorporated association have no legal personality and so could not apply for judicial review in its own name, even if each member of the association had standing to apply personally.
4.
In R v. Secretary of State for the Environment ex p. Rose Theatre, reported in 1990(1) QB 504, applied the same principle to a body of individuals who because they were interested in preserving the site of historical theatrical remains from development, formed a company to challenge the failure of the minister to prevent the development.
The case failed on its merit, but the Judges carefully considered the question of standing before coming to the conclusion that the applicant did not have any standing on to principles which are (a) the fact that some thousands of people joined together and assert that they have an interest, does not create an interest.
If the individuals did not have any interest (b) the fact that those without an interest incorporate themselves and give the applicant in its memorandum power to pursue a particular object does not give the applicant an interest.
The simple act of incorporation may not improve the status of the applicant.
There is no magic in the act of incorporation for public law purposes.
5.
In view of the determination made by me in Sand Carrier's Owners' Union case, the writ application is not maintainable at the instance of such unincorporated and unregistered body who cannot sue or suits in his name and is not a juristic person.
6.
Further it appears that the question involved in the application was concluded by the tribunal and by another decision of the tribunal sitting in Division Bench the tribunal has followed that judgment in the instant case while against the earlier decision of the tribunal none of the parties therein took the matter higher up and accordingly, we do not find anything wrong for the tribunal in following the tribunal in equal strength in the facts and circumstances of the case.
On the basis of the earlier judgment on the self- same point parties were not aggrieved and further so far as the tribunal is concerned, in coming to the finality of the order the tribunal follows a precedence and that should not be interfered with.
The tribunal considered the matter on merit but we are unable to appreciate the point of the petitioners that their seniority should be counted from the date of temporary promotion and not from the date of permanent promotion.
It is well-settled principle that promotions should be made from amongst the persons permanently in the feeder cadre.
Accordingly, we do not find any merit in the application and the same is dismissed.
7.
This order is passed without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the petitioners to move before the appropriate alternative forum.
Order accordingly.