Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against an order dated 30th August, 1993 whereby and whereunder a learned single Judge of this court while directing the respondents not to give effect to the Memo No. 1289/C dated 16th July, 1993 as contained in annexure "G" to the writ application, further directed as follows :-  "In such view of the matter District Inspector of Schools is given liberty to reconsider his Memo and is given liberty to approve the panel in accordance with law so that the candidate who will be figured as No. 1 in the respective panel can be appointed by the Managing Committee at the earliest.
Even if the panel is approved by the District Inspector of Schools and the Managing Committee appoints any candidate who will be figured as No. 1 in the respective panel, the appointment will abide by the result of the writ petition".
2.
The appellant before us was not a party in the writ application.
He filed this appeal upon obtaining leave therefor.
The appellant and the writ petitioner/respondent were the candidates for the post of Assistant Teacher in English.
They were interviewed.
It appears that the panel was not approved and in respect whereto a writ application was filed.
One Dipak Kumar Acharya was at serial No. 1 in the panel and the appellant was at serial No. 3 in the said panel.
Susanta Chatterjee, J By an order dated 5.3.1993 disposed of the writ petition upon giving certain directions which are in the following terms :-  "It is settled principle of law that in case of any objection in the panel the same has to be raised before the District Inspector of Schools and the District Inspector of Schools will consider the same in accordance with law by giving an opportunity of hearing to all concerned and if the District Inspector of Schools cannot approve the panel or he has to reject the same, he has to refer it to the Director of Schools Education, West Bengal, who will consider the matter in dispute in accordance with law.
The petitioner may take effective steps in the manner as indicated above.
With this observation this writ petition is disposed of."
3.
The impugned order dated 16th July, 1993 was passed pursuant to the said judgment and order.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the learned trial Judge committed an error in staying the operation of the impugned order and at the same time directing the District Inspector of Schools (SE) to pass an order as regard approval of the panel.
The impugned order was passed pursuant to the order passed by this court.
However, there cannot be any doubt that the said order dated 16.7.93 is not in accordance with law as the same was not supported by any reasons.
What irregularities have been committed by the Selection Committee or by the Managing Committee have not been spelt out and thus the said order has been passed without assigning any reason.
The District Inspector of Schools (SE) who is the statutory authority in terms of the Recruitment Rules framed by the Director of Schools Education could not have directed Managing Committee to take fresh interview.
5.
In this view of the matter, in modification of the order passed by the learned trial Judge we direct that the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Birbhum, shall consider the matter afresh and pass a fresh order in accordance with law after giving an opportunity of hearing to the affected parties including the writ petitioner as well as the appellant and the School authority at an early date and preferably within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order.
6.
The said authority shall pass a speaking order.
7.
The District Inspector of Schools (SE), Birbhum, however in the event finds no defect in the preparation of panel by the Selection Committee or the Managing Committee, he may also simultaneously pass an order relating to approval of the panel.
As prior permission had been granted in terms of Rules of 1993, matter would be disposed of in terms of the said Rules as the selection process had already been started.
The learned counsel for the parties agree that in view of the aforementioned order the writ application itself may be treated to be disposed of.
8.
For the reason aforementioned, this appeal as also the writ application are, therefore, disposed of with the aforementioned directions.
9.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.