Satyabrata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 15th January, 1998 passed in W.P. 28388(W) of 1997, whereby and whereunder the writ-application filed by the writ-petitioner was disposed with certain directions.
2.
The petitioner in the writ application, inter alia, has questioned the appointment of the respondent-administrator on the ground that the same was in violation of Rule 8(2) of the Rules for Management of Recognised non- Government Institutions (aided and unaided), 1969.
3.
Mr. Roy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted that a bare perusal of the Rule 8(2) of the Management Rules would show that an administrator can be appointed by the Executive Committee only in the circumstances mentioned therein.
According to the learned counsel, term of such appointment cannot exceed two years unless the incumbent of the office of the Administrator files an application and the period of his appointment is extended on cogent reasons.
It was further submitted that the management of a school cannot be kept in the hands of the Administrator by making such appointment successively which would amount to commission of fraud on statute.
The learned counsel has pointed out that no attempt had been made by the Administrator to hold election.
4.
From a perusal the impugned judgment it appears that the learned trial Judge merely directed holding of election within four months.
Before passing the said order no direction was issued for filing affidavits.
The question as to whether the first administrator appointed in the year 1992 filed any application for extension of his appointment and as to whether such extension had been granted on cogent reasons is essentially a question of fact and finding thereon can be arrived at, only upon giving an opportunity to the Board and the Administrator concerned to file their affidavits-in-opposition.
5.
However, we are of the opinion, that even if the appointment of the second Administrator is set aside, a vacuum would be created and in this view of the matter, we directed by an order dated 2421998 keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, that the District Inspector of Schools (SE) be appointed as Special Officer to rule the administration of the School.
It was further directed that he would reconstitute the managing committee in terms of the order passed by the learned trial Judge and for the said purpose he would be at liberty to take assistance from such officer or officers of his office subordinate to him other than the respondent-administrator.
6.
For the views we have taken, we are of the opinion that an opportunity should be given to the respondents to file their affidavit-in-opposition so that the entire writ application can be disposed of on merits.
In the meantime, the District Inspector of Schools (SE) Calcutta shall continue to act as the Special Officer of this Court and shall act in terms of the aforementioned order dated 2421998.
There cannot, however, be any doubt that in the event the election is completed, he would hand over the charge to the duly elected committee.
Keeping in view the points involved in this application and further in view of the fact that originally an administrator was appointed as far back as in the year 1992, we would request the appropriate Bench to hear out the writ application at an early date.
The respondents may file their affidavits-in-opposition before the learned Trial Judge within three weeks from date and affidavit-in-reply thereto, if any, may be filed within one week thereafter.
7.
With the aforementioned observations, this appeal is disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
8.
Let a plain copy of this order duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court) be handed over to the learned counsel for the parties on usual undertakings.
Orders accordingly.