Bhawani Singh, ACJ.
- The brief facts of the case are that the applicant (Smt. Sharda Devi) was appointed as Hostel Warden in Government College for Women at Gandhi Nagar, Jammu on consolidated pay of Rs. 2000/- PM on contract basis for a period of one year, vide Government order No. 258-HE of 1992 dated November 20, 1992.
This period was extended by the Government by its order No. 278-HE of 1993 dated Dec 9, 1993 upto February 28, 1994.
Thereafter, the services of Smt. Sharda Devi (respondent in LPA(SW) No. 310 of 1995) were discontinued.
Consequently, Smt. Sharda Devi filed a writ petition (SWP No. 1490 of 1995) in this court which was heard by the learned Single Judge who vide judgment dated October 30, 1995 allowed the writ petition.
The operative part of the judgment under appeal reads thus :-  "....It would serve no purpose to keep this petition alive on the Board or to put respondents on notice considering the innocuousness of the order proposed to be passed.
This writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of with a direction to respondents to implement the order passed by the Chief Secretary to maintain the status-quo in respect of the petitioner's present position till the SSRB makes selection for the post.
For this the petitioner shall be at liberty to approach the competent authority for appropriate orders in the light of the Chief Secretary's endorsement on her representation and till then shall be allowed to continue on the terms and conditions of her earlier order of appointment.
This shall not, however, debar either respondent No. 2 or the SSRB to take immediate steps to fill up the post by selection pursuant to advertisement Notice No. 6 of 1995 dated 2181995 and in that event, the petitioner, if not selected, shall have to make way for the selected candidate.
This also disposes of the connected C.M.Ps."
The said judgment of the learned Single Judge has been challenged by the State through the present appeal (LPA (SW) No. 310 of 1995).
In this LPA, the appellant sought an interim order of stay from this Court in the following terms :-  "...We have heard Mr. Chouhan, learned counsel for the appellant and perused the grounds taken in the appeal as well as the order made by the learned Single Judge.
Admit.
Emergent notice.
Interim stay as prayed for."
Since the matter is complete and the learned counsel for the parties want that the same be heard and disposed of on merits, we proceed to decide the matter finally.
2.
The sole question for determination is whether the writ petitioner can claim to remain in service as Warden of the Hostel in question ?
The perusal of the two orders, mentioned above, plainly demonstrates that the appointment of the writ petitioner (Smt. Sharda Devi) was purely on contractual basis, be it the first order or the second order.
By now it is well settled that a person appointed on contractual basis cannot claim to retain that status after the expiry of that period.
Consequently, after the expiry of the period of appointment, the termination of the writ petitioner's services cannot be legally challenged.
Her claim is, therefore, untenable in law and has to be dis-allowed.
This appeal is, accordingly, allowed and the judgment under appeal passed by the learned Single Judge on Oct 30, 1995 in SWP No. 1490 of 1995 is set aside.
The parties are left to bear their costs.
Appeal allowed.