THB Chalapathi, J - The State of Punjab is the appellant.
Respondent filed a suit challenging his reversion from the post of Vulcaniser/Head Tyreman to the post of Tyreman.
The plaintiff joined the services in the State of Punjab as Vulcaniser/Tyre Man.
He had been promoted to the post of Head Tyre Man by an order dated February 14, 1986.
He had been reverted as Vulcaniser/Tyre Man by an order dated October 22, 1986.
Challenging the same, the plaintiff filed the suit when his representations did not yield any result.
The trial Court held that the plaintiff is entitled to monetary benefits from the date of his promotion i.e. with effect from February 14, 1986 till be actually worked as Tyre Man and that the defendants shall consider the plaintiff for promotion as and when vacancy arises.
Aggrieved by the same, the plaintiff preferred an appeal to the Court of Additional District Judge, Amritsar.
By impugned judgment, the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, decreed the suit holding that the order dated October 22, 1986, reverting the plaintiff from the post of Head Tyre Man to Vulcaniser/Tyre Man is illegal and unconstitutional.
The case of the appellants is that there was no vacancy of the post of Head Tyre Man as on October 22, 1986, when he was reverted, therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to the same.
2.
There is no denial of the fact that the respondent joined the service as Vulcaniser/Tyre Man prior to 1974 and he was promoted as Head Tyre Man on August, 1, 1974, but later he was reverted for want of regular sanctioned post.
Subsequently, he had been promoted as Head Tyre Man on April 3, 1986.
Again he was reverted from the post of Head Tyre Man to Tyre Man on October 22, 1986.
As already observed, the stand of the State is that there is no vacancy to the post of Head Tyre Man.
This contention is contrary to the record.
Exhibit P-8 which has been produced from the department, clearly shows that three persons, namely, Massadi Ram, Sita Ram and Shri Ram had retired as Head Tyre Men on June 3, 1981, January 31, 1986, and August 3, 1985, respectively.
Thus, there were three permanent posts of Head Tyre Men lying vacant when the plaintiff was promoted as Head Tyre Man.
Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellants that there were no posts of Head Tyre Men as on October 22, 1986, is not correct.
The ground on which the plaintiff-respondent has been reverted is without any basis.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any error in the judgment of the Additional District Judge, Amritsar.
3.
This Regular Second Appeal, therefore, falls and is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.