GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Sanskrit Teacher.
The alternative prayer made by the petitioner is to quash the selection and appointment of the respondent Nos. 5 to 13 as Sanskrit Teachers.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner possesses the following academic and training qualifications :  (i) Visharada from Maharshi Dayanand University - 1980.
(ii) Prabhakar from Kurkshetra University - 1982.
(iii) Shastri (BA Honours) in Sanskrit (Language and Literature) from Maharshi Dayanand University - 1989.
(iv) B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject from Maharshi Dayanand University - 1994.
3.
The petitioner also acquired experience of one year and six months by teaching as Sanskrit Teacher in Adarsh Bal Mandir, District Jind which is a recognised institution.
She applied for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher in response to the requisition sent by the District Education Officer, Jind.
Her grievance is that the official respondents have gravely erred in not considering her case for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher under an erroneous impression that she does not possess the prescribed qualifications.
The contention of the petitioner is that the qualification of B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a teaching subject is equivalent to LTC (OT) in Sanskrit and there is no rhyme or reason to deny consideration to her candidature because a number of persons who have passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a teaching subject have been appointed as Sanskrit Teachers.
The official respondents have contested the writ petition by stating that the petitioner is not eligible to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher because she has not passed LTC (OT) in Sanskrit from Haryana.
Similar written statement has been filed by the non- official respondents who have further pleaded that the petitioner does not stand in merit vis-a-vis them.
4.
The qualifications prescribed for recruitment of Sanskrit Teacher are :  (i) Shastri (Honours in Sanskrit from the recognised university by Haryana Government).
(ii) Pass in LTC (OT) in Sanskrit conducted by Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
5.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner possesses the academic qualification of Shastri which she has acquired from Maharshi Dayanand University but the parties do not agree about the training qualifications possessed by the petitioner while the petitioner says that she should be treated eligible because the Government of Haryana has treated B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as equivalent to LTC (OT), the respondents have contested this position.
6.
We have thoughtfully considered the contentions urged by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the various decisions of this Court.
In C.W.P.
No. 1642 of 1982, Rajinder Singh v. State of Haryana, decided on 17121983; Smt. Raj Kalan and others v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 14803 of 1991; Smt. Saroj Bala v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 18427 of 1994; Madan Gopal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) RSJ 506 : 1995(2) SCT 751 (P&H); Veena Devi and others v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 11520 of 1996 : 1996(4) SCT 740(P&H) and Santosh Kumari v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(2) RSJ 247 : 1996(4) SCT 337 (P&H).
This Court has held that persons possessing the qualifications of B.Ed.
are eligible to be considered for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher.
In fact the learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that persons who have passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as teaching subject have been recruited as Sanskrit Teachers.
Thus, we do not have any hesitation to hold that non-consideration of petitioner's candidature for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher has resulted in violation of her fundamental right to equality and an appropriate direction deserves to be given to them to consider the petitioner for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher in all future selections.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
It is declared that the petitioner is eligible to be considered for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher.
The official respondents are directed to consider her candidature in all future selections held for recruitment of Sanskrit Teachers.
Petition allowed.