HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - Partap Singh was recruited into the Army on 1611970 and was released on medical grounds on 11.5.1971.
He was also granted the disability pension on his disability which was assessed at 20% by the Medical Board and he continued to draw the same right up to 1211977, when he was called upon the appear before the Resurvey Medical Board, at the Command Hospital, (WC), Chandimandir, but as he had shifted his residence, the communication addressed by the Army Authorities could not be delivered to him.
As no resurvey was held, the disability pension was discontinued from the year 1977.
Partap Singh, thereafter, approached the Army Authorities through a representation dated 991995 asking for pension once again and he was called upon to submit his explanation as to why he had not reported to the Resurvey Medical Board in 1977 and also to provide certain other information.
The explanation submitted by him was apparently accepted and he was called before the Resurvey Medical Board at the Command Hospital, Chandimandir, vide letter dated 13.3.1996 Annexure P-3 to the petition.
The Medical Board on an appraisal of his disability once again assessed it at 20% and the information was, accordingly, conveyed to the CDA (P), Allahabad-respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 951996, Annexure P-4 and it appears that he was also granted anticipatory pension, but he died on 361996 as evidenced by the Death Certificate Annexure P-5 to the petition.
The present petitioner, his widow, however, received a letter dated 12.8.1996 Annexure P-6 to the petition in which it was pointed out that the family pension that had been granted to Partap Singh, had been discontinued w.e.f.
841996 as the CDA (PF) had determined the percentage of his disability at between 15-19%.
The petitioner also made a representation to the respondents for the grant of a family pension, but this too, was turned down vide communication dated 2091996 Annexure P-8 to the petition, on the ground that as her husband had not been entitled to any pension on 1311977 onwards and was not in receipt of any pension at the time of his death, the family pension too, was not payable.
Annexures P-6 and P-8 have been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a reply has been put in on behalf of the respondents.
The respondents have denied the claim with regard to the payment of pension to Partap Singh on the ground that his disability had been assessed at below 20%.
The petitioner's claim to family pension has been controverted on the ground that Partap Singh was not receiving any pension of any kind after 1311977 and at the time of his death which was a sine qua non for the payment of a family pension.
The respondents have also relied upon Appendix II to Rule 27(c) of the Pension Rules to contend that CCDA (P) was the final authority in determining the percentage of disability and that this authority could even overrule the Medical Board.
3.
Mr. SS Ahlawat, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has cited Wing Commander RL Sharma (Retd.)
v. Union of India, through Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India, New Delhi and others, 1994(4) RSJ 107 : 1994(4) SCT 268 (P&H)and Ex. Capt.
Harbhajan Singh v. The Secretary, Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India, New Delhi and others, 1997(1) RSJ 340 : 1996(4) SCT 222 (P&H) and has submitted that the Resurvey Medical Board, that had examined Partap Singh was the final authority to determine the percentage of disability and the CCDA (P) Allahabad who had no occasion to examine him could not overrule the Resurvey Medical Board under any circumstances.
He has also pointed out that in the reply filed by the respondents in response to the writ petition, no reasons have been spelt out to indicate as to why the authorities at Allahabad had disagreed or differed with the opinion expressed by the Resurvey Medical Board with regard to the extent of disability of the petitioner's husband Partap Singh.
4.
As against this, Mr. Dahiya, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents has urged the point of laches and has pointed out that there was no justification for Partap Singh to have slept over the matter from the years 1977 up to 1995 when he had appeared before the authorities in Chandimandir and as such, the petitioner's claim to pension was not tenable.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
6.
The two judgments of this court cited by Mr. Ahlawat, the learned counsel for the petitioner which are identical on facts fully support his case.
In these cases, the Resurvey Medical Board had assessed the claimant's disability at 20% or more but when the matter was taken to the CDA (P), Allahabad, it came to the conclusion that the claimant was not entitled to pension as the extent of disability was less than 20%.
It was in this situation that this Court observed that it was the Resurvey Medical Board, who had examined the pensioner that would be in the best position to judge his disability and that even assuming that the Controller, CCDA (Pension) Allahabad, had the authority to differ, yet some reasons were required to be recorded for arriving at that conclusion and that these reasons would also have to be recorded after following the proper procedure laid down.
To my mind, these observations clearly apply to the facts of the case in hand.
Admittedly, the disability had been assessed at 20% by the Resurvey Medical Board and, in fact, Partap Singh had even died of the disease that he was suffering from on 361996.
No reasons have been spelt out on record as to why the CDA (P) had not accepted the opinion of the Resurvey Medical Board.
For the reasons recorded above, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
Annexures P-6 and P-8 are, accordingly, quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pay the arrears of pension on account of Partap Singh's disability from 14.1.1977 till his death on 361996 and also to determine the petitioner's claim to family pension within a period of six months from the date that a copy of this order is supplied to them.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.