Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The respondent No. 1 had joined service as Assistant Superintendent of Jails on June 23, 1962.
He was promoted as Deputy Superintendent Jail Grade II with effect from November 15, 1976.
On August 16, 1983 the respondent was promoted as Deputy Superintendent Grade I Superintendent, District Jail.
While he was working as such, the respondent was posted as Superintendent, Central Jail vide order dated July 29, 1988.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
This post was given to the respondent "in his own pay scale of Superintendent, District Jail."
On July 10, 1990 the respondent was informed that he had not passed the departmental examination with the prescribed standard and that the information sent by him vide letter dated March 17, 1989 appeared to be incorrect.
Thus, he was not to be allowed the next increment.
It further appears that the respondent apprehended that he would be transferred from the Central Jail to the District Jail.
He, thus, approached this Court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
He prayed inter alia that he may be treated as a regular Superintendent, Central Jail with effect from July 29, 1988 and the department be directed to grant him "the pay scale of Superintendent, Central Jail which is a Class-I post with effect from July 29, 1988."
2.
The learned Single Judge held that the respondent was entitled to the pay scale of the post of Superintendent Central Jail from July 29, 1988 till May 15, 1991 when the stay order regarding his reversion was vacated.
Aggrieved by this judgment, the State of Punjab has filed this appeal.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
It has been contended on behalf of the appellants that respondent No. 1 was not qualified for promotion to the post of Superintendent, Central Jail as he did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
He was, thus, not entitled to the relief granted to him.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants has been controverted by Mr. Chopra, learned counsel for the respondent.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the present appellants, it has been categorically averred that "at the relevant time, Shri Oberoi did not fulfil the requisite minimum qualifications of experience and clearance of departmental examination in higher standard."
It has also been pointed out that the respondent had wrongly conveyed "vide his TPM dated 1331990 that he had cleared the departmental examination in the higher standard.
By concealing the factual information, he succeeded in getting annual increments".
Both the averments were not controverted by respondent No. 1 by filing any replication.
Thus, these can safely be assumed to be correct.
Secondly, a perusal of the written statement shows that there were various persons senior to respondent No. 1 who were not even considered.
Added to this is the fact that the respondent had been conveyed either adverse reports or orders of punishment during the years 1963, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1973, 1975, 1977, 1978 and 1984.
The blemishes on record are far too many to entitle the respondent to claim promotion to the Class-I service.
Still further, it has also been pointed out that two prisoners had escaped from Central Jail, Gurdaspur, and there was allegations regarding irregular purchase of car and the submission of property returns.
It has been averred that respondent No. 1 was "wilfully evading to give replies and details of the immovable property purchased by him."
6.
Taking the facts collectively, it is apparent that respondent No. 1 did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications and his record of service was not satisfactory.
In such a situation, it cannot be assumed that the State Government wanted to promote him out of turn by ignoring the senior persons.
7.
When the case is examined in the background of the above-noted facts, it becomes apparent that the respondent had been merely transferred from Hoshiarpur to Gurdaspur.
It was not a case of promotion from the Class-II to the Class-I service.
Still further, it deserves mention that respondent No. 1 had been specifically informed that on transfer he would be placed in his own scale of pay of the post of Superintendent, District Jail on which he was working.
He had accepted this condition with his eyes open.
He had not raised his little finger against the stipulation in the order of posting.
It was only when his continuance on the post was threatened that he had trotted out the plea that he was entitled to the grant of the higher scale.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the respondent had accepted the offer of posting given to him without laying down any condition.
He is estopped from making the claim as made out in the writ petition.
8.
Mr. Chopra has pointed out that in two Division Bench judgments of this Court, the claim for higher wages has been upheld.
He has referred to the decision in Sadhu Singh and another v. The State of Punjab and another, C.W.P.
No. 5980 of 1990 decided on August 1, 1990 and in KL Goyal and another v. The State of Haryana and another, C.W.P.
No. 11486 of 1990 decided on March 19, 1991.
Learned counsel is, however, not in a position to show that the petitioners in these cases did not fulfil the qualifications for the post nor he is in a position to point out that persons senior to them were not considered for promotion.
Thus, these orders as referred to by the learned counsel cannot be read to mean that a person is entitled to the salary of a post even though he is not qualified for appointment thereto.
9.
It is, undoubtedly, correct that when one performs the duties of a post, he must be paid the salary sanctioned therefor.
However, in a case where the order of posting is issued by ignoring the claims of senior persons in favour of a junior who is not even qualified and whose record of service is not good, we think it would be a travesty of justice to pay the wages of a higher post even though he had accepted the offer without any reservation or objection.
When the order of posting specifically stipulates that the person shall be paid his salary in the scale of pay of the post on which he was originally working, the employee can reject the offer.
The rule of equitable esttoppel should apply to a person when he unequivocally accepts the offer without raising his little finger.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we are unable to sustain the decision of the learned Single Judge.
Thus, the appeal is allowed and the writ petition is dismissed.
However, since the respondent has already retired from service, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.