Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - We have three cases before us.
Civil Writ Petition No. 7784 of 1992 has been filed by Mr. Ram Kumar Sehrawat who was working as a Pharmacist with the Haryana State Federation of Consumer Cooperative Wholesales Stores Limited.
He challenges the Show Cause Notice dated June 3, 1992 served on him.
By this notice, he was informed that he was not eligible to continue on the post of Pharmacist as he had not got the licence to sell medicines.
After notice of motion, a short written statement had been filed by the Assistant State Drugs Controller on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 viz. the State of Haryana and the Drug Controller.
After perusal of the written statement, a Division Bench of this Court (M.R.
Agnihotri and HS Brar, JJ.)
had allowed the writ petition and set aside the impugned show cause notice vide order dated February 2, 1993.
2.
On March 3, 1993, Civil Writ Petition No. 1388 of 1991 was decided by a learned Single Judge.
The petitioner, Mr. Ram Kumar Sehrawat was a respondent in this writ petition.
No notice of this writ petition was served on him.
However, it was held by the learned Single Judge that he was not qualified for the post of Pharmacist.
In pursuance of the order of the learned Single Judge, an application for review of the order dated February 2, 1993 in CWP No. 7784 of 1992 was filed.
On December 2, 1993, the Bench had recalled its earlier order of February 2, 1993.
The writ petition was admitted.
3.
Even the Haryana State Federation of Consumers Cooperative Wholesales Stores Limited (Confed) was aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge in CWP No. 1388 of 1991.
It had filed LPA No. 568 of 1993.
On coming to know of the decision in CWP No. 1388 of 1991, Mr. Ram Kumar Sehrawat who had not been served any notice also filed an appeal viz. LPA No. 649 of 1994.
This appeal is the second case which is pending and has been put up for hearing before this Bench.
4.
Besides the above mentioned two cases, we have also CM No. 2825 of 1995 and a review application No. 21 of 1995.
These applications have been filed against the order dated August 8, 1995 by which the Confed had been permitted to withdraw its appeal viz. LPA No. 568 of 1993.
The applicant is Mr. LC Verma who was respondent No. 7 in CWP No. 1388 of 1991.
He submits that the Confed should not be permitted to withdraw its appeal as this would prejudicially affect his interests.
This is the third case which has been put up before this Bench.
5.
We shall first of all take up LPA No. 649 of 1994 for consideration.
This appeal arises out of the decision in CWP No. 1388 of 1991.
The said writ petition had been filed by Mr. Vijay Kumar Jain and two others to challenge the orders of retrenchment which had been passed by the Confed.
The claim made by the writ petitioners in a nut-shell was that they were fully qualified for the posts of Pharmacists and that the action of the Respondent-Federation in retrenching them while persons who were not qualified were allowed to work, was wholly illegal.
Various other grounds had also been raised.
On the other hand, the claim on behalf of the Confed etc. was that they (viz. Respondent No. 7 and 8) were the senior-most persons and as such, their retention was legal.
The learned Single Judge found that respondent No. 7 (Mr. LC Verma) "does not hold a diploma in Pharmacy from any recognised Institute and that respondent No. 8 (Mr. RK Sehrawat) also does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed for the post and that the management has already issued a notice to the said respondent to show cause why his services be not terminated."
On this basis, it was held that "both these respondents are not qualified to hold the post of a Pharmacist and it must, therefore, be held that their retention in service at the time when retrenchment took place was illegal even though they were the seniormost".
Resultantly, the writ petition was allowed to the extent that retention of respondent Nos. 7 and 8 in service was set aside.
The Management was left to retain the two senior-most Pharmacists from amongst those who had been retrenched.
6.
Aggrieved by this judgment, Mr. Ram Kumar Sehrawat who was respondent No. 8 in the writ petition had filed the present Letters Patent Appeal (LPA 649/94).
Mr. Laler has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that he had been condemned unheard.
No notice of the writ petition was ever served on him.
His rights could not have been determined without the service of the notice.
The order of the learned Single Judge being ex parte should be set aside insofar as he is concerned.
Secondly, it has been submitted that the failure to serve the notice has prejudicially affected his interests inasmuch as he has been deprived of the opportunity to show that he was fully qualified.
If an opportunity had been granted, he could have shown that vide order dated February 2, 1993 which had been passed a month before the decision of the writ petition, a Division Bench had observed that he was fully qualified.
On these premises, learned counsel has contended that the appeal should be allowed and that the judgment of the learned Single Judge should be set aside.
The factual position has not been controverted on behalf of the respondents.
7.
In view of the above position, it is clear that the rights of the appellant had been adversely affected without the service of any notice of the writ petition on him.
Even otherwise, nothing has been pointed out to show that he did not fulfil the qualifications for the post of a Pharmacist.
In this situation, LPA No. 649 of 1994 deserves to be allowed.
8.
The second case is CWP No. 7784 of 1992.
This is directed against the show cause notice which had been issued to the petitioner.
In this case, a short written statement has been filed by Mr. CP Mehta.
In this written statement, it has been inter alia observed that "the licensing authority (Civil Surgeon, Ambala) re-examined the case and decided, vide letter dated 1811993 (Annexure P.1) that the petitioner can be considered as qualified person and his name can be entered in the licence of existing firm and he can also be granted Retail Sale Drugs Licence in case he or (the) firm applies for it.
"It is, thus, the writ petitioner is qualified to sell drugs etc. and is eligible for the grant of a licence.
Thus, the very basis on which the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner by the Confed is non-existent.
Mr. Laler has been at pains to point out that in fact, a licence was granted to the petitioner in 1994.
Mr. Gupta appearing for the respondents is not in a position to admit or deny this statement of fact.
However, it has been conceded that in view of the factual position as disclosed in the short reply filed by the Assistant State Drugs Controller on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the show cause notice given to the petitioner is no longer valid.
That being so, it has been submitted on behalf of the Confed that the writ petition has been rendered infructuous as no action shall be taken in pursuance of the show cause notice.
9.
Resultantly, it is held that the show cause notice given to the petitioner was not valid and that he shall not be liable to be removed from service on account of the reasons as given in the impugned notice.
10.
Lastly, we come to CM No. 2825 of 1995 and Review Application No. 21 of 1995 in LPA No. 568 of 1993.
Mr. Patwalia submits that the case of Mr. LC Verma who was respondent No. 7 in CWP No. 1388 of 1991 is completely at par with that of Mr. RK Sehrawat (respondent No. 8 in the said writ petition) insofar as the eligibility for the post of Pharmacist is concerned.
Even though, the notice of the writ petition was served on him and he had contested the case but the finding that he was not qualified cannot be sustained as there was no provision in the Common Cadre Rules promulgated on April 23, 1979 by which the prescribed qualifications were to apply retrospectively to the persons who had already been recruited.
The qualifications were to be applicable only to the persons to be recruited to the service in future.
It was on account of this reason that while making retrenchment, the respondent-Federation had not chosen Mr. LC Verma as one of the persons on whom the axe had fallen.
Still further, it has also been contended that he possesses the prescribed qualifications.
In view of this factual position, learned counsel contends that by virtue of the provisions of Order 41 Rule 33, he should be granted the same relief as is admissible in the case of Mr. RK Sehrawat.
It is in this situation that he objects to the withdrawal of LPA No. 568 of 1993 which was allowed vide order dated August, 8, 1995 and prays for the review of the order.
In the alternative learned counsel submits that the requisite relief can be granted even in LPA No. 649 of 1994 wherein Mr. LC Verma has been impleaded as one of the respondents.
On the other hand, it has been submitted by Mr. Hemant Gupta, counsel for the respondent- Federation that no post of Pharmacist is available against which Mr. LC Verma may be accommodated.
After making an enquiry, he has submitted that certain posts of Accountants are available.
These posts are in the same scale of pay as the post of a Pharmacist.
11.
It is undoubtedly correct that Civil Writ Petition No. 5542 of 1994 filed by Mr. LC Verma had been dismissed in limine on May 3, 1994 as his services had been terminated in pursuance of the directions in CWP No. 1388 of 1991.
Thereafter, even his application No. 1089 of 1994 for condonation of delay and for entertainment of his appeal viz. LPA No. 689 of 1994 had been dismissed.
Then, he had filed an application for being transposed as an appellant in LPA No. 568 of 1993.
This was CM No. 208 of 1995.
This was rejected on May 8, 1995 in view of the fact that he could get the requisite relief in LPA No. 568 of 1993 wherein the Confed was duly protecting his interests.
Yet, the fact remains that he had been appointed as a Pharmacist on November 8, 1969.
He had been absorbed in the Common Cadre in 1979.
He had continued in service till 1994 when his services were suddenly ordered to be terminated.
After having served for 25 years, he was not even entitled to any pension.
He is still 51 years of age and has a period of about 7 years to serve the Respondent-Federation.
In this situation, we think it would be adjust to keep in out of survey especially when he is not likely to get any retiral benefits after a service of 25 years.
In the peculiar circumstances and without intending to lay down any precedent, we consider it appropriate to direct the Respondent-Federation to reinstate Mr. LC Verma as a Pharmacist.
Mr. Verma is present in court.
He has instructed Mr. Patwalia to state that he would not make any claim for arrears of salary from the date of the termination of his services, viz., April 19, 1994 to the date on which he is reinstated.
However, the benefit of continuity of service should be given to him and his salary may be drawn against the available post of Accountant.
It may be clarified that this would not affect the rights of any of the persons who are working on the posts of Pharmacists nor would the services of any of them be terminated on this account.
In particular, it may be clarified that Mr. Sukhbir Singh, respondent No. 3 in LPA No. 649 of 1994 is admittedly working on the post of Pharmacist.
The directions given by us in respect of Mr. LC Verma shall not in any way adversely affect his rights.
12.
In view of the above, we allow L.P.A. No. 649 of 1994.
We hold that the appellant and respondent No. 10 are entitled to continue on the posts of Pharmacists subject to the conditions mentioned above.
It is clarified that Mr. LC Verma shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary.
C.W.P.
No. 7784 of 1992 is allowed.
The show cause notice, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2, is set aside.
In view of the above, C.W.
No. 2825 of 1995 and Review Application No. 21 of 1995 in LPA No. 568 of 1993 are rendered infructuous.
These are, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
LPA allowed.