HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Department of Jails as an Assistant Superintendent on 27th June, 1962.
He was promoted as Deputy Superintendent Grade-II on 15th November, 1976 on ad hoc basis vide order Annexure P-1 to the petition.
The promotion of the petitioner was, thereafter, approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission w.e.f.
the date of the ad hoc promotion.
The petitioner's case for promotion to the rank of Deputy Superintendent Grade-I was considered by the State Government along with other eligible candidates and he was found suitable for promotion and was, accordingly, promoted w.e.f.
12th August, 1983.
Respondent No. 3 Kuljit Inderpal Singh was selected for appointment as Deputy Superintendent Grade-II on the recommendation of the Punjab Public Service Commission on 28th May, 1976 vide Annexure P-3 to the petition.
On the basis of this selection, he was deputed for pre-service training for a period of 18 months and this too was completed vide Annexure P-4 dated 5th December, 1977 and it is the petitioner's case that the said respondent was, thereafter, appointed to the post of Deputy Superintendent Grade-II w.e.f.
that date on regular basis.
Annexure P-4 also provided that he would be on probation for a period of two years w.e.f.
5th December, 1977.
The respondents circulated the Gradation List as it stood on 1.1.1977 in respect of various posts in the department and the petitioner was shown at serial No. 34 whereas respondent No. 3 was shown at serial No. 43.
The Gradation List also indicated that respondent No. 3. had been given training for a period of 18 months w.e.f.
5th June, 1976 and that the seniority of the said respondent had been determined from the date of his regular appointment to the post of Deputy Superintendent Grade-II i.e. w.e.f.
5th December, 1977.
The petitioner was also promoted as Deputy Superintendent Grade-I on the basis of his seniority and merit vis-a-vis other eligible candidates including respondent No. 3. w.e.f.
12th August 1983 Annexure P-6 to the petition.
Respondent No. 3., thereafter, submitted a representation to the State Government claiming that his seniority had been wrongly fixed vis-a-vis the petitioner and he was entitled to claim seniority over him for the reasons set out in the representation.
This representation was allowed vide Annexure P-7 dated 23rd September, 1983 with the result that seniority has been granted to respondent No. 3 over the petitioner.
Annexure P-7 has been impugned in this writ petition.
2.
Mr. HS Sethi, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that the action of the State Government in giving seniority to respondent No. 3 over the petitioner was contrary to the provisions of Rule 13 of the Punjab Prisons Service (Class II) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter called "the Rules") as this rule specifically provided that seniority was to be given to an entrant to the service w.e.f.
the date of his regular appointment.
In this connection, he has also referred to para 204-1 of the Jail Manual which further clarified the matter when it stipulated that the seniority of a Member of the service was to be reckoned from his first appointment as Deputy Superintendent in a permanent vacancy after completion of the prescribed period of training and probation.
Mr. Sethi has highlighted that the letter of appointment Annexure P-3 also contained a stipulation in the above terms when it stated that the service training given to respondent No. 3 would not count towards his seniority.
3.
As against this, Mr. Balram.
K Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 has argued that the matter was covered not by the 1978 Rules but as the appointment of respondent No. 3 had been made in the year 1976, the matter would have to be decided in terms of the Punjab Prisons Service (Class-II) Rules, 1963 (hereinafter called `the 1963 Rules') and that this rule did not stipulate that the period of pre-service training was to be excluded while determining the seniority of the officers concerned.
4.
I have heared the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
5.
The 1963 Rules were enforced w.e.f.
19.3.1963 whereas the 1978 Rules were enforced w.e.f.
1591976 and as Rule 23 of the latter set of Rules specifically repealed the 1963 Rules, it is clear that the dispute would have to be decided with reference to the 1963 Rules.
Rule 7 of the 1963 Rules provides for the method of appointment, Rule 10 provides for a departmental examination and stipulates that a member of the service would be required to pass the departmental test within a period of two years from the date of his appointment or promotion to the service.
Rule 11 provides for the training to be given to a member of the service, whereas Rule 13 provides for determining the inter se seniority amongst members of the service.
Rules 11 and 13 are reproduced below.
Rule 11.
Training :- (1) The members of service holding posts enumerated in Section I of Appendix A shall, within one year of their first appointment to the service, receive training in the Judicial line at least for a period of one month.
After the completion of that training, they will have to obtain a certificate from the District Magistrate of the District where training is taken to the effect that they have successfully completed the same.
(2) Members of the service appointed on the posts specified in section II of appendix `A' by direct recruitment and those appointed by selection from Ministerial Services or by transfer or deputation from other Departments shall receive training for a period of 18 months immediately on their selection for appointment to the service' in the manner prescribed by the Government from time to time.
Provided that such trainees shall receive the minimum of the scale of the post during the period of their training".
Rule 13.
Seniority :- The seniority inter se of the members of the Service shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointments in the Service:  Provided that in the case of members appointed directly the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed and the persons appointed as a result of early selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selection : Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, the seniority shall be determined as follows :- (a) a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise; (b) a member recruited by promotion shall be senior to a person recruited by transfer; (c) in the case of members recruited by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and  (d) in the case of members recruited by transfer from different cadre their seniority shall be determined according to their pays, preference given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment; and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same then by the length of service in those appointments and if the length of service is also the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Note 1.
This rule shall not apply to persons appointed on purely provisional basis pending their passing the qualifying test.
Note 2.
In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under rule 12 of these rules, the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended".
6.
A bare reading of the rules indicated that it is only the members of the Service i.e. the Punjab Prisons Service (Class-II) as defined in Rule 2 (g) who are liable to be sent for training.
Rule 13 further clarifies that the inter se seniority is to be determined from the date of their continuous appointment in the service.
To my mind, therefore, respondent No. 3 was liable to have his seniority w.e.f.
28th May, 1976 as he was a member of the service when he had been sent for training.
Mr. Sethi has, however, pointed out that Rule 13 of the 1978 Rules was almost pari materia with Rule 13 of the 1978 Rules and a such, the period of training had to be excluded.
To my mind, this argument is not tenable for the reasons that a note has been appended to Rule 13 of 1978 Rules which reads as under :-  Note:- "Seniority of members appointed on purely provisional basis, shall be determined as and when they are regularly appointed keeping in view the date of such regular appointment".
No such note exists in the 1963 Rules.
7.
Mr. Sethi has finally referred to paragraph 2041 of the Punjab Jails Manual which provides as under :-  "The seniority of a member of the Service will date from his first appointment as Deputy Superintendent in a permanent vacancy after completion of the prescribed periods on training and probation".
and has urged that the period of training undergone by respondent No. 3 was not to be taken into account while dettermining his seniority.
8.
I have considered this argument and find that it lacks merit.
The Punjab Jails Manual consists of a set of guidelines and cannot be said to have overriding effect over the 1963 Rules which had been framed under the authority conferred by Article 309 of the Constitution of India and thus have statutory force and pre-eminence vis-a-vis the Jail Manual.
9.
It is also relevant that an identical matter came up to this Court in C.W.P.
No. 951 of 1974 (Kanwarjit Singh v. State of Punjab & others) decided on 28th March, 1974 and a Division Bench of this Court after hearing both the sides dismissed the writ petition as being without merit.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.