Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The appellant, an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, was dismissed from service vide order dated September 9, 1991.
He filed an appeal which was rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated January 9, 1992.
He approached this Court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It was urged that there was no ground to dispense with the enquiry and to punish him.
The learned Single Judge found that the record "belies the assertion of (the) counsel ..... that there was no material before the disciplinary authority.
Record not only discloses the reason for dispensing with the holding of enquiry but also the material linking the petitioner with terrorists and anti-national elements".
Thus, the writ petition was dismissed.
Hence this appeal.
2.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the appellant, has vehemently urged that it was merely on the report of the Station House Officer, Chamkaur Sahib, that the decision has been taken.
Learned counsel submits that ipse-dixit of the Police Officer could not form the basis of a finding against the appellant.
The claim made by the learned counsel has been controverted by Mrs. Charu Tuli who has appeared for the respondents.
3.
It is, undoubtedly, correct that an employee is entitled to an opportunity before he is punished.
There is a constitutional protection provided to the civil servant under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
However, a provision has also been made authorising the competent authority to dispense with the enquiry where it is satisfied that "it is not reasonably practicable" to follow the normal procedure.
A safeguard has been provided to the employee inasmuch as the competent authority is obliged to indicate the reasons for arriving at a conclusion that it is not practicable to hold an enquiry.
4.
In the present case the impugned action was not based on the solitary report submitted by the Station House Officer, Chamkaur Sahib.
Similar reports indicating that the appellant had links with the terrorists had also been submitted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Detective), the Superintendent of Police (Operations) as also the Superintendent of Police, Mohali.
There is no suggestion of any bias against any of these officers.
It has not even been alleged that any one of them had even the slightest reason to make a false report.
In view of this factual position, it is not surprising that the learned single Judge was satisfied that the "exercise of power by the Senior Superintendent of Police under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India was bona fide....." We find no ground to take a different view.
5.
Mr. Patwalia has contended that the ipse-dixit of the Station House Officer could not have been accepted.
The counsel is right in his submission.
However, in the present case, as already noticed, the report of the Station House Officer, was not the only material before the disciplinary authority.
Independent reports had been submitted by different officers.
We have been shown copies of the various reports.
There is a report dated March 22, 1991 submitted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Detective), Ropar.
Another report was sent by the Superintendent of Police (Operations).
A report dated June 10, 1991 had been forwarded by the Superintendent of Police, Mohali.
Besides these reports, the Station House Officer, Chamkaur Sabib, had submitted a report on September 6, 1991.
Still further, on the report dated March 22, 1991, there is an endorsement to the following effect :-  "Seen.
I have once again warned him.
Let us see the result.
Though I have reasons to believe that he is incorrigible...... (illegible)".
Again on the report sent by the Superintendent of Police, Mohali, vide his Memo dated June 10, 1991 the following endorsement appears from the Senior Superintendent of Police :-  "Seen.
He has once again been warned against indulgence in such activities.
Sd/-" Then finally, on the report dated September 6, 1991 submitted by the Station House Officer the following endorsement appears :-  "Seen.
Issue orders of dismissal under Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
He has failed to break his nexus with the bad elements despite repeated warnings.
Sd/-"  Besides these, a copy of the detailed note recorded by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ropar, has also been shown to us.
It has been recorded that :-  "Today......... complained about the conduct and activities of ASI Harpal Singh......
He stated that ASI Harpal Singh has been indulging in anti- national activities and has been passing on all the secrets of the Police Station to undesirable elements.
He also does not rule out his mixing up with some of the known and hard-core terrorists and the area ......
The above complaint against ASI Harpal Singh is not the first of this kind and during the last about one year, I have received similar complaints against him from various officers under whom he happened to work.
I kept warning him and shifting him from one place to another in the hope of reforming him and bringing him on the right track.
Despite repeated suggestions from my colleague officers, I avoided taking extreme steps of his dismissal under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India unless it became absolutely necessary ..............
Though we were convinced of his complicity with all sorts of bad elements but we found it difficult to prove the charges on the file.
He remained posted at PP Gharuan under the supervision of Superintendent of Police, Mohali, in CIA under the supervision of Deputy Superintendent of Police (Det.
), in Mullanpur PP and finally in Police Station, Chamkaur Sahib, during this period of one year.
He proved a persona-non-grata everywhere and I have written complaints from ................
Superintendent of Police, Mohali, ............
Superintendent of Police (Operation), and ............... Deputy Superintendent of Police (Detective), Ropar, against him.
I see no way out in dealing with this police official except dismissing him under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
Having fully satisfied myself about the genuineness of the application of this extraordinary provision of law....." In view of the above it cannot be said that the order was passed on the mere ipse-dixit of the Station House Officer.
6.
Mr. Patwalia has placed reliance on two Bench decisions of this Court in Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(5) SLR 610 : 1996(2) SCT 87 : 1994(2) SCT 89 : 1994(1) SCT 276 and Lalji Dass v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(1) RSJ 285 : 1996(1) SCT 821 to contend that the impugned order cannot be sustained.
7.
We have perused these decisions.
In Gurdev Singh's case, it was found by the Bench that the order passed by the Superintendent of Police, "does not make any reference to the source from which the Senior Superintendent of Police has derived knowledge about the petitioner's link with extremists'.
Such is not the position in the present case.
In the detailed note, the Superintendent of Police, has referred to the reports which had been submitted to him.
In Lalji Dass's case, it was found that "the Lines Officer in his report had mentioned that he has some source of information from which it was gathered that the petitioner was having links with the terrorists.
At no stage, the statement of the Lines Officer or any other person to the effect that the petitioner was having links with the terrorists was recorded.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran, who in turn accepted the same..... no effort whatsoever was made by the Deputy Superintendent of Police or the Senior Superintendent of Police to verify the authenticity and the correctness of the contents of the report of the Lines Officer".
This case is again distinguishable on facts.
In the present case the appellant had been posted at different places.
Reports were received from different officers and it was on consideration of all the material that the impugned action was taken.
Besides this, as already mentioned, there is not even a suggestion of any bias or any extraneous consideration against the persons who had reported against the appellant or the officer who had passed the final order.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere with the view taken by a learned single Judge.
The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.