Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Head Constable in District Rewari, prays for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to depute him for the "Intermediate School Course which has commenced with effect from 1101997."
He further prays that the respondents be directed to confirm him as a Head Constable.
The respondents contest this claim.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on April 16, 1974.
He was promoted as a Head Constable on September 11, 1989.
In November 1989 district Narnaul having been reorganised, the petitioner who was posted at Rewari came to be allocated to the newly created district of Rewari.
3.
Respondent No. 4 was recruited as a Constable on March 20, 1978.
He was promoted as a Head Constable alongwith the petitioner.
In November 1989 he was posted in District Narnaul and continues to remain there.
On January 31, 1995 he was confirmed as a Head Constable.
On October 1, 1997 he was deputed for the Intermediate School Course.
4.
The petitioner complains that the action of the respondents in deputing respondent No. 4 for the course while he was ignored, is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Is it so ?
5.
Admittedly, respondent No. 4 was confirmed as a Head Constable on January 31, 1995.
This order of confirmation has not been challenged by the petitioner either on any earlier occasion or even in the present writ petition.
As against this, the petitioner is still an officiating Head Constable.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the petitioner and respondents are posted in two different districts.
Under the rules the seniority of Constables and Head Constables is required to be determined only in their respective districts.
Being in separate districts, the two persons do not have any inter se seniority.
Thus, according to the rules the petitioner who in district Rewari does not have any inter se seniority vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 who is in district Narnaul.
In case an inter se seniority list was to be prepared, the short question that would arise is - "Can a confirmed employee be junior to an officiating employee ?"
The department has taken the view that the confirmed employee shall rank senior to a person who has not yet been confirmed.
This view is based on the observations of a Full Bench of this Court in Sardul Singh Head Constable v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab and others 1970 S.L.R.
505.
In this case it was categorically held in para 15 of the judgment that "while sending the Head Constable for the Intermediate School Course, the Deputy Inspector General of Police shall first send the confirmed Head Constables and after their list is exhausted, the Head Constables on probation will be sent and last of all officiating Head Constables will be sent.
This appears to us to be the most reasonable, fair and equitable way of complying with the provisions of rule 139 of the Police Rules in the interest of all the Head Constables in the police force who legitimately aspire for promotion."
Surely, the department cannot be blamed for following the dictum laid down by the Full Bench.
6.
In view of the above, it cannot be said that the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 4 or that he was arbitrarily ignored for being deputed for the Intermediate School Course.
In fact the action of the respondents was in strict conformity with the rules and the law laid down by their Lordships in Sardul Singh's case (supra).
7.
Faced with the situation, Mr. Singla has contended that the date of confirmation cannot form the basis for determination of inter se seniority.
Learned counsel has referred to the decisions in SB Patwardhan and another v. State of Maharashtra and other, A.I.R. 1977 SC 2051, DK Mitra and others v. Union of India and others, 1985(2) SLR 791 and Shiv Kumar Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh and others, A.I.R. 1988 SC 1673.
These cases are clearly distinguishable on facts.
The observation of the Supreme Court in SB Patwardhan's case (supra) that "Rule 33, in so far as it makes seniority dependent upon the fortuitous circumstances of confirmation, is open to the same objection as Rule 8(iii) of the 1960 Rules and must be struck down for identical reasons" is really not attracted in the present case.
The decision in DK Mitra's case (supra) related to the determination of the seniority of employees in different zones of Railway and in Shiv Kumar Sharma's case (supra) the issue was regarding the effect of penalty on the determination of seniority.
These issues do not arise in the facts of the present case.
Equally it cannot be said that the view taken by the Full Bench is wrong.
In any event, this Bench is bound by the decision of the Full Bench.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.