Sat Pal, J - The Director of Industries, Punjab, Chandigarh got published advertisement in the Daily Tribune dated 1651989 (Copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-4) inviting applications inter-alia for 107 posts of Supervisors which were sanctioned for a period of eight months.
Pursuant to the said advertisement, the petitioners who were already working as Junior Field Investigators in the Department of Industries, State of Punjab applied for the posts of Supervisors.
Thereafter all the petitioners alongwith certain other candidates were appointed as Supervisors in the Industries Department, Government of Punjab under the Census Scheme.
The tenure of these posts was extended upto 3171990 and with effect from 181990 all the said 107 posts were abolished and consequently all the incumbents including the petitioners became surplus.
The petitioners were, however, appointed as Junior Field Investigator with effect from 181990, against the same posts which they were holding prior to joining the posts of Supervisor in the Industries Department.
It may be relevant to note here that the pay scale of the Field Investigator at the relevant time was 950-1800.
Some of the persons who also became surplus as a result of abolishing of 107 posts of Supervisors were, however, absorbed against the posts carrying pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 and some were absorbed on the posts carrying pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200.
The petitioners, therefore, also represented to the State Government that since some of the employees who like the petitioners had also become surplus as a result of abolishing 107 posts of Supervisors, have been absorbed on the posts carrying higher scales, as mentioned herein above, they should also be considered and absorbed against the posts carrying the higher scales.
Since the request of the petitioners was rejected by the State Government, the present writ petition was filed by the petitioners.
2.
Written statement on behalf of the official respondents has been filed.
In the written statement, inter-alia, it has been contended by the official respondents that the other persons who had been adjusted against the posts carrying higher scale, were rendered surplus as a result of abolishing of 107 posts of Supervisors but the petitioners were never rendered surplus as a result of abolishing of those posts but on the contrary they were reverted to their original posts of Junior Field Investigator which they were holding when they were appointed as Supervisor.
3.
Mr. Chopra, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submits that the point raised in this writ petition is squarely covered by a judgement dated 17101996 which was rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 17266 of 1995 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
355, Devinder Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others and other connected writ petitions.
He submits that in those writ petitions the respondents were directed to consider the cases of the petitioners for absorption etc. on suitable posts carrying pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 or Rs. 1800-3200 afresh commensurate to their qualification which they possessed at the time of retrenchment from the industries department.
4.
Mr. Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General, however, submits that case of the petitioners is distinguishable inasmuch as the petitioners were never rendered surplus as a result of abolishing of 107 posts of Supervisor but on the contrary they were reverted to their original posts of Junior Field Investigator which they were holding when they were appointed as Supervisor in the industry department.
5.
I have given my careful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel of the parties and have perused the record.
It is not disputed that the petitioners like other candidates had applied for the posts of Supervisor in the industry department pursuant to an advertisement (copy annexure P-4) and they alongwith other candidates were considered and selected for the posts of Supervisors.
It is also not disputed before me that the petitioners were not having any lien on the posts of Junior Field Investigator which they were holding prior to joining the posts of Supervisor in the industry department.
In view of these facts the petitioners alongwith other incumbents of 107 posts of Supervisors became surplus on 181990 when the said 107 posts of Supervisors were abolished.
It was sheer matter of chance that they were adjusted against the posts of Junior Field Investigator after abolishing of the said posts whereas some other incumbents of the said posts of Supervisors, were adjusted in the other departments.
Keeping in view these facts, there is no merit in the contention raised by the learned Deputy Advocate General that the petitioners were reverted to the posts of Junior Field Investigator with effect from 181990.
In fact the question of reversion of the petitioners does not arise as they were never promoted to the posts of Supervisor but on the contrary, as stated hereinabove, they were appointed pursuant to an advertisement (copy Annexure P-4) alongwith other candidates.
6.
In view of the facts stated hereinabove, I am of the opinion that the point raised in this writ petition is squarely covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Devinder Singh and others (supra).
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed with a direction that the respondents shall consider the case of the petitioners for absorption on suitable posts carrying pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 or Rs. 1800-3200 afresh commensurate to their qualifications which they possessed on 3171990.
Appropriate orders shall be passed by the competent authority within four months of the submission of the certified copy of this judgment by the petitioner.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.