TS Doabia, J - The petitioner was appointed as a teacher.
He was appointed on probation.
He was supposed to impart education in the disciplines of Math and Physics.
His services were brought to an end within the period of probation.
This happened on 1831996.
The order passed reads as under :  "You have been found totally misfit for the post of TGT (Phy/Maths) during your period of probation.
As such, the Directorate General Border Security Force has decided to terminate your services with immediate effect.
Hence, I hereby terminate your services by giving you one month notice as per the terms and conditions of your appointment with effect from the date of this letter."
A perusal of the aforementioned order indicates that the services of the petitioner were brought to an end as these were found to be not satisfactory.
Therefore, the order Annexure P-2 is the simple order and does not impose any stigma on the petitioner.
It cannot be said that this order visits him with evil consequences.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submits that as in the counter filed by the respondents, some reasons have been given, these should be looked into and the order should be held as penal.
The reasons given in the counter are :  (i) That the petitioner cannot impart education in the medium of English.
(ii) That he was shifted from the discipline of Math to the discipline of Physics and even in this discipline he was found wanting.
I am of the opinion that the reasons given in the counter are the basis which led the competent authority to come to the conclusion that services of the petitioner were not satisfactory and these reasons would not make the simple order of discharge as penal.
Discharge of probationer in terms of the condition of employment is valid.
See following decisions :  Hukam Chand Khundia v. Chandigarh Administration, 1996(1) SCT 478, Oil and Natural Gas Commission and others v. Dr. Md S Iskander Ali, AIR 1980 SC 1242, The Union of India and others v. PS Bhatt, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 957, Unit Trust of India and others v. T Bijaya Kumar and another, 1993(2) SCT 63(SC) : JY 1992(6) SC 82 and M Venugopal v. The Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, Machilipatnum Andhra Pradesh and another, JT 1994(1) SC 281 : 1994(1) SCT 858.
Therefore, when in the exercise of powers conferred on the Competent Authority and in terms of the letter of appointment, the service of the petitioner were brought to an end, then order of termination cannot be faulted.
This petition is found to be without any merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.