NK Sodhi, J - Challenge in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is to the promotion of respondent 3 to the post of Principal, Government Polytechnic on the ground that she is ineligible.
2.
Facts that are necessary for the decision of this case may first be noticed.
3.
The three petitioners are working as Heads of Departments in Mechanical Engineering, Automobile Engineering and Electronics respectively whereas respondent 3 was working as Head of the Department in Applied Sciences.
They are all members of the Haryana Technical Education Department (Group-A) Service which is governed by the Rules framed by the Governor of Haryana under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution called the Haryana Technical Education Department (Group-A) Service Rules, 1986 (for short the Rules).
These Rules regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the service which comprises the posts shown in Appendix-A to the Rules and that includes the posts held by the petitioners and respondent 3.
The Technical Education Department of the Haryana Government is running various Polytechnics/Institutions in the State which are Engineering Polytechnics/Institutions and non-Engineering Polytechnics/Institutions.
A Polytechnic having more than 60% non-Engineering courses is declared as non-Engineering Polytechnic while the others are treated as Engineering Trades.
Recruitment to the service in the case of Principals of Polytechnics offering diplomas in Engineering Trades and non-Engineering diplomas is governed by Rule 9 of the Rules the relevant part of which reads as under:-  "9.
(1) Recruitment to the service shall be made:  (a) in the case of Director ........ (b) in the case of Additional Director ........ (c) in the case of Principals of Polytechnics/Technical Institutions offering diplomas in Engineering Trades - (i) 75% by promotion from amongst Heads of Department in Engineering; and (ii) 25% by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an officer already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
(d) in the case of Principals of Polytechnics/Technical Institutions offering non-Engineering diplomas, -  (i) 75% by promotion from amongst Heads of Department in Pharmacy/Library Science/Commercial Practice and Stenography/Management; and (ii) 25% by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an officer already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
(e) ..................  to  (z) .................."  4.
A perusal of the aforesaid Rule makes it clear that Principals of Polytechnics offering diplomas in Engineering Trades are appointed by promotion to the extent of 75% from amongst the Heads of Department in Engineering and the remaining 25% by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation.
Similarly, Principals of a Polytechnic offering non-Engineering diplomas are appointed by promotion to the extent of 75% from amongst the Heads of Department in Pharmacy/Library Science/Commercial Practice and Stenography/Management and the remaining 25% by direct recruitment or by transfer or deputation.
Respondent 3 before her promotion as Principal of Polytechnic was working as Head of the Department of Applied Sciences.
Treating that Department as a Department in Engineering the Secretary to Government, Haryana Technical Education Department as per his order dated 491996 promoted respondent 3 to the post of Principal in the pay scale of Rs. 4,100-5,300 + 200 Special Pay and posted her at Government Polytechnic, Manesar against a vacant post.
This promotion was made under Rule 9(1)(c) of the Rules.
It is this order that has been impugned in the present petition on the ground that the Department of Applied Sciences is not a Department in Engineering and, therefore, this respondent was not eligible for promotion as Principal of Polytechnic under Rule 9(1)(c) of the Rules as that promotion could be made only from amongst the Heads of Departments in Engineering.
It is also urged on behalf of the petitioners that respondent 3 was not eligible even for promotion as Principal of a Polytechnic offering non-Engineering diplomas as that promotion too could be made only from amongst the Heads of Department in Pharmacy/Library Science/Commercial Practice and Stenography/Management and that this respondent was not heading any of these departments.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, the promotion of respondent 3 is sought to be justified on the basis of an order passed by this court while disposing of civil writ petition 16160 of 1990 decided on 2531991 wherein it was observed that the petitioners therein who were Heads of Departments in Applied Sciences belonged to the Engineering side and could not claim promotion on the non-Engineering side.
In a separate written statement filed by respondent 3, the claim of the petitioners has been controverted.
It is pleaded that she was eligible for promotion as a Principal of the Polytechnic offering diplomas in Engineering Trades as the Department of Applied Sciences is a Department in Engineering.
The learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of this respondent strenuously contended that since the Department of Applied Sciences was not one of the Departments mentioned in clause 9(1)(d)(i) of the Rules, it must, therefore, be treated as Department in Engineering.
The argument indeed is that the Rule-making authority has specified the non-Engineering Departments in Rule 9(1)(d)(i) of the Rules thereby making its intention clear that all other Departments would be Departments in Engineering within the ambit of clause (c)(i) of Rule 9(1).
It is also contended that respondent 3 was promoted in September, 1996 whereas the writ petition was filed in May, 1997 and that it suffers from laches and is liable to be dismissed on that ground as well.
6.
We have heard counsel for the parties and from their rival stands the sole question that arises for our consideration is whether the Department of Applied Sciences is a Department in Engineering so as to make its Head eligible for promotion to the post of a Principal of a Polytechnic offering diplomas in Engineering Trades.
When the case came up for hearing before us on 2721998, we directed respondent 2 to file an affidavit stating in detail the various departments which offered diplomas in Engineering Trades and whether the Department of Applied Sciences could be treated as a Department in Engineering.
The Director, Technical Education, Haryana has filed an affidavit stating that the term Applied Sciences comprises the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics and English and that these subjects are taught to the students in the first year of 3/3/4 years diploma course in various branches of Engineering.
It is stated that the Department of Applied Sciences is not treated as a Department in the Engineering Trades and that this Department is only an ancillary Department to help the students in the first year of training to grasp the various concepts of Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics to enable them to understand Engineering subjects in the subsequent years of their training.
The subject of English is being taught in the first year because the medium of instruction of all the Engineering/Non- Engineering courses is English.
It has further been brought out that no Polytechnic/Institution run by the Department of Technical Education is offering any diploma in Applied Sciences.
It is further stated that there is no such trade as Applied Sciences and the Department of Applied Sciences does not offer any diploma in any trade-Engineering or non-Engineering.
The affidavit filed by the Director, Technical Education is quite exhaustive, logical and enlightening on the controversy and there is nothing on the record for us to hold to the contrary.
We are, therefore, of the firm view that the Department of Applied Sciences is not a Department in Engineering and, therefore, a Head of that department is not eligible for promotion as a Principal of a Polytechnic offering diplomas in Engineering Trades.
A plain reading of clause (d) of Rule 9(1) also makes it clear that Head of that Department is also not eligible for promotion to the post of a Principal of Polytechnic offering non-Engineering diplomas because the Department of Applied Sciences is not one of those mentioned in clause (d)(i) from amongst the Heads of which promotion can be made to the post of a Principal.
In the result, it has to be held that respondent 3 who was Head of the Department of Applied Sciences was not eligible for promotion to the post of Principal under clause (c) of Rule 9(1) of the Rules.
7.
The argument of the learned counsel for respondent 3 that since the Department of Applied Sciences is not mentioned in clause (d)(i), it should be presumed to be included in the Departments in Engineering so as to make its Head eligible for promotion under clause 9(1)(c) of the Rules has no merit.
It is true that in the case of Principals of Polytechnics offering non-Engineering diplomas the promotion can be made only from amongst the Heads of Departments in Pharmacy/Library Science/Commercial Practice and Stenography/Management but mention of these Departments in clause (d)(i) does not mean that all other Departments are Departments in Engineering.
Clause (c) and clause (d) are independent of each other.
Clause (c) deals with promotion to the post of Principal of a Polytechnic offering diplomas in Engineering Trades and only Heads of the Departments in Engineering have been made eligible for such promotion.
In the case of Principals of Polytechnics offering non-Engineering diplomas only Heads of a few departments specifically referred to in clause (d)(i) are eligible for promotion.
A Head of the Department of Applied Sciences is not eligible for promotion as Principal of a Polytechnic whether it offers diplomas in Engineering Trades or non-Engineering Trades.
8.
Respondents 1 and 2 in their written statement have sought to justify the impugned order of promotion of the basis of the order passed by this court in Smt. Indra Vij and another v. State of Haryana and others, 2004(1) S.C.T.
345, civil writ petition 4717 of 1990 decided on 2531991.
Respondent 3 herein was one of the petitioners in that case.
The two Heads of the Departments in Applied Sciences filed that petition challenging the vires of Rule 9(1)(d) on the ground that Heads of only a few non-Engineering diploma courses like Pharmacy/Library Science/Commercial Practice and Stenography/Management were eligible for promotion under Rule 9(1)(d) of the Rules and, therefore, the Rule was discriminatory and arbitrary in its application.
While upholding the vires of the Rule and dismissing the writ petition in limine, we observed that the petitioners therein who belonged to the Engineering side could claim consideration for promotion on that side.
The issue whether Department of Applied Sciences was a Department in Engineering was neither raised in the writ petition nor was it canvassed before us and our observations cannot be understood to mean that we recorded a positive finding that the said Department was a Department in Engineering.
It is in the present case that the issue has been specifically raised and having examined the same, we have held that the Department of Applied Sciences is neither a trade in Engineering or non-Engineering and nor does it offer any diplomas and, therefore, it cannot be regarded as a Department in Engineering.
9.
As regards delay, we are of the opinion that in the circumstances of the present case, it is not such so as to non-suit the petitioners.
Respondent 3 has been promoted to the post to which she is not eligible under the Rules and we are, therefore, constrained to quash her appointment.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 491996 promoting respondent 3 to the post of Principal, Government Polytechnic quashed.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.