RM Prasad, J - This writ petition is directed against the order of the Rail SP, Muzaffarpur, contained in Annexure 2, dismissing the petitioner from service and the order of the D.I.G., Railway Police, Patna and the order passed by the D.G.P., contained in Annexures 3 and 4 respectively, affirming the order of dismissal passed by the Rail SP, Muzaffarpur.
2.
In short, the facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as Constable on 7.1.1984.
While he was posted at GRP, Narkatiyaganj on 27.8.1990, he was charged with unauthorised absence from duty and during the period of his unauthorised absence travelling in first class compartment with an illicit woman unauthorisedly.
The further charge against him is that he while travelling fought with students travelling in the said compartment which led to cutting off vacuum and delaying the train by 40 minutes.
During the said period, the petitioner reported as `sick' but he was found travelling with the said woman in the first class compartment unauthorisedly.
Accordingly, charge was framed and a full-fledged departmental enquiry was conducted by the conducting officer who submitted his report and on examination of the entire materials, the impugned order, contained in Annexure was passed by the Rail SP, Muzaffarpur.
The petitioner being aggrieved filed appeal before the DIG Rail, who affirmed the order of the SP, vide Annexure 3.
The petitioner filed memorial before the D.G.P.
who also affirmed the orders passed by the SP and D.I.G., vide Annexure 4, which has been impugned alongwith Annexures 2 and 3 in the present writ petition.
3.
A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of the SP Rail, Muzaffarpur (respondent No. 4).
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the impugned orders have been passed in utter violation of the principles of natural justice and the relevant rules relating to departmental proceeding inasmuch as the complainant has not been examined and the document relied upon by the enquiry officer was not supplied to the petitioner.
It was also contended that the witnesses examined are not the eye-witnesses and competent to substantiate the charge, yet the disciplinary authority by placing reliance on such hearsay witnesses has held the petitioner guilty of the charges.
5.
I do not find any substance in the said submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
It is not the case of the petitioner that he ever asked for any document and was not supplied.
In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of respondent No. 4 it has specifically been stated that the petitioner never asked for the document and that he never filed a petition for supply of exhibits.
The petitioner received a copy of the charge report but never raised any objection before the higher authority with respect to non-supply of documents/exhibits, rather he cross-examined the witnesses who proved those exhibits.
It is further stated that no request to mark the defence documents as exhibits was made as is evident from the record of the departmental proceeding.
The only defence filed on behalf of the petitioner was by way of show cause.
6.
It was contended on behalf of the State that in any view of the matter, this much evidence of the guard witness cannot be denied that the petitioner was unauthorisedly present in the train and that near Kanti Railway Station the train was detained for 42 minutes on account of quarrel taking place at the instance of this petitioner.
It was further contended that the enquiry report and the documents on record were fully considered by all the authorities while passing the impugned orders and it was found that the conduct of the petitioner was not such to continue him in police service.
7.
I find substance in the submissions of the learned Counsel for the State.
A bare perusal of the order of the disciplinary authority, contained in Annexure 2, clearly shows that by reporting `sick' on 27.8.1990 and without taking permission or sanction of leave he unauthorisedly absented from Narkatiyaganj Police Station and on 29.8.1990 he was found travelling with some illicit woman in first class compartment unauthorisedly.
Earlier also the petitioner ten times unauthorisedly absented from duty.
The appellate authority as well as the D.G.P.
have also considered the enquiry report and the other documents and affirmed the order of the disciplinary authority in which no legal infirmity has been pointed out by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
8.
It was also contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the charges are barred under Section 42 of the Police Act as the proceeding was initiated after the expiry of three months from completion of the alleged act committed by the petitioner.
In this regard he placed reliance on a decision of the Apex Court in the case of Pritam Singh v. State of Haryana, reported in AIR 1973 SC 1354.
9.
I am unable to accept the said submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
Section 42 of the Police Act deals with prosecution against any person which may be lawfully brought for something to be done or intended to be done by him under the provisions of the said Act or under the general police powers for which three months' limitation has been prescribed.
It does not deal with initiation of a departmental proceeding against police personnel.
In the case before the Supreme Court, referred to above, the accused challenged the judgment and order confirming the conviction and sentence passed against him for an offence under Section 29 of the Police Act and in that context it was held that the prosecution against the appellant had been commenced beyond the period of three months and as such it was barred by limitation under Section 42 of the said Act.
10.
The instant case is not a case where any prosecution has been launched against the petitioner.
As such, in my opinion, Section 42 of the Police Act has got no application to the facts of this case.
11.
Accordingly, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed, but without costs.
Petition dismissed.