M.H.S.
Ansari, J - Heard Sri K Vasudeva Reddy, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Sri K Srinivasa Murthy, learned Counsel for the Respondent, none having appeared for Respondent No. 2.
2.
The above writ petition is filed for a direction to the respondent to appoint the petitioner in any suitable post.
The said appointment is sought on compassionate grounds.
The petitioner's elder brother Late Sri Pakala Ravi expired on 971993 in a road accident leaving behind him surviving his wife Smt. Sulochana and a minor daughter, mother (Smt. P Kanakamma), who is working as general mazdoor in the respondent organisation and a brother -petitioner herein.
3.
The claim of the petitioner is resisted mainly on two grounds viz., (1) the deceased's widow Smt. Sulochana (Respondent No. 2) applied for payment of Rs. 50,000/- in relinquishment of her right of employment as defendant of the deceased, and (2) that the mother of the petitioner herein Smt. P Kanakamma is working in the respondent organisation since 1984, the petitioner is not dependant of the deceased employee.
4.
It is the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner that as per the scheme obtaining in the respondent organisation for compassionate appointment, the Company has to provide employment to one male dependant of the worker.
The term, "male dependant" has been defined in the said scheme as under:  "The term `male dependant', for all purposes of dependant employment, will mean son, son-in-law and younger brother of the worker.
Adopted sons will not be eligible.
The defendant to be considered for employment should be physically fit, suitable for employment underground and aged between 18 and 35 years."
The scheme also provides as under:  "Where the deceased or permanently disabled worker has no male dependant of the above description and only a female dependant, as defined under NCWA-IV, is available for employment, the company will pay lumpsum monetary benefit of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand only) to the female dependant, in lieu of employment".
5.
The petitioner does not appear to have any cordial relation with the widow (Respondent No. 2) of the deceased and has strongly objected to the respondent offering monetary benefit to the widow of the deceased.
There is nothing in the conduct of the petitioner to suggest that the petitioner would provide any maintenance to the widow or the minor daughter of the deceased if the employment is offered to the petitioner in lieu of the monetary benefit of Rs. 50,000/- claimed by the widow of the deceased.
6.
The very object of providing appointment on compassionate basis is to alleviate the hardship caused to the family on account of the sudden death of the bread winner in the family.
The compassionate appointment is not to be construed as another mode of recruitment.
Before a compassionate appointment can be offered, the person claiming such appointment should satisfy the twin test viz, (1) that he was dependant upon the deceased, and (2) that the family of the deceased would be provided with a bread winner, if appointment is offered to the claimant.
7.
In case of the widow or the lineal descendants of the deceased employee, the twin tests can be satisfied without much difficulty save in exceptional cases.
But in case of other relatives claiming compassionate appointment, the need to satisfy the twin tests is all the more obvious and necessary for fulfilling the object and intendment of providing such compassionate appointment.
8.
No doubt, in the case on hand, as per the scheme obtaining in the respondent organisation, a younger brother as also a son-in-law of a deceased employee come within the definition of a dependant.
It is in these cases that the requirement of satisfying the twin test, referred to above, is essential so that the family of the deceased is not without a bread winner.
9.
The petitioner is the younger brother of the deceased worker.
His mother Smt. P Kanakamma is already an employee in the respondent organisation.
The petitioner may therefore more fittingly be classified as a dependant on his mother.
As already noticed, the petitioner has not been able to satisfy this Court either through the pleadings on record or by his conduct that the family of the deceased would be looked after and provided for if appointment on compassionate basis is granted to the petitioner.
The allegations made by the widow of the deceased against the petitioner are to the contra as can be seen from the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent-Management as also in the Writ Petition No. 19906 of 1994 filed by the widow of the deceased.
The relevant portion of the averments made in that writ petition have been extracted in the counter affidavit regarding the threat to her life from the petitioner.
10.
What is more significant is that in the writ petition as also in the reply affidavit filed by the petitioner, the particulars of the family or dependants of the deceased neither have been furnished nor stated.
Whether the deceased died leaving behind a widow and a minor daughter, particulars regarding them have not been stated.
The widow of the deceased was also not impleaded as a party to the above writ petition in the first instance and was only impleaded by orders dated 8121995.
What is, however, stated in the affidavit of the petitioner is that,  "as a result of untimely death of my brother, myself and my whole family left with no source of income".
In the reply affidavit, the claim made by the Respondent No. 2 (widow) for the monetary benefit of Rs. 50,000/- has been contested on the ground that she has no right to claim either employment or monetary benefit.
How is the widow and minor daughter of the deceased to teke out their livelihood seems of no concern to the petitioner.
11.
It was submitted before Court, that the widow of the deceased has since remarried during the pendency of the above writ petition and is living separately.
Reliance was placed on the affidavit filed by the said widow (Respondent No. 2) in support of her impleading petition disclosing her intention not to claim any amount or to providing compassionate appointment to the petitioner.
No reference had, however, been made about the minor daughter of the deceased and about her welfare, by the petitioner.
12.
No doubt, subsequent events can be taken into consideration.
If the Respondent Company declines to make payment of the monetary benefit to the widow of the deceased on the said ground, that would be altogether a different matter with which we are not concerned in the present writ proceedings.
The said ground, however, would not entitle the petitioner to claim as of right, appointment on compassionate grounds unless the petitioner fulfils the requirements adverted to supra.
As already noticed, the petitioner's mother is already an employee in the respondent organisation.
There is remote possibility of the petitioner providing any assistance to the widow or the minor daughter of the deceased employee.
13.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the petitioner has made out a case for grant of compassionate appointment.
The above writ petition accordingly deserves to be dismissed and be and is hereby dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.