HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner VK Vohra was appointed as an Accounts Clerk in the Border Area Project, Hussainiwala, vide appointment letter dated 25th July, 1980, Annexure P-1 to the petition.
The petitioner's case is that the Border Area Project, Hussainwala (District Ferozepur) is a voluntary organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1960, and one of the 12 projects managed by the Central Government.
The appointment of the staff and the administrative control of this project vests in the Chairman, Punjab State Social Welfare Advisory Board, Sector 35, Chandigarh (hereinafter called `the Board').
It is the admitted case that the appointing authority for the staff was the Chariman of the Board.
The Secretary, Punjab State Social Welfare Advisory Board, issued a letter vide which the services of the petitioner were temporarily transferred from the Border Area Project Hussainiwala to the Board office in Sector 35, Chandigarh.
It was clarified in the said order that the duties in the Board would be in addition to the work that had been entrusted to him as an Accounts Clerk in the Border Area Project.
The Secretary of the Board issued a circular letter dated 20121991, Annexure P-3 to the petition by which applications were invited for filling one permanent post of Assistant/Accountant in the Board, from amongst the staff working in the Border Area Project in the State of Punjab.
The petitioner being fully eligible for the post applied for the same and was duly selected and appointed as Accountant (Senior Assistant, Accounts) on permanent basis vide letter dated 10.4.1992, Annexure-P-4 to the petition.
In this letter, it was specifically mentioned that the petitioner had been permanently appointed in the Board with immediated effect and his services would be governed by the Rules and Regulations of the State of Punjab/State Board.
The petitioner continued to work in the Board from 15.4.1992 till 12.9.1996 when the Chairman of the Board vide the impugned order No. 2767 Annexure P-5 to the petitioners ordered the reversion of the petitioner from the post of Senior Assistant, Accounts to the post of Account Clerk and posted him once again at the Border Area Project, Hussainiwala.
It appears from the pleadings that the aforesaid action had been taken on the direction of the Executive Director of the Central Social Welfare Board, New Delhi, who vide his letter dated 29.8.1996 Annexure P-6 to the petitioner had directed the Chairman of the Board to reinstate one Kirpal Singh respondent No. 4 as Accountant and to revert the petitioner so as to make way for him.
Kirpal Singh aforesaid had apparently been dismissed from the service of the Board on 13121991 vide Annexure P-7 on account of serious misconduct.
He had, thereafter, filed representation before various officers of the Punjab Government as also to the Chief Minister, Punjab.
The representation filed by him directly to the Chief Minister, Punjab, was received in the office of the Board on 2751993 with an endorsement in the hands of the Chief Minister to" examine and reinstate."
A copy of the representation has been appended as Annexure P-9 to the petition.
The Secretary of the Board, thereafter, sent a note dated 171993 Annexure P-10 to the petition to the Chairperson of the Central Social Welfare Board, New Delhi, on 171993 in which she pointed out that the Chairperson of the Board, Mrs. Satinder Kaur Nabha had expressed her inability to reinstate respondent No. 4 and one Shangara Singh, but she was being pressurised in the matter by Mrs. Rajinder Kaur Bhattal, a Minister on the asking of the Chief Minister, and that Mrs. Bhattal had hinted that Mrs. Nabha was perhaps not fit enough to hold her office.
The Officer on Special Duty with the Board Mr. AK Gupta-respondent No. 3 however, issued three orders on 721995 :-  (a) reinstating Kirpal Singh-respondent No. 4 with immediate effect (Annexure P-11/1)  (b) posting him in the Board's officer (Annexure P-11/2)  (c) directing him to reply to the charge-sheet dated 29.10.1990 that had been served on him so that further action in the matter could be taken which could also lead to the dropping of the charges, in case, the circumstances so warrant (Annexure P-11/3)  A copy of the order Annexure P-11/1 was also endorsed to the Secretary to the Chief Minister.
The orders Annexures P-5, 6, 11/1 and 11/2 have been impugned in the present writ petition on the ground that as the petitioner had been appointed on a permanent basis, he could not have been removed therefrom and that the Central Social Welfare Board, Delhi, could not vide Annexure P-6 direct the Board to reinstate respondent No. 4 as it had no legal authority to do so and that the reinstatment of Kirpal Singh-respondent No. 4 had been ordered by the Secretary, who was not so authorised and that even otherwise the action was unsustainable as it was on account of the directive issued by the Chief Minister on the representation Annexure P-5 that the said order had been made.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and various replied have been filed.
The Board has filed its reply in which the broad facts have been admitted, and the reinstatement of respondent No. 4 Kirpal Singh has been sought to be justified by stating that he had been dismissed from service without following the procedure as visualised by Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules (1970) (hereinafter called `the Rules') and it was primarily this fact that had influenced respondent No. 3 Mr. AK Gupta to make the order of reinstatement.
It has also been pleaded that vide Annexure P-8, respondent No. 3 AK Gupta had been given administrative control over the employees of the Board and was thus authorised to adjudicate on the appeal filed by Kirpal-respondent No. 4 and as such he was competent to make the order Annexure P-11/1 and that the said order having been subsequently ratified by the Board, the defect, if any, stood cured.
Respondent No. 4 Kirpal Singh has taken a similar stand in the written statement filed by him.
3.
Mr. Chatrath, the learned senior counsel appearing in support of this petition has pointed out first and foremost that no appeal had been filed by respondent No. 4 and even otherwise, respondent No. 3 AK Gupta had no authority to make the order Annexure P-11/1 or any consequential orders as he had not been conferred the powers of the Appellate Authority.
He has also pointed out that even assuming for a moment that the order did have the sanction of law, it had been passed on account of the acute bias in favour of Kirpal Singh-respondent No. 4 on the basis of the interest shown by the Chief Minister and by Mrs. Rajinder Kaur Bhattal and for this admitted reason, it could not be justified.
4.
As against this, Mr. MM Kumar, and Mr. Navkiran Singh, the learned counsel representing the respondents have pointed out that the petitioner was not entitled to any relief whatsoever as he had managed to secure the confidential records of the Board and to put the same on the file of the petition.
On facts, it has been urged that the dismissal of respondent No. 4 had been made in violation of the Rules and as such it had been rightly set aside on the representation filed by the him leading to the reversion of the petitioner to accommodate the said respondent in the same post that he had earlier been occupying.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record carefully.
6.
Without going into this controversy, as to whether respondent No. 4 had filed an appeal or not the question shall remains as to whether AK Gupta, respondent No. 3 was competent to pass an order on representation assuming that an appeal had been duly filed.
The document on which the parties have placed reliance with regard to the authority of respondent No. 3 to hear this appeal, is to be found from Annexure P-8 a letter addressed by the Central Social Welfare Board New Delhi to the Board.
The contents of the said documents are reproduced below :-  ``2.
In continuation of this office order of even number dated 12th July, 1994 and also in modification of para 2 of the said order, the financial and administrative powers of the Chairman, Punjab State Social Welfare Advisory Board, are hereby withdrawn with immediate effect.
All financial and administrative powers pertaining to the functioning of the Punjab State Board as well as implementation of Board's programmes would not be vested in Shri AK Gupta, Officer on Special Duty, with immediate effect and until further orders.
Decision of any major financial and administrative matter pertaining to the State Board would be taken by the OSD in consultation with the Central Social Welfare Board.
Bank Account will now be operated under the joint signature of OSD Sh. AK Gupta and Secretary Sh. AK Ranga.
The above arrangement has been made on the advise of State Government of Punjab."
7.
It is conceded before me that as per the rules governing the functioning of the Board, the Appellate Authority with respect to the order that had been passed dismissing respondent No. 4 from service was the Board.
To my mind, Annexure P-8 was an authority conferred on AK Gupta respondent No. 3 of the powers that had earlier vested in the Chairperson of the Board and this document cannot be read to mean that appellate power of the Board had also been vested in the said respondent.
A reading of Annexure P-8 would further show that the power that had been delegated was financial and administrative but in major financial and administrative matter pertaining to the Board that authority had to be exercised in consultation with the Central Social Welfare Board.
I am also of the opinion that major financial and administrative matters such as the reinstatment of a dismissed employee after a period of four years was a major financial and administrative matter and could not have been taken without consultation with the Central Board.
8.
I am further of the opinion that the order Annexure P-11/1 dated 721995, ordering the reinstatement of respondent No. 4 cannot be sustained as it suffers from acute bias and outside influence on a matter which was essentially quasi-judicial in nature.
It will be seen that this respondent had made a representation dated 2751993 Annexure P-9 to the then Chief Minister, Punjab, S Beant Singh and he had forwarded the matter on the same day to the Chairman of the Board with the observations "to examine and reinstate."
The matter was, thereafter, put up before Mrs. Satinder Kaur Nabha, on the same day and she noted. "
Please write to the Chairman of Social Welfare Advisory Board forwarding this application and asking for the reply."
It would be evident from Annexure P-10, an office note put up by Mrs. Surinder Kaur Atwal Secretary of the Board in which it was pointed out that undue influence was being imposed on Mrs. Satinder kaur Nabha so as to reinstate respondent No. 4 and one Shingara Singh another employee of the Board, who too had been dismissed from service.
It is also evident from Annexure P-10 that Mr. Bhattal, who was Cabinet Minister had, in fact, held out a threat to Mrs. Nabha as well.
However, from the order Annexure P-11/1 it is evident that it had been passed in compliance with the orders of the Chief Minister, Punjab dated 27th May, 1993.
Mr. Kumar, the learned counsel representing the Board has produced before me a note purporting to have been recorded by Mr. AK Gupta-respondent No. 3 on 2nd February, 1995 detailing reasons that had impelled him to pass the order Annexure P-11/1.
The authenticity of this note has been seriously challenged by the petitioner's counsel, but assuming that it had been recorded on the due date, it is evident that his factor did not weigh with respondent No. 3 as he had passed the order Annexure P-11/1 on the direction of the Chief Minister.
9.
Mr. MM Kumar, the learned counsel has, however, argued that various confidential documents and more particularly Annexures P-9 and P-10 that had been put on record by the petitioner, has been obviously obtained in an improper way and as the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Puranjit Singh v. Union Territory of Chandigarh and others, 1994(5) SLR, 280 had deprecated such a practice they should not be taken note of.
To my mind, this judgment has no bearing on the facts of the present case.
In the cited case, the petitioner Puranjit Singh had placed reliance on certain notings on the file in order to bolster his claim to promotion.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that as these notings could not confer any right on the petitioner (Puranjit Singh) in the absence of a specific order in his favour by the competent authority they could not taken into account.
In the case before me today, however, the entire case of the petitioner stems from the bias that has stood in favour of respondent No. 4.
To my mind, in such a case, the documents which have been produced are not only relevant but have a significant bearing on the outcome of this case.
For the reasons set out above, this petition is allowed and the orders Annexures P-5, P-6, P-11/1 and P-11/2 are quashed.
It is further directed that the enquiry against respondent No. 4 which had been ordered to continue by virtue of Annexure P-11/3, shall be conducted by the Chairman of the Board.
The petitioner shall also have his costs which are determined at Rs. 5,000/- to be paid by respondent No. 3 AK Gupta personally.
It is further directed that enquiry against respondent No. 4 shall be completed within a period of six months from the date that a copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
Petition allowed.