HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The Punjabi University Patiala, conducted a common Entrance Examination known the PMT for admission to the M.B.B.S, BDS and BAMS Courses in the State of Punjab, on the basis of a prospectus issued for that purpose.
Clause 3 of the prospectus provided that the applications were to be received by May 3, 1997 and Clause 3.4(c) further stipulated that the applications received after the prescribed dates would not be entertained and would be rejected without intimation to the candidates.
The petitioner and respondents No. 8 and 9 hereinafter called the private respondents filed their applications in terms of Clause 7 of the prospectus wherein it was provided that 2% of the seats were to be reserved as the Defence Quota.
The petitioner and the private respondents appeared in the PMT.
Examination and on the declaration of the result, the petitioner got 608 marks whereas respondents No. 8 and 9 secured 380 and 516 marks respectively.
The petitioner, however, was not granted admission in the MBBS as per her merit in the Defence Quota whereas the private respondents were granted admission on the basis that even amongst this category, preferences had been set out and as they fell within Category G-1 given in Clause 7 i.e. being the children of defence personnel who had either been killed or disabled to the extent of 50% or more in action, and that this Category was to be given preference over the petitioners Category G-3 i.e. the children of serving/ex-servicemen.
The petitioner's father, thereafter, submitted a representation dated 7.9.1997 Annexure P-3 to the petition pointing out that the late Major MS Sekhon, father of respondent No. 8 had died due to Meningitis, while he was on leave and being an officer of the 61st Cavalry, which was a Unit used for ceremonial functions, it could not be said that he had been killed in-action.
As the representation bore no fruit, the present writ petition has been filed.
2.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents and various replies have put in on their behalf.
The broad facts as they have been stated, have not been refuted, though an inference which is at variance with the petitioner's case has been attempted.
It has been pointed out by respondent No. 1 to 4 in their reply that the private respondents had claimed reservation under Category G-1 and having been found to be under that category, they had a preferential right to admission over the petitioner who was in Category G-3.
Respondents No. 5 and 6 have also filed their reply and it has been pleaded that late Major MS Sekhon had expired on 4.1.1989 while on active service with 61 Cavalry and as per Certificates Annexures R-1 and R-2, the widow of the deceased had been sanctioned Special Family Pension on account of the fact that his death was attributable to military service (on active service).
Respondent No. 8 has also filed his reply and it has been pointed out that the writ petition ought to be dismissed on the short ground that it had been filed belatedly.
It has also been pleaded that the said respondent had been selected for admission in the MBBS Course in the Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla and he had given up this seat on 5th November, 1997 to join the Medical College, Patiala and that the seat vacated by him in Shimla had since been allotted to some one else.
It has, accordingly, been prayed that in this set of circumstances, the admission granted to him at Patiala should not be disturbed for this reason as well.
On merits, it has been pleaded that late Major MS Sekhon had a very good career while in service and had fallen down from a horse and had died thereafter on account of those injuries leaving behind a young family and as his death could be attributable to military service, respondent No. 8's categorisation was fully justified.
A similar stand has been taken by respondent No. 9 in his written statement and it has been pleaded that the disability suffered by his father which had impaired his hearing ability and led to his premature retirement from the Army, was on account of active service in the Gulmarg area of Jammu and Kashmir in the year 1977.
3.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, the learned counsel for the petitioner has raised various arguments before me.
He has pointed out that as per the conditions laid down in the prospectus, the applications complete in all particulars were to be filed before the 3rd May, 1997 and as the certificates relevant to their reserved category that is Annexure P-1 pertaining to respondent No. 8 and Annexure P-2 to respondent No. 9 had admittedly been filed long after the date, they could not be entertained.
He has in addition urged that even accepting that these certificates could have been taken into account, yet, it could not be said that the death/disability had been caused in-action and as such, they could not be categorised as Category G-1.
4.
As against this, it has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents that the writ petition had been filed belatedly and as some equities had been raised in favour of the respondents, no inference was called for at this stage.
It has also particularly been highlighted by Mr. Patwalia on the basis of the written statement filed by respondent No. 8 that this respondent had even given up his seat in the Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla to seek admission at Patiala and as the writ petition had been filed about five months from the date of admission i.e. Ist week of July, 1997, the writ petition should be dismissed on this short ground.
Arguing on facts, Mr. Patwalia has submitted that though certificate Annexure P-1 had been put on record after the last date fiexed for the filing of the applications, the certificate Annexure R-8/7 dated 2041997 had been appended with the application and this certificate if read as a whole would also clearly make out that the case fell within Category G-1 as the death of respondent No. 8's father had been attributed to military service.
A similar argument has been raised with respect to the Certificate Annexure R-9/1 with respect to the disability suffered by respondent No. 9's father.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
6.
It is the admitted position that the Certificates Annexures P-1 and P-2 which have formed the basis of the admission of respondents No. 8 and 9 under Category G-1 were put on record long after the last date fixed for filing of the applications which was 3rd May, 1997.
From a bare reading of Clauses 3, 4 and 5 of the prospectus, it is apparent that the applications complete in all respects, had to be filed by the last date and it was further clearly mentioned that the applications received after the due date and time due to any reason whatsoever as also applications which were incomplete in any respect would be rejected.
The prospectus further provided that the candidates applying in the reserved category were to submit attested copies of their reserved category certificates and that in case, a reserved category certificate was found to be incomplete or had been issued by an incompetent authority that too, would not be entertained and that all certificates on the basis of which reservation was being sought, would have to be appended with the application forms at the very first instance and no claim could be entertained at any later stage.
The above conditions make it very clear that certificates Annexures P-1 and P-2 which had not been appended with the application forms (and had been even procured after the last date of admission) could not have been entertained at a later stage for whatever reasons.
To my mind, therefore, the Admission Committee was totally unjustified in taking these certificates into account.
7.
Mr. Sibal's other argument has merit as well.
It is evident from Annexures P-1 and P-2 and the original certificates Annexures R-8/7 and R-9/1 that had been appended with the application forms that neither of them spelt out that the private respondents could have fallen within Category G-1.
These are being set out below :-  Annexure P-1 and Annexure R-8/7 relating to Respondent No. 8 (Manpreet Singh Sekhon)  Annexure P-1: "Certificate for Defence Category (G-1) (For reservation in State Medical/Dental Colleges):-  This is to certify that Late major MS Sekhon (IC 27621-H) of 61 CAVALRY c/o 56 APO (Father of MANPREET SINGH SEKHON) died while in service in-action on 4th January, 1989.
As his death was due to Military causes vide Goverment of India, Ministry of Defence Letter No. 8/51/90, Special Family Pension Payment order was sanctioned vide CCDA (P) Allahabad letter No. G-1/M/F 12861, dated 28th January, 1991.
Dated 17th June, 1997.
SIGNATURES  Sd/-  Welfare Officer  Patiala.
Annexure R-8/7:  "CERTIFICATE FOR DEFENCE CATEGORY (G-1) FOR RESERVATION IN STATE MEDICAL/DENTAL COLLEGES.
This is to certify that late Major MS Sekhon (IC 27621-H) of 61 Cavalry, (father of Manpreet Sekhon) died on 4th January, 1989 while on active service notified vide Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence letter No. 8/51/90 dated 21st November, 1990 and that "SPECIAL Family Pension" was sanctioned vide CDDA (P) Family Section, Allahabad letter No. G-1/M/F 12861 dated 28th January, 1991 and his death is attributable to military service.
Sd/  Deputy Director,  Zila Sanik Board, Patiala  28th April, 1997.
Patiala, Punjab.
Annexure P-2 and Annexure R-9/1 relating to respondent No. 9 Shri Sunny BMK:-  Annexure P-2:-  "DEPENDENT CERTIFICATE FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADMISSION ONLY"  This is certified that No. MR-3508-P Rank : Major, Name : MM Krishan is a resident of Village Mian Mohalla Batala, PO Batala, Tehsil Batala, District Gurdaspur and has served in the Indian Armed Forces from 1 Jan. 1975 to 6 Nov 1986 and has been retired vide order No. B-66751/V.DGMS-1A, dated 9th Oct, 1986 with 60% Disability due to Traumatic Perforation Ear Drums in Oct, 1977 in action.
Mr.
Sunny BMK son of Major MM Krishan is residing with him and is wholly dependent upon him.
2.
This certificate has been issued for admission purpose only to Mr.
Sunny BMK.
to apply for claim of the Class/Course/Admission PMT 1997 Entrance Test.
(Name of he Educational Institution) Medical College in Punjab.
CERTIFICATE WHICH IS NOT APPLICABLE.
Sd/-  Signature & Stamp  Deputy Director Sainik Welfare,  Gurdaspur.
No. Atten/261/97/1890,  Dated: 271997.
Place: Gurdaspur.
Note: Dependent Certificate bearing No. 105/Steno/169/97/1890, dated 03 Mar, 1997, issued earlier is hereby cancelled.
Sd/- Director  Sainik Welfare, Punjab.
4 Jul, 97.
Annexure R-9/1  "DEPENDENT CERTIFICATE FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADMISSION ONLY"  This is certified that No. MR-3508-P Rank Mahor Name: MM Krishan is a resident of village.
Mian Mohalla, Batala PO Batala, Tehsil Batala, District Gurdaspur and has served in the Indian Armed Forces from 01 Jan, 1975 to 06111986 and has been released vide order No. B-6675/V.DGMS-IA dated 09.10.1986 with 60% disability as per discharge certificate, issued by Command Hospital (W.C), Chandimandir-7, is an exserviceman.
Mr.
Sunny BMK.
son of Major MB Krishan is residing with him and is wholly dependent upon him.
2.
This certificate has been issued for admission purpose only to Mr.
Sunny BMK.
to apply for (Name of the Class/Course/admission PMT.-1997 Entrance Test: in (name of the educational institution) Medical Colleges in Punjab.
(Strike out which is not applicable)  Sd/-  Deputy Director Sainik Welfare  Gurdaspur.
No. 105/Steno/169/97/1890  Dated: 03 Mar.
97.
Place: GURDASPUR  COUNTERSIGNED  Sd/-  Director  Sainik Welfare, Punjab  Sd/-  Secretary, Rajya Sainik Board,  Punjab.
SCO 1136-37, Sector 22,  Chandigarh."
Clause 7 which deals with various categories in the Defence Quota in so far that it is relevant is also reproduced below:-  "vi.a.
Children/Widows of defence personnel who are killed or disabled to the extent of 50% or more in action G-1  b.
Wards of Gallantry Awardees i.e. Paramvir Chakra/Mahavir Chakra/Vir Chakra/Ashoka Chakra/Kirti Chakra and Shaurya Chakra.
G-2  c Children of the serving/ex-servicemen.
G-3  xxx xxxx xxxx  Note 6: The candidates seeking admission against category (vi) above should produce a certificate from the Army Headquarters or the Commanding Officer of the Unit, in the case of Serving Defence Personnel and Army Headquarters or Commanding officer of the last armed unit or Secretary Zila Sainik Board countersigned by the Secretary, Rajya Sainik Board, as the case may be in the cases of Ex-Defence Personnel.
In doubtful case of Ex-Defence Personnel discharge certificate may be asked for.
Preference will be given in order as given in the list a, b and c under category (vi)".
xxxx xxxx xxxx  A bare reading of Sub Clause via, would indicate that this benefit is to be given only to the Children/Widows of Defence Personnel who are killed or disabled in action.
It is the admitted postiton on all sides that Major Sekhon had not been killed in action, whereas respondent No. 9's father Major MM Krishan had sustained his disability on account of frequent firing in Kashmir, though not in action.
8.
Mr. HS Gill, learned DAG, Punjab, appearing for respondents No. 1 to 4 has, in this connection, argued that sub-clause vi.a was to be read disjointedly in the following manner.
Firstly, the Children/Widows of the Defence Personnel who are killed and secondly, the Children/Widows of the Defence Personnel, who are disabled to the extent of 50% or more in action.
It was, accordingly, urged that the cases of respondent No. 8 and 9 fell in the second category.
9.
I have considered this argument and find that this would violate the very wording of the clause and the intention behind it.
If the argument of the learned counsel is taken to its logical end, an army officer who was still serving in the army and killed in the course of a drunken brawl or while crossing the road, would be entitled to claim the benefit of Category G-1.
To my mind `in action' would refer to death or injuries sustained while fighting the nation's battle against internal or external forces.
Viewed in this light, it would be apparent that late Major MS Sekhon had died in the year 1989 on account of meningitis while on leave at Ludhiana whereas the father of respondent No. 9 Major MM Krishan had suffered more than 60% disability while in active service in Jamu and Kashmir.
The reply filed by respondent No. 9 is rather vague on this aspect.
While traversing the plea of the petitioner with regard to the disability suffered by Major MM Krishan, it has been pleaded that the father of the answering respondent had sustained serious injuries in October, 1977 during Artillery Firing in Gulmarg while posted in Uri Sector on the Border with Pakistan where the exchange of firing had been very common.
It is nowhere stated that this injury took place in an exchange of fire or in an inaction.
10.
Mr. Patwalia's argument with regard to the delay in the filing of the writ petition must now be dealt with.
It has been pointed out that the admissions had been finalised in June, 1997 and the private respondents had already joined the course in the month of July, 1997, whereas the writ petition had been filed on 4th November, 1997 and in this connection, he has highlighted that respondent No. 8 had, in the meanwhile, given up his seat in the Medical College at Shimla and had he known that he would be faced with problems at Patiala, he would not have done so.
In this connection, Mr. Patwalia, has relied upon Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, 1989(4) SLR 437, Dr. Pramod Kumar Joshi v. Medical Council of India and others, 1991(2) SCT 270 : 1991(2) SLR 58, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana v. Kamaljot Kaur, 1996(4) SCT 395 and Anil Jain v. The Controller of Examinations, MDU, Rohtak, 1997(4) S.C.T.
777, the last referred judgment to contend that no admission could be made after the last date fixed for admissions.
11.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties on this aspect of the matter and find that Mr. Patwalia's argument cannot be accepted.
It has first to be borne in mind that it is the practice for the Admission Committees to maintain complete secrecy with regard to the nature and extent of admissions and it is only with the intervention of the Court that some transparency has now come about in their functioning.
It has equally to be borne in mind that admission had been given to respondents No. 8 and 9 in July, 1997 and the representation Annexure P-3 had been filed by the petitioner's father on 7th September, 1997 and the writ petition on 4th November, 1997.
To my mind, therefore, it cannot be said that there was an inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner in agitating the matter.
It has also been pointed out by Mr. Sibal that the State Government itself had extended the last date of admissions to 3111998 and if this assertion is correct, there can be no dispute that the petitioner can be admitted even now, but even assuming that the last date for admission had since expired, the petitioner cannot be denied admission by an improper interpretation of Clause 7.
As already mentioned above, to my mind, the categorisation of respondents No. 8 and 9 as being in Category G-1 cannot be sustained as they too fell in Category G-3.
12.
On facts as found, respondent No. 8 who had secured 380 marks must go as respondent No. 9 has secured 516 marks, but in the light of what follows, I am of the opinion that even respondent No. 8 should not be disturbed.
Mr. Patwalia has once again reiterated the facts to show that respondent No. 8 needs to be dealt with compassionately.
It has been pointed out that his grand-father had died in the year 1977 leaving behind a widow, his father's younger brother had also died in 1983 leaving behind a widow and a daughter and the father too had died in January, 1989 leaving a widow and three children i.e. two sons and a daughter 9, 7 and 1 year old respectively.
It has also been reiterated that the said respondent had given up his seat in the Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla, to be nearer his family at Patiala.
It has also been pointed out by Mr. Patwalia that respondents No. 8 and 9 had not withheld any information from the Admitting Authorities and if any default had occurred, it was at their end and it would be unfair to cancel the admission of respondent No. 8 on this score.
He has, in this connection, relied upon a Full Bench decision of this Court in Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and other, 1998(1) Judicial Reports (Labour and Services) 27 : 1997(4) SCT 511(P&H)(FB).
This judgment does support Mr. Patwalia's assertion.
13.
After considering the matter in its totality, I find that the admission given to respondents No. 8 and 9 was not proper but in the light of the facts set out above, more particularly that respondent No. 8 would have to go and his case being a really compassionate one, I deem it proper that the admission granted to the two respondents should not be disturbed.
The petitioner will nevertheless be given admission forthwith and in case, she joins up within a week of receiving a certified copy of this order, no impediment will be placed in her way in sitting for the examination by resorting to technical reasons.
Dasti order.