GS Singhvi, J - The petitioners are employees of the Irrigation Department.
They have moved this court for quashing of the recovery sought to be made by the respondents on the basis of Annexures-P.3, 3a and 4.
2.
The facts giving rise to this petition are that as employees of the Irrigation Department the petitioners have been maintaining and cultivating the land of the Canal Rest Houses under para 1327 of the Revenue Manual without entering into any lease agreement with the department.
The trees and their produce standing on the land of the Canal Rest House is being annually auctioned by the government.
Vide Annexure-P3, the Executive Engineer issued a circular for conveying the decision of the General Manager (Projects), Irrigation Department, requiring all persons to deposit their dues pending against them on account of cultivation charges.
Annexure-P.3a is a statement of the amount due from the employees of the Irrigation Department for the year 1995-96 in respect of Narwana Sub Division.
Annexure-P4 is a circular issued for recovery of long standing monetary dues.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the respondents have started recovery from their pay without complying with the principles of natural justice.
They have asserted that no action oriented notice or opportunity of hearing was given by the concerned authorities before taking steps to make recovery of the alleged lease amount from their pay.
4.
The respondents have justified the recovery from the pay of the petitioners on the ground that they have been cultivating the government land without paying dues.
We have heard the learned counsel and have perused the record of the case.
5.
At the very outset, we may mention that the learned Deputy Advocate General has been extremely fair to concede that no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioners before steps for recovery of the outstanding dues from the salary of the petitioners were initiated.
In view of this admission by the learned government counsel, it is not necessary for us to go into the tenability of the rival submissions made at the bar on the merits of the recovery sought to be made by the respondents.
In our opinion, the ends of justice would be met by restraining the respondents from making recovery from the salaries of the petitioners without giving action oriented notice and opportunity of haearing to the petitioners.
6.
It is a settled principle of law that administrative authorities are bound to act in consonance with the principles of natural justice when their action or orders are likely to have adverse impact on the rights of the citizens or when their actions may visit other with adverse consequences.
7.
In this connection, we may refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269; Sayeedur Rehman v. The State of Bihar and others, AIR 1973 SC 239; Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and another, AIR 1978 SC 597; Mohinder Singh Gill v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC 851; SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan, AIR 1981 SC 136; Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 818; Olga Tellis and other v. Bombay Municipal Corporation and others, AIR 1986 SC 180 : 1986 R.R.R.
290 and SN Mukherjee v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition and quash Annexures-P.3, P.3a and P.4.
However, liberty is given to the respondents to pass fresh order after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
Petition allowed.