Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on June 30, 1990.
On June 3, 1994, he was charged for absence from duty for a period of 65 days 14 hours.
Having been found guilty by the Enquiry Officer, the petitioner was given a notice to show cause as to why he be not dismissed from service.
The petitioner submitted his reply.
Vide order dated December 1, 1994, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition, the Senior Superintendent of Police held that the petitioner "cannot become a good employee and he is not fit for the department".
He was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range, vide order dated July 13, 1995.
Hence this petition.
The petitioner alleges that the orders are violative of the provisions of the rules and should, thus, be quashed.
It has been prayed that the order passed by the disciplinary authority, a copy of which is at Annexure P.3 and that passed by the appellate authority, a copy of which is at Annexure P4, be quashed.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner has challenged the order dated December 1, 1994 after a gap of about two years.
The writ petition should be dismissed on the ground of delay alone.
He should have filed a civil suit.
On merits, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been found absent from duty on 12 occasions and was, thus, not suitable to continue in service.
Resultantly, the respondents pray that the writ petition should be dismissed.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Should the writ petition be dismissed on the ground of delay ?
(ii) Are the impugned orders in conformity with the provisions of rules ?
Reg: (i)  3.
The disciplinary authority viz. the Senior Superintendents of Police, Sangrur had undoubtedly ordered the dismissal of the petitioner vide order dated December 1, 1994.
However, it is not disputed that the petitioner had filed an appeal against this order.
The appellate authority had decided the case vide its order dated July 13, 1995.
In the very nature of things, the order must have been communicated to the petitioner sometime later.
He had filed this writ petition within less than a year in May 1996.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the writ petition had been filed after the lapse of two years.
It was not inordinately delayed.
Consequently, the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondents that the writ petition should be dismissed on the ground of delay, cannot be sustained.
Another fact which deserves to be mentioned is that the petition has remained pending for more than one year in this Court.
On the date of filing of the writ petition as well as at the time of its disposal, even if the petitioner was to file a suit, it would be within limitation.
No triable issue of limitation arises.
In this situation, it would be neither be fair nor proper to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of delay alone.
The preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondents is, consequently, rejected.
The first question is answered in favour of the petitioner.
Reg: (ii)  It is undoubtedly correct that the petitioner is alleged to have remained absent from duty.
It is also true that even on certain earlier occasions, he had been accused of absence.
However, certain facts deserve to be noticed.
Firstly, the petitioner belongs to a weaker section of the society.
He is a member of the Scheduled Castes.
Secondly, the petitioner had gone to his village to give his pay to his mother who is a widow.
He was detained on account of her illness.
Having gone to his village on February 8, 1994, the petitioner claims to have reported back on duty on February 12, 1994.
He alleges that he had visited the Police Post, appeared before the Deputy Superintendent of Police and even sought permission to appear before the Superintendent of Police.
He was not permitted by the Orderly.
It is only on April 14, 1994 that he was allowed to see respondent No. 3.
He was then permitted to join duty.
It is true that the respondents have controverted these facts.
However, the petitioner had appeared before us in Court.
He had not only reiterated these facts but had sought the last chance to join service with a promise that he would not give another occasion for complaint.
He was apparently poor and seemed deserving of compassion.
Besides these facts, Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules inter alia provides that "dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility..." In the present case, the impugned orders dod not even notice the provision contained in Rule 162.
It has not been even observed that absence from duty in the circumstances of the present case constituted the gravest act of misconduct.
The orders also dod not suggest that on account of the cumulative effect of various acts of absence, the petitioner was incorrigible.
Resultantly, the provisions of Rule 162 have not been complied with.
5.
Undeniably, the petitioner was the member of a disciplined force.
Absence from duty is undoubtedly unbecoming of a member of the disciplined force.
However, the facts of the present case and the petitioner's condition indicate that absence was not wilful.
In State of Punjab & others v. Darshan Singh, 1981(1) SLR 191, even an absence for almost 13 months was not treated as the gravest act of misconduct.
While the view taken by the learned Single Judge appears to be too liberal, it cannot be said in the present case that the petitioner deserved extreme penalty of dismissal.
6.
Resultantly, the impugned orders, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P.3 and P.4 with the writ petition, are set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be reinstated in service.
He will, however, not be entitled to any arrears of salary for the period of from December 1, 1994 to the date of this order.
This period shall be treated as leave of the kind due.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
We are passing this order in the peculiar circumstances of the present case without intending to lay down any precedent.