Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was working as a Lower Division Clerk in the Punjab State Electricity Board.
He had joined service on June 18, 1969, on purely ad hoc basis.
His services were regularised vide order dated June 30, 1971.
On December 13, 1996, the petitioner "issued notice to the Superintending Engineer, PSEB Ferozepur....." By this notice, the petitioner had requested that he may be allowed to retire w.e.f.
March 12, 1997.
The respondents having not accepted the petitioner's request, he has filed this writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that "after expiry of the notice period .....(he) stands retired....." He prays that he "be ordered to be retired w.e.f.
1231997 on the expirty of notice period and be granted all pension, gratuity and other retiral benefits alongwith interest @ 18% per annum to be compounded annually."
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that his notice "was considered and rejected by the competent authority i.e. Superintending Engineer.
Said decision was communicated to the Executive Engineer, Zira vide letter No. 4375 dated 25.2.97, copy of which is at Annexure R/1."
It has also been pointed out that the matter had been reconsidered by the Superintending Engineer who had found that there were "as many as 11 charge sheets/enquiries pending against Surjit Singh petitioner."
It has, thus, been found that "it is not in the interest of the Board to retire the petitioner".
On these premises, the respondents maintain that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. SK Sharma has contended that the petitioner's request for premature retirement had never been rejected by the competent authority.
He will, therefore, be deemed to have retired.
Learned counsel has further submitted that the mere fact that enquiry was pending against the petitioner, was in fact no ground for disallowing his request.
The petitioner had completed 20 years qualifying service and was, thus, entitled to retire from service.
It was also submitted that Surjit Singh against whom the enquiries were pending is in fact a different person and that the petitioner had nothing to do with it.
Learned counsel also submitted that the petitioner has in fact already been relieved and that he is practising as an advocate.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. DS Brar counsel for the respondents.
5.
There is no averment on the record that the petitioner had been relieved of his duties or that he has been enrolled as an Advocate.
In spite of being asked, learned counsel was unable to refer to anything to support his statement.
Still further, in the petition, it has been indicated that the petitioner is a Lower Division Clerk in the office of the Senior Executive Engineer, Operation Division, Zira.
Even in the replication, the title is "Surjit Singh, LDC son of Late Shri Hari Singh, PSEB Zira".
There is no averment that the petitioner is practising as an Advocate.
The writ petition was presented to the court in March 1997.
Thereafter, the replication was filed on September 16, 1997.
It has nowhere been indicated that the petitioner had been relieved of his duties or that he has been enrolled as an Advocate.
In this situation, we are proceeding on the assumption that the petitioner is still a Lower Division Clerk in the Board.
6.
The short question that arises is - Can the petitioner be deemed to have retired from service ?
7.
Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the question has to be answered in the light of the provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 as amended from time to time and in accordance with the instructions issued by the Board.
According to these rules, an employee is entitled to seek premature retirement after he has completed 20 years of qualifying service "by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appropriate authority".
This notice requires "acceptance by the appropriate authority".
It has also been provided that "where the appropriate authority does not refuse to grant the permission for retirement before the expiry of the period specified in the said notice, the retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry of the said period."
8.
Mr. Sharma contended that the notice had been issued on December 13, 1996.
The period of three months had expired on March 12, 1997.
The appropriate authority had not rejected the petitioner's request.
Thus, he shall be deemed to have retired.
Is it so ?
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been categorically averred that the petitioner's request was rejected by the competent authority and that the decision was communicated to the Executive Engineer, Zira "vide letter No. 4375 dated 25.2.97...." In reply to paras 8 and 9, it has been further averred that the contents of this letter "were known to the petitioner as he himself was dealing hand and he kept the papers in the file with him.
Now he cannot claim that the notice having not been rejected, he automatically stands retired."
The petitioner has filed a replication.
He has not averred that the letter dated February 25, 1997 referred to in para 1 of the preliminary objections and in paras 8 and 9 of the reply on merits, had not been received in the office of the Senior Executive Engineer or that he was not aware of it.
In fact it appears that he has tried to evade the issue by referring to various judgments and other communications.
Even in the rejoinder to paras 8 and 9 of the written statement, he has only averred that "actually the petitioner's request for retirement was not rejected during the notice period....." The specific averment that he was the dealing clerk and that he had actually received the letter and placed it on the file, has not been controverted.
In this situation, we cannot accept the argument of the learned counsel that the petitioner's request had not been rejected before the expirty of the period of three months.
9.
Mr. Sharma also submitted that the respondents could not have declined to accept the petitioner's request on the ground that certain enquiries were pending against him.
According to the learned counsel, the person against whom the enquiries were pending was a different person viz. Surjit Singh s/o Mukhtiar Singh and not the petitioner whose father's name is Hari Singh.
For this purpose, the petitioner had placed reliance on a communication dated March 13, 1997, a copy of which was produced as Annexure P.5 with the replication.
10.
This contention cannot accepted.
In para 1 of the preliminary objection, it has been inter alia averred that the matter regarding the petitioner's retirement was "again considered by the Superintending Engineer and he found that there are as many as 11 charge sheets/enquiries pending against Surjit Singh petitioner..... : list of 11 cases showing grave charges of cheating, fabricating documents and corruption is at Annexure R2.
The competent authority keeping in view the aforesaid background and keeping in view the policy of the Board contained in instructions dated 20695...has decided vide order at Annexure R.4 that it is not in the interest of the Board to retire the petitioner."
In the replication filed by the petitioner, he has not averred that 11 charges sheets as mentioned in the list at Annexure R2 with the written statement were not served on him or that these did not relate to him.
He has only quoted the memo dated March 13, 1997 and produced a copy thereof as Annexure P.5.
This memorandum relates to a charge sheet dated July 19, 1995 and an FIR dated February 20, 1990.
There is nothing before us to show that the 11 charge sheets as mentioned in the document at Annexure R2 did not relate to the petitioner or that no enquiry had been held against him.
Consequently, even the claim as sought to be made by the counsel for the petitioner is wholly unfounded.
11.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Sharma contended that the petitioner had not been suspended and that his request for premature retirement could not have been declined on the ground that enquiries were pending against him.
Is it so ?
12.
Admittedly, a notice for premature retirement requires acceptance by the authority.
It is not that the person concerned automatically retires from service on the expiry of the period of three months.
In fact, it is only in the eventuality of the authority failing to pass any order that the employee can claim to have retired.
In the present case, as already observed, the authority had issued an order dated February 25, 1997 by which the petitioner's application was returned and it was observed that the request cannot be considered inter alia on the ground that "disciplinary cases are still pending against him".
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner's request was not accepted by the competent authority.
It was so on account of the fact that 11 enquiry proceedings/charge sheets were pending against him.
The charges were serious.
These have been summarised in the document at Annexure R2 and read as under :-  Sr. No.
Charge sheet No. and date Charges in Brief 1.
8306 dt. 31890 Got Rs. 10,000/- from Sh. Karam jeet Singh for Fabricating/issuing of bogus certificate of experience for employment of work charge.
2.
8998 dt. 24.8.90 Absent from duty (1-6-1990 to 1771990).
3.
10239 dt. 7.9.90 Issued bogus appointment letter to Sh. Karamjeet Singh s/o Sh. Gurden Singh, resident of Bhiwanigarh as Assistant Lineman.
4.
10241 dt. 17.9.90 Forged transfer order of Sh. Malkiat Singh as Assistant Lineman and permitted to join Rama Sub-Division.
5.
2130 dt. 19.2.91 Prepared fake/forged transfer order of Sh. Hardev Singh, Peon to join under XEN D/S Division, Ahmedgarh.
6.
15273dt.11.10.90 Prepared fake/forged appointment letter to employee Sh. Guljar Singh and Jagtar Singh as Assistant Lineman in PSEB.
7.
4861 dt. 16.4.91 Prepared fake/forged letter of the office of XEN Suburban Division, Ferozepur to appoint Sh. Madan Gopal and Sh. Dhir Singh as Assistant Lineman at Sunam.
8.
17846dt.23.12.92 Preparedforged/false and fictitious documents in respect of 22 employees and gave appointment.
9.
8491 dt. 8.6.93 Accepted Rs. 5000/- against his demand of Rs. 10,000/- for getting Sian Singh employed as peon in PSEB.
10.
18269dt201293  Forged documents to help to join Sh. Pritam Singh and Sh. Jawala Singh after getting Rs. 30,000/- and Rs. 27,000/- respectively.
11.
19896 dt.19.7.95  1) Absent from duty: 15794 to 21296.
2) FIR No. 77 dated 24.7.1`990 lodged by Anti Fraud Squad., Faridkot for forging documents for appointment.
In ten of these 11 cases, the Enquiry Officer has already recorded his findings and the matter is pending before the punishing authority.
The last case is still under `investigation'.
A perusal of the above charges shows that there were allegations of fabricating and forging documents and acceptance of illegal gratification.
In one of the cases, it is alleged that the petitioner had forged documents "after getting Rs. 30,000/- and Rs. 27,000/-" These allegations are very serious.
It is not understood as to why the Board did not consider it appropriate to report the matter to the police.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that enquiries into serious allegations are pending against the petitioner.
In such a situation, it would not have been fair or in public interest to allow the petitioner to retire and to earn pension, gratuity or any of the admissible retiral benefits.
The petitioner was seeking premature retirement only to avoid the order of penalty that may be ultimately passed against him.
The circumstances of the case and more particularly seriousness of the allegations against the petitioner fully justified the view taken by the authority.
The action was just and fair.
13.
Mr. Sharma submitted that it is only in a case where an employee is under suspension that the authority can refuse to accept the request.
14.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The provision in the rule is categoric.
Every notice requires acceptance.
The rule does not provide that the request for premature retirement shall be accepted in all cases except when an employee is under suspension.
The fact that the rule-making authority has provided that the authority has to pass an order within the notice period, indicates that a discretion has been conferred.
Within the prescribed period, the authority can either accept or reject the request.
Since it has not been provided that the request for premature retirement shall be rejected only when an employee is under suspension, it is implicit that it can be rejected even in other cases.
In fact the present case is a clear indication of the circumstances in which the authority can exercise the discretion to reject the request.
Sometimes an employee may be allowed to retire even when he under a cloud if the authority finds that the charges cannot be proved.
However, equally when the authority takes the view that the charges are serious and that the matter has to be decided after an enquiry, it can refuse to accept the request for premature retirement and to impose any of the penalties permissible under the rules.
The language of the rule clearly indicates that the authority could have declined the petitioner's request for premature retirement.
In the present case, it actually did so inter alia for the reason that 11 charge sheets were pending against him.
15.
Mr. Sharma submitted that the letter at Annexure R1 by which the petitioner's application for premature retirement was returned was only addressed to the Executive Engineer.
A perusal of the letter shows that it is so.
However, it is also clear from the record that the petitioner was the dealing clerk in the office and that in the written statement, it has been clearly averred that the contents of the letter were known to him and that "he kept the papers in the file with him".
In this situation, it is clear that the petitioner was aware of the fact that his application had been returned.
It had not been accepted inter alia on the ground that 11 charge sheets were pending enquiry against him.
16.
On a consideration of the matter, it appears that the petitioner was trying to seek premature retirement only to avoid departmental action.
An indication to this effect is clearly available even from the notice dated December 13, 1996 sent by the petitioner.
In this notice, he has clearly stated that "I am fully fed up from the PSEB's indiscriminate, routine policies such as suspending and reinstating after a long process/spell of time.
It is, therefore, requested that...." This notice gives a lie to the suggestion that the petitioner was wanting to retire on account of family circumstances or that the charges as mentioned in the document at Annexure R2 did not relate to him.
17.
It was contended by Mr. Sharma that the petitioner had completed more than 20 years of service.
The respondents had rejected his request on the ground that he had not done so.
Therefore, the order is vitiated.
18.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
In the letter, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R1 with the written statement, it has been categorically mentioned that the official "has not completed 20 years qualifying service and disciplinary cases are still pending."
Consequently, even if it is assumed that the period of ad hoc service had to be taken into account and that the petitioner had completed 20 years of qualifying service, still, it cannot be said that the request was arbitrarily rejected or that the order is vitiated.
19.
Learned counsel had also placed reliance on the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in 1995(1) SCT 497 : 1994(4) SCT 689 (Union of India & Ors v. Sayed Mujaffar Mir).
The facts and the rule which fell for consideration of their Lordships in this case were totally different.
Firstly, it appears that the rule did not lay down that the request for premature retirement would require acceptance by the authority.
Secondly, no charges were pending against the employee.
The factual position being totally different, learned counsel can derive no advantage from this decision.
20.
Technicalities apart, it appears that no ground for exercise of any discretion under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out in this case.
Allowing the petitioner to prematurely retire would only enable a person who is alleged to be corrupt to escape punishment.
No ground in equity is made out to intervene.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, no ground for interference is made out.
The writ petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is, consequently, dismissed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 5000/-.
Appeal dismissed.