VK Bali, J - Petitioners, who are respondents in present Letters Patent Appeals successfully challenged the order of appointment of respondents shown in the writ petition from 4 to 25 as Revenue Patwaris.
Whereas, the respondents whose appointment as Revenue Patwaris was quashed have filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 1 of 1990, the State of Punjab equally aggrieved of the judgment rendered by the learned single Judge has filed a separate appeal bearing No. 480 of 1990.
Inasmuch as both the appeals herein have been filed to challenge the judgment of the learned single Judge rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 8054 of 1989, we propose to decide these appeals by a common order.
2.
The facts so far as the same are relevant for deciding these Letters Patent Appeals reveal that petitioners alongwith 187 other Patwari candidates were selected by the Departmental Selection Committee, District Patiala for regular recruitment on permanent posts in the year 1987.
Candidates numbering 189 so selected by the departmental selection committee, Patiala were to be ultimately appointed against 120 vacant permanent posts of Patwaris contemplated in Patiala District on the completion of requisite Patwar Training that the selected Patwari candidates were undergoing at State Patwar Training School, Jalandhar.
It has been specifically pleaded in paragraph 5 of the writ petition that 186 Patwari candidates including the petitioners had submitted their joining reports to the State Patwar Training School, Jalandhar by 17th of April, 1989.
The petitioners and other selected Patwari candidates were to attend the Patwar Training School from 19th of June, 1989.
The writ petition as such came to be file on 15th of June, 1989 i.e. when the petitioners had so far not even started attending the Patwar Training School Course.
The challenge to the appointments of respondents so arrayed in the writ petition was based upon the only ground that appointment by transfer of an employee working in the Irrigation Department as Revenue Patwari was not warranted by the Rules.
On the sole contention, as mentioned above, the learned single Judge after scrutinising the relevant rules returned a positive finding that "Clause (iii) of Rule 10 provides for appointment by transfer of an officer already in the service of the State Government.
The Patwaris working in the Irrigation Department whose conditions of service and recruitment are governed by the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Patwaris State Service Class III Rules, 1955 are the employees of the State Government and they can be appointed as revenue Patwaris by transfer as provided in Clause (iii) of Rule 10.
Too narrow and rigid construction cannot be placed upon this clause.
It cannot apply to only those employees whose services are regulated by the Rules.
The appointment by transfer is a well recognized method adopted and approved in the Government service.
Merely because the service condition and recruitment of Patwaris working in Canal/Irrigation Department and revenue patwaris are regulated by different set of rules, will not deprive the Patwaris working in the Irrigation Department for recruitment as Revenue Patwaris.
Thus, I hold that the appointment by transfer of Irrigation Patwaris as Revenue Patwaris is fully justified under the Rules."
3.
Even though, therefore, the sole contention of the petitioners was repelled in the manner as fully indicated above by the learned single Judge, the appointment of respondents as Revenue Patwaris was still invalidated on the ground that applications were invited for appointment by transfer from officials already working in the service of the State Government and all the employees similarly situated had the right to apply for the post and for consideration of their claim for appointment.
Applying Article 14 of the Constitution and the judgment of the Apex Court in EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, A.I.R. 1974 S.C. 555, the learned single judge held the method followed in offering the appointment suffers from arbitrariness and was, thus, void.
4.
Mr. Ashwani Kumar Chopra, the learned Counsel representing the respondent- appellants in Letters Patent Appeal 1 of 1990 vehemently contends that the petitioners had not mentioned a single word in their writ petition that the appointment of respondents as Revenue Patwaris was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as some similarly situated employees were not given a chance to make applications for their appointment on the post under contention.
He further contends that challenge to the appointment of the respondents on the posts of Revenue Patwaris could not be made by petitioners who were concededly at the relevant time wholly ineligible to occupy the post under contention.
He has also informed the Court that during the pendency of the appeal in which operation of the judgment of the learned single Judge was stayed, some of the respondents have even been promoted to the post of Tehsildar and it would be too inequituous at this stage to set aside their appointment as Revenue Patwari.
5.
Mr. Anil Malhotra, learned Counsel representing the petitioners in the writ petition could not controvert the two-fold contentions raised by the learned Counsel for the appellants as noted above.
During the course of arguments he had no option but to concede that insofar as petitioners are concerned, they were not even eligible to occupy the post of Revenue Patwari on a date when appellants herein were so appointed.
Even otherwise, it is established on the records of the case i.e. from the reading of the petition itself that at the relevant time the petitioners had not even started their training.
Reference to the pleadings on that count has since already been made in the earlier part of the judgment.
Mr. Malhotra also could not show us any averment from the writ petition whereby appointment of the appellants as revenue Patwaris might have been challenged on the ground that similarly situated persons were not asked to apply for the post of Revenue Patwari.
While dealing with the matter, the learned single Judge has also not referred to the pleadings of the parties as such on the aforesaid issue and simply mentioned that on perusal of the file, he had found that the appointment of respondents No. 4 to 25 as revenue Patwaris was irregular and arbitrary.
The learned single Judge further held that an application was filed by an individual respondent and the same was forwarded to the Collector of the District and appointment letter was issued to him.
He further held that the appointing authority under the Rules did not invite applications eligible candidates for appointment as revenue patwaris.
We are of the view that such a finding could not possibly be returned without there being pleadings to that effect made by the contesting parties.
As mentioned above no such base was laid in the petition itself and obviously there was no reply as well by the respondents on the said issue.
Insofar as the petitioners are concerned, they were not even considered eligible for the post under contention.
Even if applications were to be invited from all eligible candidates, the petitioners could not have, in any case, made for their selection on the posts of Revenue Patwaris.
Those who might have been eligible and were not asked to make their applications for appointment referred to above were not arrayed as a party in the petition.
In these circumstances, we are of the firm view that appointment of the appellants on the posts of revenues patwaris could not be faulted.
If, however, the sole contention of the petitioners might have turned in their favour, a different result ought to have followed.
In that case the appointment of appellants would have been wholly illegal and a writ of quo-warrant could be filed by anyone.
However, as mentioned above, the only contention of the petitioners that there was no rule by which the State could make appointment on the post of Revenue Patwari by way of transfer was repelled by the learned Single Judge.
6.
In the circumstances referred to above added to the fact that some of the appellants have even now been promoted to next two higher ranks and have even got the post of Tehsildar, we set aside the order of the learned Single Judge and allow these appeals.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Appeals allowed.