K Sreedharan, CJ - Petitioner has approached this Court inter-alia praying for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Kurukshetra University and its Registrar to declare the result of BA Part-III taken by her with roll No. 9230 in May, 1996.
2.
It is stated in this petition that she took B.Sc.
Part-I and B.Sc.
Part-II examinations held by the Punjab University.
Thereafter, she applied to Kurukshetra University for taking BA Part-III examination held in May, 1996.
Alongwith that application, prior history namely of having taken B.Sc.
Part-I and B.Sc.
Part-II examination from Punjab University was not stated.
She took BA Part-III examination on the basis of the roll number issued by the Kurukshetra University.
She did not produce any migration certificate and therefore, the Kurukshetra University did not declare her result of BA Part III taken by her.
3.
When this petition came up for hearing on 27th August, 1997, following order was passed :-  "According to the respondent, petitioner did not produce migration certificate from Punjab University for taking examination in Kurukshetra University.
Over and above this, we are at a loss to understand how petitioner who had taken B.Sc.
Part I and B.Sc.
Part II examinations from Punjab University could take BA Part III examination of Kurukshetra University.
Petitioner is directed to produce the rules which entitle her to have BA Part III examination."
4.
No rule or regulation of Kurukshetra University has been made available to Court.
No argument was advanced before us that a candidate who took B.Sc.
Part I and B.Sc.
Part II examinations can take BA III examination.
In B.Sc.
Part I examination, petitioner had Chemistry, Botany and Zoology.
In B.Sc.
Part II, she had appeared in Physics, Chemistry, Botany and Zoology.
These subjects are not subject for BA Therefore, we are clear in our mind that petitioner was not entitled to take BA Part-III examination without having undergone the course of study for BA Part-I and BA Part-II.
5.
In the circumstances detailed above, we find no merits and accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.