Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of writ of mandamus directing the Haryana State Electricity Board to provide him employment in accordance with the policy instructions issued by it.
According to these policy instructions which are contained in the letter of May 6, 1994, the respondents had decided to "provide employment to dependents of land- owners whose land has been acquired by the Board for the Thermal/Hydel Projects".
This appointment was to be granted "in case it is felt that by acquisition of land, the means of livelihood have been taken away ...".
It is only in the event of this condition being fulfilled that the employment was to be given to one member of the family on compassionate grounds.
2.
The petitioner claims that "the Haryana State Electricity Board had set up a Thermal Power Plant at Panipat and for that purpose, had acquired the lands in which the petitioner had share.....
The land was acquired at different stages prior to 1991."
It has been further averred that various persons who were similarly situated as the petitioner had been granted appointments.
Reference has been made to a Division Bench Judgement of this Court in Krishan Kumar and others v. The Haryana State Electricity Board and others, CWP No. 6539 of 1994 which was decided on January 25, 1995.
The petitioner further alleges that he had submitted a representation dated July 25, 1995, with a request for the grant of employment.
The needful having not been done, he has approached this Court.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner's claim is not sustainable as "at no point of time an application was made by the proper person (owner of the land) to the respondents prior to 13121991".
It has been further submitted that the last date for the receipt of application was December 13, 1991.
Till that date, no application was received from the owner of the land because under the relevant policy, the owners of the land were required to ask for the employment of their dependents in case their means of livelihood were taken away by acquiring the land.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was not shown as a shareholder in the acquired land or in the award given by the Land Acquisition Collector.
Still further, the petitioner's claim was not sponsored by his father or his grandfather.
In these circumstances, the respondents maintain that there is no merit in the claim made by the petitioner.
The writ petition should be dismissed.
4.
This case was listed for hearing before another Division Bench consisting of RS Mongia and NC Khichi, JJ.
On September 30, 1996, their Lordships were pleased to pass the following order :-  "Let specific affidavit be filed on behalf of the petitioner as to how much land out of the `Jumla Mustarka Malkan' was acquired and what was the share of the person on whom the petitioner is dependent.
Further it may also be indicated as to whether the petitioner or the person on whom he is dependent owned any other land on the date of the acquisition.
Adjourned to 6.11.1996."
In spite of the lapse of many months, the petitioner has not filed any affidavit indicating as to how much land was acquired and as to whether the petitioner or the person on whom he is dependent owned any other land on the date of the acquisition.
The obvious purpose of asking the petitioner to file this affidavit was to ascertain as to whether or not the means of livelihood had been taken away.
The petitioner has desisted from filing this affidavit which shows that either there was some land still available with him or none had been acquired.
In any event, nothing has been produced to show that the means of livelihood have been taken away.
5.
In view of the above, it is clear that the petitioner does not fulfil the essential conditions stipulated in the circular dated May 6, 1984, by which the Board had decided to grant appointment on compassionate grounds.
6.
In fact, there is no evidence to indicate that the petitioner or his father or grandfather had ever submitted any application for the grant of appointment on compassionate grounds.
The only application that has been placed on record is Annexure P-7 with the writ petition.
This is dated July 25, 1995.
Even in this application, it has not been mentioned that he or the actual owner of the land had lost the means of livelihood on account of the acquisition.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the respondents had acted either illegally or arbitrarily in contesting the petitioner's claim or not accepting the request contained in the letter of July 25, 1995.
7.
Admittedly, the landowners were given compensation.
The grant of appointment on compassionate grounds was only calculated to help the persons whose means of livelihood had been taken away by acquisition of the land.
To illustrate, those who were working as tenants or labourers might have lost the source of livelihood on account of the acquisition of land.
They were to get no compensation.
To help the needy, the respondents had issued certain instructions.
However, the instructions were not meant to help the greedy like the petitioner who, even without showing that any land belonging to him was acquired, is clamouring for a job.
8.
Mr. Sud has placed firm reliance on the Division Bench judgment in Krishan Kumar's case (supra).
On facts, the case is clearly distinguishable.
The petitioners therein had applied for the jobs within the stipulated time.
Their applications were placed on record as Annexure P-1 and P-2.
The acquisition of land was not in dispute.
Consequently, the Division Bench had directed the respondents to consider their applications.
In the present case, the petitioner has not been able to give even a remote proof regarding the submission of any application by him or his father or grandfather.
He has also not been able to give any proof regarding the acquisition of his or his father's land.
In this situation, no ground for the grant of any relief to him is made out.
The petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is dismissed.
No costs.