Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in these three cases are aggrieved by the respective orders of their reversion from the post of Naib Tehsildar to that of Kanungo.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts in civil writ petition No. 1938 of 1987.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Patwari on April 16, 1955.
On March 3, 1980, he was promoted as a Kunungo.
He passed the departmental examination for promotion to the post of Naib Tehsildar on January 28, 1986.
The petitioner alleges that his name was placed in Register `D' as maintained under the provisions of the Punjab Naib Tehsildars (Class III) Service Rules, 1984 at Sr. No. 58.
The petitioner concedes that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were senior to him in the cadre of Kanungos.
However, their names were entered in Register `D' at Sr. Nos. 60 and 62 as they had passed the examination on July 16, 1996.
3.
In August, 1986, Mr. Sarup Chand who was working as Naib Tehsildar had proceeded on earned leave from August 18, 1986 to October 24, 1986.
The petitioner was promoted as he was "the seniormost candidate available on Register `D'...." A copy of the order dated August 18, 1986 has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
This appointment was further extended "as the leave of Sarup Chand was extended upto 24111986."
Another person, Mr. Gurdial Singh had proceeded on leave from November 25, 1986 to January 2, 1987.
The petitioner was allowed to continue working as Naib Tehsildar "against the vacancy caused as such".
Thereafter, Mr. Jagjit Singh had proceeded on leave and the petitioner's appointment was "extended upto 621987".
In the meantime, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as Naib Tehsildars against regular vacancies.
The petitioner alleges that he "was not promoted against the regular vacancy as he had already been promoted and (was) working as Naib Tehsildar".
On February 5, 1987, the petitioner was ordered to be reverted to the post of Kanungo.
He was relieved of the charge on February 9, 1987.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P.2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner mentions that this order had been passed "during the pendency of Civil Writ Petition No. 6718 of 1986 filed by one Kultar Singh, Field Kanungo, which has since been dismissed as having become infructuous in view of Annexure P/2."
4.
The petitioner challenges the validity of the order dated February 5, 1987 on the ground that Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were junior to him.
He further alleges that "one Sukhdev Krishan who though passed the departmental examination on 581985, was placed at Sr. No. 61 in Register `D' and was promoted as Naib Tehsildar after" his appointment.
The petitioner could not have been reverted as Mr. Sukhdev Krishan was still working on the higher post.
The petitioner, consequently, alleges that the action is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He prays that the order reverting him from the post of Naib Tehsildar to that of Kanungo be quashed.
5.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
A written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was initially filed by Mr. Amrik Singh Pooni, IAS, the then Commissioner, Patiala Division.
In this written statement, it was inter alia averred that "the petitioner was never enlisted as `B' Class Naib Tehsildar candidate and, therefore, the question of his name being entered in that Register did not arise."
Similarly, even the names of respondents Nos. 3 and 4 had not been entered in Register `D'.
They were promoted as officiating Naib Tehsildars "in stop-gap arrangement on seniority-cum-merit basis".
The petitioner had been promoted as officiating Naib Tehsildar in the leave arrangement "as the record of the senior Kanungos who had passed the departmental examination of Naib Tehsildars was not forthcoming from the respective Deputy Commissioners.
On receipt of record, respondents Nos. 3 and 4 being senior to the petitioner were promoted as officiating Naib Tehsildars against the available vacancies..." It has been further stated that Mr. Kultar Singh, Kanungo of District Ludhiana, being senior to the petitioner had filed a Civil Writ Petition No. 6718 of 1986 challenging his promotion.
On the petitioner's reversion, the writ petition was dismissed vide order dated March 20, 1987.
The petitioner having been promoted against the leave vacancy had no right to the higher post.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 being senior to the petitioner were rightly allowed to continue working as Naib Tehsildars.
The petitioner's reversion on the expiry of the leave vacancy was legal and valid.
It has been further pointed out that Mr. Sukhdev Krishan was working as Kanungo w.e.f.
October 16, 1978.
He had been initially ignored for promotion because of the order by which a penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect had been awarded to him.
His appeal against this order was accepted by the Commissioner vide order dated August 29, 1986.
He was, accordingly, promoted as Naib Tehsildar vide order dated October 30, 1986.
He was senior to the petitioner.
It has also been averred that the seniority of Kanungos is maintained districtwise.
At the time of making promotion of Naib Tehsildars, a list of Kanungos who fulfil the prescribed conditions is prepared on the basis of "their continuous length of service.....
Accordingly, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as Naib Tehsildars on seniority-cum-merit basis."
6.
A separate written statement had also been filed by respondent No. 4 on his own behalf as well as on behalf of respondent No. 3.
It has been pointed out that respondent No. 3 was working as a Kanungo on August 17, 1957 in the Consolidation Department.
On account of retrenchment, he was absorbed as a Patwari in the Revenue Department but was later on promoted as Kanungo on September 17, 1976.
Similarly, respondent No. 4 had been promoted against reserved post "falling to the share of Scheduled Castes and the petitioner is....not competent to challenge the appointment by way of promotion as Naib Tehsildar of respondent No.
4."
The respondents had "qualified the Naib Tehsildar's examination at the time when the vacancies of Naib Tehsildars were to be filled..." They maintain that they are senior to the petitioner and were rightly allowed to continue working as Naib Tehsildars when the petitioner had been ordered to be reverted.
7.
These cases had initially come up for hearing on September 27, 1996.
During the course of arguments, it was claimed that the names of the petitioners as well as respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were borne on Register `D'.
This claim had been controverted in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
In this situation, Counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was "directed to produce the original Register/s which was/were being maintained from the year 1985 to 1988."
In spite of repeated adjournments, the record was not produced.
Ultimately, vide order dated December 11, 1996, respondent No. 2 viz. the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala was directed to be present in court with the Register.
In pursuance of this order, he had appeared in court on December 18, 1996.
It was stated that Register `D' had not been maintained.
A request for adjournment was made to enable the respondents to place the correct factual position on record.
Thereafter, an amended affidavit was filed by Mr. SK Sinha, IAS, Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala.
It was taken on record.
Copy was given to the counsel for the petitioners.
In this affidavit, it was categorically stated that "according to the office record, no Register `D' was maintained by respondent No. 2 in 1986 and to this extent, the petitioner's assertion is denied that his name was entered at Sr. No. 58 of the said Register".
It was further stated that "those who clear the departmental examination earlier will be considered eligible candidates for promotion earlier than those Kanungos who clear their departmental examination later, provided a post exists.
However, at the time when a regular vacancy for promotion to the post of Naib Tehsildar occurs, the senior-most candidates who are eligible for promotion at that point of time are to be considered for promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, which means that the Kanungo who is senior and is eligible for promotion after having cleared his departmental examination and has a clear record of service will be considered for promotion to a regular vacancy prior to a Kanungo who is junior in service but might have become eligible earlier to his senior by having passed the departmental examination before his senior."
It has also been stated that the petitioner's appointment to the post of Naib Tehsildar was only an ad hoc arrangement.
The persons who had been allowed to continue working on the higher posts viz. respondent Nos. 3 and 4 as also the other persons mentioned in the writ petition were senior to him.
The claim made by the petitioner that the reversion was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, has been controverted.
The respondents, consequently, pray that the writ petition be dismissed.
In spite of grant of opportunity, no replication was filed on behalf of the petitioner.
8.
The solitary contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that promotion to the post of Naib Tehsildar has to be made in the order of the date/s of passing the departmental examination.
The claim was controverted on behalf of the respondents.
9.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Did the petitioner become senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 by virtue of his having passed the departmental examination in January 1986 while the said respondents were declared successful in July 1986 ?
10.
Admittedly, the appointment to the post of Naib Tehsildar is governed by the provisions of the 1984 rules.
Under Rule 7, 50% posts have to be filled up by direct recruitment and the remaining 50% by promotion from amongst the District Kanungos, District Revenue Accountants and the Kaungos who have worked as such for a minimum period of five years and have passed the departmental examination.
In case of a Kanungo, it is further required that he should have worked as a Field Kanungo for a minimum period of two years.
The provision regarding maintenance of Registers is contained in Rule 8.
Register `A' is in respect of candidates who have qualified for the appointment by direct recruitment.
Registers `B', `C' and `D' contain the names of "the candidates from the categories mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) respectively of Clause (ii) of Rule 7".
There are two provisos which read as under :-  "Provided that while entering the names of candidates in Registers `B', `C' and `D' from the same district cadre their inter-se seniority in that cadre shall not be disturbed.
Provided further that mere entry of name of a person in a Register of candidates shall not confer upon him any right of appointment to the Service."
Rule 12 relates to the enlistment of the candidates.
It reads as under :-  "12.
Enlistment of candidates - (1) Each Deputy Commissioner shall, at such time in a year as the Commissioner may by general or special order specify, recommend to the Commissioner names of the officials from the categories of persons mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Clause (ii) of Rule 7, whom he considers suitable for appointment to the Service and who are borne on the cadre of his district and who have passed the departmental examination specified in the Regulations.
(2) The Commissioner shall consider the names of the persons recommended by the Deputy Commissioners under sub-rule (1) and may consider the names of any other persons belonging to the categories mentioned in and fulfilling the requirements of Clause (ii) of Rule 7, who have passed the Departmental Examination specified in the regulations, and prepare lists from amongst such persons for entering their names in Registers B, C and D, as the case may be: Provided that the lists prepared by the Commissioner shall contain names not exceeding twice the number of vacancies to be filled from amongst the candidates entered in Registers B, C and D" On a perusal of the rules, it is clear that the names of candidates in Register `D' have not to be entered in the order of the dates of passing the departmental examination.
In fact, while entering the names of candidates from the same district, the inter-se seniority in the cadre has to be protected.
Still further, the Commissioner has to consider the names of the persons for being placed on Register `D' on the recommendation of the Deputy Commissioner.
The rules do not envisage that the recommendation has to be made by the Deputy Commissioner immediately on the receipt of the result of the departmental examination.
In fact, the Deputy Commissioner has to make recommendation "at such time in a year as the Commissioner may by general or special order specify..." Nothing has been produced on the record to show that the Commissioner had issued any direction in the present case.
Still further, it appears that the respondents had determined the inter-se seniority of the eligible candidates on the basis of the date of their appointment as Kanungos.
In the absence of any rule to the contrary, the date of appointment of the persons working in different districts furnished a valid basis for determining the inter se seniority of the eligible candidates.
In any event, this was a reasonable criteria.
The respondents cannot be blamed for having adopted such a criteria.
The action did not suffer from any legal infirmity.
11.
It is true that the Commissioner, Patiala Division, had failed to maintain a register as required under the rules.
Strictly speaking, the action did not conform to the letter of law.
However, the failure to do so cannot be fatal to the action of the respondents.
It is the admitted position that respondents Nos. 3 and 4 were senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Kanungos.
They had qualified the departmental examination before the occurrence of a vacancy in the cadre of Naib Tehsildars.
Admittedly, they had passed the examination in July, 1986 while the vacancy had occurred in August, 1986.
If the names were to be entered in Register `D', the respondents would have been placed higher than the petitioner on the basis of their seniority and the proviso to Rule 8.
In this situation, the action of the respondents in filling up the post of Naib Tehsildars in the order of seniority in the cadre of Kanungos cannot be said to be illegal.
Equally, the action in reverting the petitioner while others who were senior, were allowed to continue, cannot be faulted.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner was admittedly appointed against a leave vacancy.
The appointment conferred no right on him.
No one junior to the petitioner in the cadre of Kanungos has been allowed to continue.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents was either arbitrary or illegal.
There was no violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
No other point was urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in these petitions which are dismissed.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.