Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15767, 15915, 15927 of 1994 and CWP No. 4081 of 1996.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts in CWP No. 4081 of 1996.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners claim that they had passed the Parveshka Examination conducted by the Hindi Vidyapeeth, Devghar (Bihar) in the year 1992-93.
This examination is equivalent to the Matriculation Examination conducted by the Punjab School Education Board.
On this basis they sought permission to appear in the 10+2 examination being conducted by the respondent-Board.
Their applications having been rejected on the ground that ``the 10th Class examination of the Hindi Vidyapeeth Devghar, Bihar is not a recognised institution in the Board record'', they have filed the present writ petition.
The petitioners pray that the order passed by the Board holding that they are ineligible to appear in the 12th Class examination be quashed and that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to allow them to appear in the 12th Class examination.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner claim.
It has been inter- alia averred that the Board has not ``accepted equivalence of the Matriculation Examination held by the Hindi Vidyapeeth Devghar to that of the Matriculation Examination of the Board and as such petitioners have been rightly refused (permission) to take the examination as they are not eligible.''
4.
It has been further pointed out that according to Regulation 15(1) a student has to study the prescribed subjects i.e. Punjabi, Hindi, English, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies.
The institution has been recognised only for the purpose of exemption from appearing in the Hindi Language Examination which is one of the prescribed subjects and not for treating the Parveshka Examinations equivalent to the Matriculation Examination.
The respondents maintain that the petitioners were not eligible to appear in the examination.
5.
The petitioners have filed a replication and an additional affidavit to reiterate their claim.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
According to Mr. BR Mahajan, the Board has published a list of the examinations which are treated as equivalent to the Matriculation Examination.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-7 with the replication.
Learned counsel submits that the Course passed by the petitioners is mentioned at Sr. No. 14 of the order.
The Board having recognised the examination of Parveshka as equivalent to the Matriculation Examination, the petitioners had rightly taken the 10+2 Examination and their results should be declared.
Learned counsel for the respondents contest this claim.
7.
Mr. Mahajan has produced the printed order issued by the Board.
It is taken on record as Mark `A'.
According to the learned counsel the institution from which the petitioners have passed the examination is mentioned at Sr. No. 14 at page 5, the relevant entry reads as under :-  ``Hindi Vidyapeeth  Darghar (Bihar) Parveshka.''
8.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, they appear to have passed the Parveshka Examination from the Hindi Vidyapeeth Devghar.
This is obvious for a perusal of a copy of the Certificate produced by the petitioners as Annexure P-6 with the replication.
It relates to petitioner No. 1.
Apparently, the two institutions are not the same.
Still further, there is a dispute regarding the factum of the examination having been declared as equivalent to the Matriculation Examination of the Board.
While the petitioners maintain that it has been so declared, the respondents insist that it was only in respect to the subject of Hindi.
9.
The existence of dubious institutions is not unknown.
Lest there should be any mistake on account of an error on facts, it appears appropriate that the petitioners should be relegated to their remedy before the Civil Court where parties will lead evidence and prove facts.
It would be possible on examination of facts and evidence to determine as to whether or not the institution from which the petitioners claim to have passed the examination is recognised.
It will also be possible for both sides to produce evidence to show that the Course content etc. is such that the examination was and could be declared equal to the Matriculation Examination.
10.
In view of the above, the writ petitions are dismissed.
The petitioners may, if so advised, seek their remedy before the Civil Court.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.