Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - The petitioner in this case was offered the post of Vocational Master (Automobile Engineering) in the Government Senior Secondary School, Tara Garh, District Gurdaspur, vide letter dated 14th July, 1994 (Annexure P-3).
The appointment of the petitioner along with other appointments was challenged in C.W.P.
No. 5985 of 1994, inter alia on the ground that the respondents have appointed persons against the post which were more than the advertised posts.
This writ petition was disposed of by a Division Bench of this Court on 28th September, 1994, and it was directed that the respondents could appoint only those persons who come within the advertised posts.
It is not disputed that the appointment of the petitioner was against the post which was within the number of posts advertised by the respondents.
2.
Since after the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 5985 of 1994, the petitioner was not appointed as Vocational Master (Auto Engineering) he filed the present writ petition.
3.
Written statements on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4 have been filed.
The main objection taken in the written statement was that the petitioner had not gained the requisite experience of three years after obtaining the educational qualification.
It is, however, not disputed that the petitioner has gained the requisite experience of three years prior to/after passing the Diploma in Automobile Engineering.
The learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the point raised in this writ petition is squarely covered by a judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 9884 of 1995 (Swaran Singh v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 7th May, 1996.
In view of this, this writ petition is allowed in the same terms as in the case of Swaran Singh (supra) and it is held that the petitioner is eligible for appointment by direct reruitment for the post of Vocational Master (Automobile Engineering).
The respondents are further directed to consider the petitioner's claim keeping in view the offer of appointment contained in Annexure P-3 and also on the basis of hypothesis that he is fully qualified for appointment to the post.
The respondents are further directed to complete the exercise within three months from today.
With this order, the writ petition stands disposed of.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.