GS Singhvi, J - On the basis of their selection by the District Education Officer, Rewari, the petitioners were appointed as Teachers on contract basis for 89 days vide order dated 3111997.
However, just after 10 days of joining the services by the petitioners, the appointing authority issued the impugned order terminating their services on the ground that Shiksha Shastri (B.Ed.
certificate) awarded by Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapitham, New Delhi is not equivalent to the qualification of OT Sanskrit and as the petitioners do not fulfil the required qualification of Shastri OT recognised by the Haryana Education Department, they cannot be treated eligible for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
This action of the District Education Officer has been challenged on the grounds of arbitrariness and non-application of mind.
The petitioners have prayed for quashing of the order Annexure P2 and similar other orders passed by the respondent No. 3.
2.
The respondents have defended the action taken by the respondent No. 3 on the ground that degree of Shiksha Shastri (B.Ed.
certificate) is not recognised by the Government of Haryana as equivalent to OT (Sanskrit) and, therefore, the petitioners are not entitled to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
3.
After having heard Shri RK Malik and Shri Jaswant Singh, we are of the opinion that the impugned orders should be quashed.
Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapitham, New Delhi has been declared to be a deemed university by the Government of India vide notification No. 9-2/85-U.3 dated 16th November, 1987.
Vide office memorandum No. 6/1/64-Estt.D dated 29th April, 1964, the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs decided that the decision regarding recognition of degrees/diplomas/certificates for the purpose of employment under the Central Government should be extended to the degrees/diplomas of the institutions deemed to be university under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
The issue of equivalence of the degree of Shastri awarded by Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapitham, New Delhi came to be examined by the equivalence committee of Kurukshetra University in its meeting held on 2531996.
The committee decided to treat the examination of Shiksha Shastri of the Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapitham, New Delhi as equivalent to B.Ed.
examination of Kurukshetra University.
On its part, the Government of Haryana has also issued general instructions vide circular letter dated 18.3.1975 for treating those degrees/diplomas and certificates as recognised for the purpose of employment which have already been recognised by the Government of India.
4.
In view of the above, it must be held that the Shiksha Shastri examination conducted by Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapitham, New Delhi is equivalent to B.Ed.
degree awarded by a university established by law and the petitioners, who have acquired such degrees, are eligible to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
5.
A similar issue has been examined by this Court in CWP No. 11520 of 1996, Veena Devi and two others v. State of Haryana and others, decided on December 20, 1996.
After examining the rival contentions, the Court held :-  "After having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that the petitioners who have passed Shastri examination as well as B.Ed.
examination conducted by Maharshi Dayanand University cannot be denied consideration for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers in view of the fact that Maharshi Dayanand University is an institution established by law enacted by the State Legislature and in terms of the instructions contained in the letter No. 43/93/78-5GSI dated 1661979 issued by the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana, candidates possessing higher qualifications are to be treated eligible for appointment to the Government service.
6.
We also find merit in the submission of the learned counsel that order dated 17.3.1993 passed by a Co-ordinate Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 14803 of 1991 is binding on the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and they are bound to consider the petitioners as eligible for the purpose of appointment as Sanskrit Teachers."
7.
By following the above decision CWP No. 19760 of 1996, Saroj Devi and three others v. State of Haryana and others, has been allowed on April 29, 1997.
8.
In view of the aforementioned decisions, the writ petition is allowed.
It is held that the petitioners are eligible to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teachers.
The order Annexure P2 and similar other orders passed by the respondent No. 3 terminating the services of the petitioners are declared illegal and are quashed.
However, the petitioners shall not be entitled to be reinstated because the term of their appointments has come to an end.
They shall only be entitled to be considered for fresh appointment as and when fresh recruitment is made by the respondents for making temporary as well as regular appointments.