K Sreedharan, C.J.
- Issues raised in CWP No. 8334 of 1997, CWP No. 8610 of 1997, CWP No. 8392 of 1997, CWP No. 8259 of 1997, CWP No. 8609 of 1997 and CWP No. 8158 of 1997 are identical.
Counsel appearing on either side agreed to have all these petitions disposed of by a common judgment.
Accordingly, we are passing this common judgment.
2.
The short question that arises for consideration in these writ petitions is whether the selection of candidates for Post Graduate Degree/Diploma course in Medicine from among HCMS candidates is in conformity with the instructions contained in prospectus issued for the entrance examination for 1997.
Petitioners and contesting respondents are member of HCMS.
After obtaining the 'no objection certificate' from the Government they took entrance examination held on 4-5-1997.
All the above candidates secured more than 20% marks in the entrance examination.
Contesting respondents who secured lower rank in the merit list prepared on the basis of marks in entrance examination were admitted to the course while petitioners who were in higher merit in the entrance examination were denied admission.
This was so done on the basis of Annexure 3 memo No. 31/3/96-IHB I dated 21-5-1997 issued by the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. of Haryana, Health Department.
Basing on provision contained in the said memo, contesting- respondents have been admitted to the various post-graduate course.
The admission so given is under challenge.
3.
Prospectus issued by the Director of Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak, for admission to MD/M.S./P.G.
Diploma entrance examination for 1997 courses was made available to us.
As per that prospectus, last date of receipt of application was 2131997 and date of entrance examination was 4-5-1997.
Parties to these proceedings after securing `no objection certificate' from the Government filed their applications on or before 21-3-1997.
They took the entrance examination which was held on 4-5- 1997.
Result of that examination was published on 8.5.1997.
List of HCMS category candidates who qualified in the written test for admission in the Post Graduate courses, in the order of merit, was published by the University.
A copy of the merit list is marked as annexure P/2.
Contesting-respondents who were given admission are not ranked higher in the said merit list.
Petitioners have secured higher ranks in that list.
4.
Chapter V of the prospectus deals with method of selection and admission to the course.
It states that a merit list of eligible candidates, 2-1/2 time the number of seats available in each category on the basis of written examination and weightage shall be notified and such candidates shall be called for interview.
So merit list must be prepared on the basis of marks obtained in the written examination and with reference to weightage.
Weightage of 10 marks is given to candidates who Graduated from Pt. BD Sharma, PGIMS, Rohtak.
Weightage of 5 marks is given to candidates who are residents/domicile of Haryana but have passed their MBBS from Medical College other than Pt. BD Sharma, PGIMS, Rohtak and recognised by MCI.
So merit list of candidates should be prepared on the basis of marks obtained in the written examination and based on the above mentioned "weightage".
No other criteria was to be looked into for preparing the merit list of candidates who are to be called for interview by the interview committee.
The interview was only for the candidates to exercise the choice of the subject to which they seek admission.
The committee has no other discretion at the time of interview.
5.
How the seats reserved for HCMS to be filled up and candidates ranked are also provided in the prospectus.
If two or more candidates secure identical marks in entrance test, their relative merit will be determined by the marks obtained by them at the final MBBS examination or equivalent examination.
In case the marks in the qualifying examination are also identical, the candidate senior in age is to be preferred.
HCMS candidates who obtained 'No objection certificate' from the Government, took entrance examination and got higher rank in a merit list prepared as per the guidelines fixed in the prospectus are to be admitted to the courses by the interview committee to the various disciplinses by counciling.
6.
While the provisions contained in the prospectus stood as stated above, the Govt. issued memo No. 31/3/96 dated 21-5-1997.
It stated that on re-consideration, the Govt. decided that the criteria for determination of merit of HCMS doctors is to be revised in the manner mentioned therein.
The criteria stated therein is against the provision contained in the prospectus.
So the question is whether criteria mentioned in the prospectus can be varied by the Government while process of selection was in progress.
In other words, whether the Government had any authority to change the criteria mid-stream.
At this juncture, it will be worthwhile to mention that the said memo dated 21-5-1997 was issued nearly two weeks after the declaration of the result of entrance examination held pursuant to the prospectus for 1997.
7.
In Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab etc., 1993(2) PLR 212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 a Full Bench of this Court went to the question as to whether criteria laid down in the Prospectus can be varied while the process of selection is in progress.
The bench observed :-  "Since the prospectus issued for admission to the 1992-93 course in the medical collage has the force of law and the students appeared in the examination on the basis of the instructions laid down in the said prospectus, it was not open to the State Government to issue contrary instructions and as such also the notification dated July 13, 1992 issued by the State Government is invalid in law."
We are in respectful agreement with the said observation.
Further we are bound by that decision.
It applies on all fours to the facts on hand.
Annexure P/3 memo upsets the entire criteria for selection of HCMS candidates as prescribed in the prospectus.
8.
Learned counsel for the contesting-respondents advanced argument that criteria similar to those contained in annexure P-3 wherein existence and the memo of 21-5-1997 was only a restatement of the pre-existing criteria.
There was no variation in old criteria and so the argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the provisions contained in the prospectus have been varied, has no force.
In support of this argument, they relied on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 14701 of 1990 where similar criteria was upheld.
9.
The criteria that was in force prior to the issue of the prospectus has been produced by the Goverment alongwith the written statement as annexure R-I/II that is memo No. 18-94-96-IHBI dated 21-2-1997.
The subject dealt with therein was "regarding issue of 'No objection certificate' for doing DM/MD/MS diploma courses."
So the principle stated therein can apply only to the issue of "No objection certificate."
This is made more clear in paragraph 2 of that memo.
Last portion of paragraph 2 states "notwithstanding anything contained in the earlier instructions in this regard, the following criteria shall apply for seeking NOC/Sponsoring certificates for different courses."
From this, it is crystal clear that the said memo was only regulating the conditions for the issuance of NOC.
It has nothing to do with the selection of candidates for admission to the courses.
Learned Addl.
AG Haryana laid stress to para 5 of the said memo.
Para 5 states that issuance of NOC BY ITSELF WILL NOT entitle a doctor to get admission to PG courses.
The doctor who secured NOC must also get atleast 20% marks in the entrance test.
Thus para 5 has not gone to lay down the criteria for selection.
Para 6 deals with the constitution of selection committee.
The selection committee is to choose the requisite number of candidates for the seats from those who are ranked in the merit list and to admit them to the various disciplines according to their choice at the time of interview.
No other discretion is available to the members of the said committee.
We are not in a position to hold that selection to the various disciplines is governed by the provision contained in the said memo.
Selection should be on the basis of the provision contained in the prospectus only.
10.
Memo dated 21-5-97 altered not only memo No. 18-94-96-IHBI dated 20-12-1996 but also tried to interfere with the criteria fixed in the Prospectus for admission.
Actually the memo dated 21-5-1997 was treated as one which controls the selection of candidates to the various courses and contesting respondents were admitted to different courses ignoring the provision contained in the prospectus.
11.
The decision in Civil Writ Petition No. 14701 of 1990 is not of any assistance to the contesting-respondents because condition as it existed in 1990 was that admission was to be made on the basis of common entrance test followed by the criteria for merit detailed in Annexure P3, the policy decision attached to the prospectus.
When the prospectus for 1990 specifically stated that admission will be on the basis of common entrance test followed by the criteria fixed by Govt., criteria contained in the memos which was in force at that time controlled the admission to the courses.
Such a provision is conspicuously absent in the prospectus of 1997.
In the absence of such provision in the prospectus, which has got force of law, condition mentioned in the prospectus should control the admission.
12.
It is common case that admission to the various Post Graduate courses in medicines, from HCMS candidate, for 1997 was made ignoring provisions contained in the prospectus, following the criteria mentioned in memo dated 21-5-1997.
By doing so, the merit in the entrance test has been ignored in its entirety.
In the light of the principle of law stated in the decision 1993-2 PLR 212 referred to above we are not in a position to uphold the admission given to the contesting-respondents.
Respondents 1 to 3 namely State of Haryana, Director Pt. BD Sharma PGIMS Rohtak and Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak represented by Registrar are directed to cancel the admission given to the contesting-respondents forthwith and to make selection of HCMS candidates on the basis of merit as contained in the prospectus for 1997.
This may be done as expeditiously as possible at any rate within two weeks from today.
14.
In CWP No. 8610 of 1997 petitioner is Raj Kumar.
He took entrance examination for admission to the Post Graduate courses with Roll No. 37.
He came out successful in the examination.
According to him instead of calling him for interview another Dr. Raj Kumar Gupta working in ESI Dispensary, Sirsa was called for interview.
Said Raj Kumar did not appear at the time of interview and so he was also not admitted.
Petitioner's grievance is that instead of Dr. Raj Kumar Kanwar he should have been called for interview and offered admission to the Post-Graduate courses on the basis of marks obtained by him in the entrance test.
Since we are directing the authorities to make admission to Post Graduate courses reserved for HCMS candidates afresh strictly on the basis of position in the merit list as per the Prospectus of 1997, Respondents should examine the case whether petitioner who took examination with Roll No. 37 is meritorious enough to be admitted to the course.
15.
Writ petitions are disposed of on the above terms.
Issue copy of the judgment dasti to the AG Haryana for complying with the direction given above.