Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was given an agency by the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
On April 25, 1994, this agency was terminated.
It was observed that the petitioner had not completed "the business guarantee required under regulation 9 of the Agents Regulations during - year ending 3131994."
The petitioner submitted a representation dated November 1, 1996.
It was rejected vide order dated January 25, 1997.
It was inter alia observed that "the matter has also been got investigated and it was concluded that the complaints have been sorted out by Shri Pillai with his complainants.
Though these complaints against Shri Pillai by various clients were of serious financial nature which would otherwise call for blacklisting of his agency, but since these have been sorted out by him and also since his Agency stands terminated, I, therefore, take a lenient view and allow the release of renewal commission to Shri Pillai.
However, his request for restoration of the Agency is rejected."
2.
Mr. Ashok Gupta, Counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the Respondent-Corporation in terminating the Agency was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
He further submits that even his request for restoration has been arbitrarily turned down.
3.
We are unable to accept the contention raised by the learned counsel.
It has been categorically observed in the impugned order that the petitioner had not completed the business guarantee required under Regulation 9 of the Agents Regulations.
There is not even an averment in the petition that this observation is incorrect.
It has been vaguely averred in paragraph 7 that the Respondent-Corporation had started refusing to accept the new policies in the month of April 1993.
However, no clear particulars of any proposal that may have been submitted by the petitioner in April 1993 or thereafter, have been disclosed.
In the absence of a categorical averment giving the details, the petitioner's contention cannot be accepted.
Still further, it has not been disputed that there were certain complaints against the petitioner.
Later on, he had sorted them out with his clients.
Yet, there were certain financial irregularities.
If in such a situation, the Respondent-Corporation has chosen to terminate the agency, the petitioner cannot complain that the action is arbitrary or unfair.
It is the result of his own doing.
He cannot blame anyone else for it.
4.
Faced with this factual position, it has been contended that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination in as much as the agencies of certain other persons which had been initially terminated were later on extended.
5.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
Firstly, there is nothing to show that there were any complaints against the persons mentioned in paragraph 12 of the petition.
Secondly, even if it is assumed that the Corporation had wrongly granted extension in certain other cases, the petitioner cannot be heard to say that this court should compel the Corporation to repeat the wrong.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.