Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners are working as Law Officers with the Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Limited.
Their conditions of service are governed by the provisions of `The Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank Limited, Staff Service (Common Cadre), Rules, 1974'.
Under the provisions of these rules, as originally promulgated, it was inter alia provided that the posts of Assistant Secretaries and Chief Inspecting Officers could be filled up either by transfer on deputation or "by promotion from Law Officer/Inspecting Officers/Development Officers."
In March 1994, the provision was amended to inter-alia provide that the post of Assistant Secretary (Law) shall be filled "by promotion from Law Officer only".
The posts of Assistant Secretary/Regional Manager shall be filled either by transfer or "by promotion from amongst the District Managers/Development Officers."
The petitioners allege that the total number of posts of Law Officers is eight.
They have been given only one promotional post of Assistant Secretary (Law).
There are 12 posts of District Managers/Development Officers and eight posts of Assistant Secretaries.
By the amendment in the law, they have been denied the right to be considered for promotion to all the 20 posts.
Thus, the chances of promotion of the petitioners have been totally obliterated.
This amendment was made because the Law Officers even though lesser in number were being "promoted frequently.....whereas the Inspecting Officers (now District Managers) Development Officers are more in number" but were not getting the promotions.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the action of the Respondent-Bank in amending the rule wa wholly arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
Learned counsel placed firm reliance on the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in TR Kothandaraman etc. v. TN Water Supply and Drainage BD & Ors., JT 1994(6) SC 157 : 1994(4) SCT 763 (SC).
2.
Admittedly, the Board of Directors of the Respondent-Bank had followed the prescribed procedure before making the amendment.
It has even been approved by the Registrar of the Cooperative Societies in accordance with the provisions of Section 37 of the Haryana Cooperative Societies Act, 1984.
The only question that arises for consideration is the amended rule invalid only because the chances of promotion of the Law Officers have been reduced ?
3.
It is true that anyone who joins a service has a legitimate expectation of some promotional avenue.
It is also clear that initially the Law Officers were eligible to be considered for promotion to the higher posts of Assistant Secretaries/Chief Inspecting Officers alongwith the other Inspecting Officers and the Development Officers.
However, if on consideration of the matter, the Bank felt that other sections of employees viz. the Inspecting Officers (now designated as District Mangers and Development Officers) who were more in number but were not getting adequate chances of promotion and thus, the rule needed to be amended, it was entitled to amend the rule.
This is precisely what has been done.
As a result, the petitioners' chances of promotion may have been reduced.
This does not, however, render the rule invalid or ultra vires.
4.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram contended that the reason given by the Bank was extraneous to the rule making power.
5.
This contention cannot be accepted.
The employer is the best judge of its needs.
It is aware of the factual position.
If the chances of promotion were not evenly distributed, it was entitled to make a suitable amendment.
6.
Learned counsel placed reliance on the decision in TR Kothandraman's case (supra) to contend that the rule is invalid.
Specific reference was made to the observations in paragraph 23.
This was a case where the diploma holders and the degree holders were made eligible for promotion.
However, a quota was fixed.
In that context, the Court was considering the question as to whether "the ratio could be made so inequitable as to mock at the guarantee of equality?"
Such is not the position in the present case.
By the amendment of the rules, one of the posts has been taken out of the cadre of Assistant Secretaries/Chief Inspecting Officers and designated as Assistant Secretary (Law).
Only Law Officers like the petitioners are eligible to be considered for promotion against this post.
The remaining posts have to be filled up from amongst others.
Thus, there is a complete bifurcation of the cadre.
Consequently, the petitioners have no right to be considered for promotion to the posts other than the Assistant Secretary (Law).
Thus, the decision referred to by the counsel has no application.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.