GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to quash the termination of the services of the petitioner brought about by the respondent No. 3 w.e.f.
1431995.
2.
The name of the petitioner was sponsored by the employment exchange for appointment as Math Mistress.
She was interviewed on 2571994 by the District Level Selection Committee.
The petitioner's name was placed at No. 4 in the list prepared by the committee.
She was appointed as Math Mistress by order dated 15111994 against the leave vacancy of Smt. Sheela Dixit.
The petitioner joined on 1121994 and continued in service till 1431995 when she was relieved due to the joining of the incumbent who had proceeded on leave.
This action of the respondents has been challenged by the petitioner on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
According to the petitioner, respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were appointed as Math Mistresses on 1221995 and 931995 respectively and, therefore, both of them are junior to her and the respondent No. 3 should have followed the rule of last come first go at the time of the termination of her services.
3.
The respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have defended the impugned decision on the ground that although the seniority of ad hoc teachers is to be maintained at District level but the petitioner has no locus standi to challenge the termination of her service because she was appointed against a leave vacancy.
As against this, the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were appointed as Mistresses on ad hoc basis.
The respondents have further stated that the name of the petitioner was not sponsored by the employment exchange in response to the demand letter dated 211995 and as such her name was not considered for ad hoc appointment when the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were selected.
In a separate written statement, the respondent No. 4 has pleaded that the petitioner can have no competition qua her because the petitioner was appointed against leave vacancy whereas she had been appointed on ad hoc basis after due selection by the competent authority.
4.
The question which arises for adjudication by the Court is whether the respondent No. 3 was bound to prepare seniority of ad hoc Math Mistresses of District Rohtak and the rule of last come first go should have been followed while terminating the services of the petitioner.
5.
From the facts, which have been brought on record, it is clearly established that the petitioner as well as the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were appointed as Math Mistresses on the basis of recommendations made by the District Level Selection Committee.
The record also reveals that the competent authority had sent requisitions to the employment exchange in the years 1994 and 1995.
Name of the petitioner was sponsored in the year 1994 and she was one of the candidates who were selected by the District Level Selection Committee.
The names of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were sponsored in response to the requisition sent on 211995.
This time the name of the petitioner was not sponsored by the employment exchange because she had already been appointed as Math Mistress vide order dated 15111994.
The respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were selected pursuant to the requisition dated 211995.
It is thus clear that the department adopted identical procedure before appointing the petitioner and the respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
At the cost of repetition, we deem it appropriate to observe that in both the cases identical requisitions had been sent to the employment exchange and after interviewing the eligible candidates, the District Level Selection Committee prepared select list in the order of merit.
The only difference which can be discerned in the appointments of the petitioner on the one hand and those of the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 on the other hand is that the petitioner was appointed against a leave vacancy and the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were appointed on ad hoc basis.
However, in our view the tenor of the order of the appointment cannot be determinative of the nature of the appointment of the petitioner which has to be treated as an ad hoc appointment.
If the petitioner had not been appointed against the leave vacancy, then her name was bound to be forwarded to the competent authority for the purpose of selection as ad hoc Math Mistress in response to the requisition sent on 121995 and as already mentioned above this seems to have not been done because the petitioner had already been appointed as Math Mistress.
In the background of these facts, we have no hesitation to hold that the petitioner should have been treated senior to the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 in the category of ad hoc Math Mistress.
The language used in the order dated 15111994 is clearly indicative of the fact that for all practical purposes, the official respondents had also treated the petitioner as an ad hoc appointee.
6.
The instructions issued by the respondent No. 2 vide circulars dated 251984 and 14101985 clearly show that seniority of ad hoc teachers is to be prepared on the basis of length of service and the rule of last come first go has to be followed at the time of termination of the services of the ad hoc teachers.
These instructions reflect the desire of the department to act strictly in accordance with the equality clause embodied in Articles 14 and 16.
Therefore, before terminating the services of the petitioner w.e.f.
1431995 on account of joining of the incumbent who had proceeded on leave, the respondent No. 3 should have considered the candidature of the petitioner vis-a-vis other ad hoc Math Mistresses and the junior most should have been asked to relinquish the post.
By not following this rule the respondent No. 3 has violated the fundamental right of equality guaranteed to the petitioner under Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Applicability of the rule of last come first go as well as Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India stands unequivocally established by the judgment of the Supreme Court in The Manager, Govt Branch Press and another v. DB Belliappa, AIR 1979 SC 429.
The proposition of law laid down in the decision is as under :-  "If the services of a temporary Government servant are terminated in accordance with the conditions of his service on the ground of unsatisfactory conduct or his unsuitability for the job and/or for his work being unsatisfactory, or for a like reason which marks him off a class apart from other temporary servants who have been retained in service, there is no question of the applicability of Article 16.
Conversely, if the services of a temporary Government servant are terminated arbitrarily, and not on the ground of his unsuitability, unsatisfactory conduct or the like which would put him in a class apart from his juniors in the same service, a question of unfair discrimination may arise, notwithstanding the fact that in terminating his service, the appointing authority was purporting to act in accordance with the terms of the employment .........................
The services of a temporary Government servant were terminated without giving any reason while some other employees junior to him were retained in service.
The employee was earlier served with a show cause notice questioning his integrity and fidelity but the Government ultimately adhered to the stand that there was no nexus between the show cause notice and termination of service.
Held, the termination of service was made arbitrarily and not on ground of unsuitability or other reason."
(Underlining is ours) Applying the above quoted principle of law, we hold that the termination of services of the petitioner w.e.f.
1431995 is contrary to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The termination of services of the petitioner is declared illegal.
She shall be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits except the salary for the period between 1431995 and the date of this order.
The respondent No. 3 is directed to determine the seniority of ad hoc Math Mistresses of District Rohtak and pass an appropriate order for dispensing with the services of junior most person.
In order to avoid further litigation, we direct the respondent No. 3 to give notice and hearing to the junior most person before pass an order terminating services of such junior most person.
It is also made clear that if vacant posts of Math Mistress are available and no regularly selected person is awaiting appointment, then it shall not be necessary for the respondent No. 3 to terminate the services of the junior most person.