Sat Pal, J - The petitioners in this case are working as Agricultural Sub Inspectors in the Office of Soil Conservation Department, Punjab.
In para 6 of the writ petition, it has been stated that there are similar posts of Agricultural Sub Inspectors in the Department of Animal Husbandry which was also formed out of the Agricultural Department like the Department of Soil Conservation.
It has further been stated that in the Department of Animal Husbandry 20% quota has been fixed for the Agricultural Sub Inspectors for promotion to the posts of Agricultural Inspectors/Agricultural Development Officers but the request of the petitioners to provide similar 20% quota for promotion has been rejected by the respondents.
It has, therefore, been prayed that the respondents be directed to consider the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Soil Conservation Officers on completion of 10 years service as Agricultural Sub Inspectors like the Department of Animal Husbandry.
2.
In the written statement, filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2, it has been stated that the Agricultural Sub Inspectors of Animal Husbandry Department and Agricultural Sub Inspectors of the Soil Conservation Department are governed by the different Departmental Rules, and even qualifications are also different.
It has further been stated that the nature of the work in the two Departments is also different and as such the promotion quota cannot be equated with the Animal Husbandry.
In para 2 of the written statement, it has also been stated that the Government created promotion avenue of 20% promotions for Agricultural Sub Inspectors/Surveyors working in the Department of the petitioners, i.e. 10% for each category against total number, of sanctioned posts.
3.
Mr. Dogra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, submitted that since the nature of work of the writ petitioners and of the Agricultural Sub Inspectors working in the Animal Husbandry Department was the same, 20% posts should be provided for promotion of the petitioners and other persons working in the same cadre for promotion to the posts of Agricultural Inspectors (now designated as Soil Conservation Officers).
In support of his submission, he placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. (Mrs.) OZ Hussain v Union of India, 1990(1) RSJ 164.
4.
I, however, do not find any merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel of the petitioners.
In Para 6 of the written statement, it has clearly been stated that the agricultural Sub Inspectors working in the Animal Husbandry and Agricultural Sub Inspectors working in the Soil Conservation Department are governed by different Departmental rules and even the qualifications and the nature of work for the two posts are different.
These facts have not been controverted by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
In view of this, the claim of the petitioners that 20% posts should be sanctioned for promotion of persons working in their cadre, is not tenable.
Even otherwise, as stated in the written statement, 20% posts of Agricultural Inspectors/Sectional Officers/Soil Conservation Inspectors have been reserved for promotion from amongst the Agricultural Sub Inspectors and Surveyors, in the Soil Conservation Department and out of these 20% posts, 10% are filled up by promotion from amongst the surveyors and 10% by promotion from amongst the Agricultural Sub Inspectors.
Thus the ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Dr (Mrs.) OZ Hussain (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners is not applicable to the facts of this case.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is dismissed.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.