RS Mongia, J - Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
We have also perused the judgment of the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Hisar, in Sessions Case No. 34 of 1992.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge in his judgment dated September 3, 1993, has recorded the finding as regards the petitioner's conduct and character as under, --  "Since the prosecutrix was more than 21 years of age at the time of commission of alleged offence and she accompanied the accused from CH Hisar to his room situated in Jawahar Nagar Hisar without any resistance and had sexual intercourse with him of her own free will, the accused cannot be held to have committed any offence.
The prosecution has miserably failed to prove the offence either under Section 366 IPC or 376 IPC.
So, the accused is acquitted.
File be consigned to the records.
Announced in open Court."
2.
In the present writ petition, the petitioner has sought the relief that the respondents be directed to accept the petitioner's form for appearing in the final year examination of the nursing course and allow her to appear in the said examination to be held in March, 1996 and that order dated March 2, 1994, Annexure P/2, disallowing the petitioner to appear in the examination of Haryana Nurses Registration Council, be quashed.
The examination form was to be submitted by the first respondent with the certificate.
In paragraph 1 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No.2, the relevant bye-law regulating the final year general nursing examination has been set out and it inter alia provided that a candidate shall be eligible for admission if he produces a certificate of good moral conduct issued by the Principal Tutor or head of the institution.
The Principal has refused to certify good moral conduct of the petitioner in view of the finding recorded by the criminal Court.
In our opinion, there was no error whatsoever in refusing to issue the good moral conduct certificate to the petitioner.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, vehemently urged that the petitioner committed no fault and she could not be punished in the manner in which it has been done.
We are unable to appreciate this contention, in view of the fact that the petitioner has been appearing for the nursing course where the moral conduct assumes great importance.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are satisfied that the refusal to issue the good moral conduct certificate cannot be said to be illegal.
There is no substance in the writ petition.
Writ petition to stand summarily rejected.