Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - On June 19, 1996 a copy of representation submitted by Smt. Onkar Kaur was received in the office of this Court.
It was alleged by the applicant that her husband had retired as a Sub Divisional Engineer on February 29, 1980.
He had died on November 29, 1995.
The gratuity and leave encashment benefits had not been released in spite of various representations.
This representation was placed before THB Chalapathi, J It was ordered that the representation be treated as a writ petition and it be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice for appropriate orders.
It is C.W.P.
10468 of 1996.
2.
In pursuance of the order of Hon'ble the Chief Justice, the matter was placed before this Bench.
A direction for the issue of a notice to the Chief Engineer, Public Works Department, Building and Roads Branch, Patiala, "to show cause as to why a direction for payment of the retiral benefits as may be due to the deceased husband of the applicant alongwith interest @ 15 per annum be not issued" was given.
A written statement was filed.
It was inter alia pointed out that the petitioner's husband Mr. HS Virdi, "was found responsible for the loss amounting to Rs. 3695341".
The amount of death-cum- retirement gratuity due to him was Rs. 20312/-.
This was adjusted against the amount that had to be recovered from him.
It was further pointed out that he had filed Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988 challenging the order for recovery of Rs. 3695341.
In view of the factual position as disclosed by the Department, it was directed that this matter be listed along with Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988.
It was also ordered that the learned counsel for the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988 shall be informed.
Both the matters were, thus, listed.
However, no one appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
3.
We have perused the record of Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988.
It appears that HS Virdi was retired from service on February 29, 1980.
The retiral benefits as due to him were not released.
Consequently, he had filed a suit for a declaration inter alia praying that he was entitled to the payment of "all his dues pending with the department and retiring pension, gratuity, GP Fund------."
On August 16, 1983, the Additional Senior Sub Judge, Bhatinda, dismissed the suit as withdrawn with the direction to the defendants "to expeditiously decide the cases of the plaintiff regarding pension, GPF., Gratuity and leave preparatory to retirement."
Thereafter, vide letter dated February 8, 1984, the Chief Engineer issued a charge sheet to the petitioner under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
It was inter alia alleged that the petitioner had failed to turn up to hand over the complete charge/record and that he was responsible for the shortage of material which had caused a loss of Rs. 3695341.
He had, thus, betrayed the confidence reposed in him and was guilty of misconduct.
The petitioner had submitted a reply.
He had submitted that having retired from service, he was no longer a Government employee and as such the provisions of the Punishment and Appeal Rules were not applicable to him.
He submitted a detailed reply on merits also.
A copy of the petitioner's reply dated February 24, 1984, is as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
After the lapse of more than four years, the Government passed an order dated July 14, 1988.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
After reproducing the charges against the petitioner and noticing the fact that he had submitted a reply, it was observed as under :-  "And whereas, his reply to the charge sheet was considered by the Government after obtaining the comments of the Secretary, Punjab Housing Board, Chandigarh and it was found that Shri Virdi did not turn up and paid no heed to hand over the charge of material despite several letters written to him by the Divisional Engineer (C), Punjab Housing Development Board, Sangrur and in the face of it charges No. 1 to 4 clearly stand established against him.
Charge No. 5 also stands established against him as he did not make efforts to settle the imprest money of Rs. 25033 outstanding against him.
Now, therefore, the Government in pursuance of Rule 10 of Punjab Civil Services (P&A) Rules, 1970, and also in consultation with the PPSC has decided to impose upon Shri Virdi the punishment of recovery of Rs. 36,953.41 (36,703.8 + 25033) on account of non-submission of charge of material and non-submission of the account of imprest of Rs. 25033 outstanding against him."
The petitioner HS Virdi filed Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988 to challenge this order.
He inter alia alleged that the order was passed "without considering the reply of the petitioner and without giving any opportunity of hearing to him------the impugned order (Annexure P-5) does not contain the reasons."
He consequently prayed that this order be quashed and the respondents be directed to release the gratuity and other retiral benefits with compound interest at the rate of 18 per cent.
4.
During the pendency of this petition, the petitioner had expired.
Consequently, his legal representatives including the widow Smt. Onkar Kaur were impleaded as petitioners.
5.
Admittedly, the charge sheet for imposition of a major penalty had been issued to the petitioner.
However, after the petitioner had filed a reply no inquiry was held.
This fact was categorically admitted by Mr. GS Dhillon, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, who had appeared on behalf of the respondents.
In fact, he had ascertained the factual position from the departmental representative who was present in Court.
Thus, it is clear that no evidence was adduced to prove the charges against the petitioner.
In this situation, it is not understood as to on what basis it was held that "charges No. 1 to 4 clearly stand established ------.
Charge No. 5 also stands established-----".
Still further, it was not even suggested that comments of the Secretary of the Punjab Housing Board, Chandigarh, were ever conveyed to the officer.
Thus, it appears that the order for the recovery of Rs. 3695341 passed against HS Virdi was not in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
It was not just and fair.
It was based on material which was never put to the officer.
The explanation furnished by him was not even taken into consideration.
Why was it rejected ?
No reasons were given.
Resultantly, the order dated July 14, 1988, cannot be sustained.
It is consequently quashed.
As a result, Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988 is allowed.
6.
In Civil Writ Petition No 10468 of 1997, Smt. Onkar Kaur, widow of Harbans Singh Virdi, has claimed that the benefits of gratuity, leave encashment, etc. have not been released to her so far.
In the reply filed by the Executive Engineer, it is stated that the leave encashment of Rs. 8541/- and gratuity amounting to Rs. 2031250 were withheld on account of the inquiry pending against HS Virdi.
Since the order passed by the department after the inquiry has been quashed by us in Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988, the petitioner Smt. Onkar Kaur shall be entitled to the retiral benefits which were due to her husband.
Admittedly, an amount of Rs. 8541/- was due on account of leave encashment and Rs. 2031250 by way of gratuity.
Resultantly, an amount of Rs. 2885350 was due to the officer on his retirement on February 29, 1980.
More than 17 years have passed since then.
This amount shall now be paid to the petitioner Smt. Onkar Kaur with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from June 1, 1980 till the date of actual payment.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
A copy of this order shall be conveyed by the Registry through Registered AD post to Smt. Onkar Kaur at the address given in her representation dated June 3, 1996.
7.
We are conscious of the fact that in Civil Writ Petition No 8056 of 1988 besides the widow Smt. Onkar Kaur, the other children of HS Virdi had been impleaded as parties.
However, it appears that the children are settled.
No one has appeared on their behalf.
They do not even appear to have pursued the case.
The widow is the one who is needy.
Consequently, we have passed the order in her favour.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.