GC Garg, J - Challenge in this writ petition is to the order dated 2651995, Annexure P2 whereby the petitioner was placed under suspension by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Local Government Department.
The only ground on which the above order has been impugned is that the State Government had no power to suspend the petitioner who was the employee of the Improvement Trust, Yamunanagar and in any case of the Improvement Trust, Jagadhri.
2.
It is not necessary to notice the facts in detail as the controversy raised in this writ petition has already been settled by this Court.
Few facts however, in brief, are that the petitioner was the permanent employee of the Improvement Trust, Yamunanagar.
Improvement Trust, Yamunanagar and Improvement Trust, Jagadhri were dissolved by the Government vide notifications dated 2861991, Annexures P7 and P7/A respectively.
The petitioner was thereafter transferred from Improvement Trust, Yamunanagar to Improvement Trust, Jagadhri.
He was thereafter placed under suspension by order dated 2651995, Annexure P2, passed by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Local Government Department.
It is that order which is under challenge in this writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner by reference to section 18 of the Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922 and Rule 12 framed thereunder as also the instructions, Annexures P.1, submitted that the Financial Commissioner and the Secretary to Government, Haryana had no jurisdiction to pass the order of suspension in the case of the petitioner, he being an employee of the Improvement Trust, Jagadhri.
4.
In the written statement it is stated that the petitioner has since been reinstated by order dated 23.3.1996, Annexure P.1 and posted as such in the Improvement Trust, Bhiwani against a vacant post.
As already noticed, the controversy raised in this petition is not res integra as the dispute raised is squarely covered against the State of Haryana by a decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition 7481 of 1995 (S.P.
Goel v. State of Haryana and others,) decided on 1131996, by a Division Bench.
This writ petition is consequently allowed and order dated 26.5.1996, Annexure P2 is quashed.
5.
Petitioner has already been paid subsistence allowance for the period he remained under suspension.
However, nothing could be shown that the petitioner has been paid the balance amount of his salary for the period of his suspension.
Since the order of his suspension has been withdrawn, the petitioner would obviously be entitled to full salary for the period of his suspension and it is so ordered.
The amount payable in respect of salary etc. shall now be discbursed to the petitioner within three months.
It will, however, be open to the authorities to take proceedings for any lapse on the part of the petitioner, if so required, and as permissible in law.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.