SC Malte, J. (Oral) - By this writ petition the petitioners have challenged the notification dated 11101979 issued by the State Government in exercise of powers under Section 5 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, whereby all the employees employed in private coaching classes/schools, including Nursery Schools and Technical Institutions in the Union Territory, Chandigarh, have been included in the list of employees to whom the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 would apply.
The main plank of the contention is that neither the educational coaching classes can be included in the notification, nor the present notification would apply to the petitioners because the Schools run by the petitioners cannot be treated as private coaching classes/institutions.
The argument does not appeal to me.
The writ petition indicates that these educational schools are duly recognized by the Government as private institutions.
Annexure P.1 with the petition shows that the petitioner is an educational school governed under certain bye-laws and rules of the Society which runs the Schools.
It also appears that the Government Officer, such as Director of Public Institutions, Chandigarh Administration, is also a member of the Committee in meeting of the institutions, held for passing certain resolutions.
It is so clear from Annexure P.1.
Obviously, therefore, it is clear that the petitioner is a private educational institution imparting education to the pupils.
The notification states that it applies to employees including private coaching classes/schools......etc.
It means that it applies to all the private coaching classes/schools which are recognized as educational institutions.
I make it clear that presently I am not concerned with recognition of the coaching classes or the school as a criterion to attract the notification.
The notification itself does not make classification on the ground of educational institution having been recognized or not.
That apart, institution which is recognised by the government as a school cannot be said to be such a private coaching class in which education is imparted on private basis, which is like a tuition class.
The notification, therefore, would apply to the petitioners also.
2.
The next question for determination is whether the teaching staff would be covered by such notification.
On behalf of the respondents my attention was invited to the case of Manmohan Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 28.9.1992 : 1993(1) SCT 421.
In that case the Division Bench of this Court observed that the State was entitled to include the educational institution in the list of the schedule to which the Minimum Wages Act would apply.
While considering that aspect, their Lordships have declined to interfere in the application of the Minimum Wages Act in respect of a post of employees under the categories of non-teaching staff.
The reason assigned was that since the minimum wages described under the Act is to the tune of Rs. 52575 per month which is such a small amount that it hardly deserves interference in the writ jurisdiction in case of such part time non-teaching staff.
On behalf of the petitioners my attention was invited to a case of Haryana Unrecognised Schools' Association v. State of Haryana, 1996(4) SCC 225 : 1996(2) SCT 704.
In that case, the Supreme Court considered the similar provisions and observed as follows in so far as it pertains to the teaching staff of such institutions:-  ``We are of the view that the teachers employed by educational institutions whether the said institutions are imparting primary, secondary, graduate or post-graduate education cannot be called as `workmen' within the meaning of section 2(s) of the Act.
Imparting of education which is the main function of teachers cannot be construed as skilled or unskilled manual work or clerical work.
Imparting of education is in the nature of a mission or a noble vocation.
A teacher educates children, he moulds their character, builds up their personality and makes them fit to become responsible citizens.
Children grow under care of teachers.
The clerical work, if any they may do, is only incidental to their principal work of teaching.''
3.
Thus, on construing both these rulings.
It is obvious that the respondents were justified in issuing the impugned notification.
However, that notification is hereby held to be inapplicable to the teaching staff of the petitioners.
In this view, I further hold that direction issued by the Assistant Labour Commissioner vide his letter dated 1591981, addressed to the petitioners (Annexure P.11) is also quashed to the extent it covers the teaching staff of the petitioners.
Petition disposed of accordingly.
No order as to costs.