THB Chalapathi, J (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioners are seeking the relief that the services rendered by them in the privately-managed Government aided schools be taken into account for the service benefits.
2.
The petitioners were working as teachers in privately-managed Government aided schools.
The said schools were taken over by the Government in the year 1976.
According to the petitioners, they have been appointed in the privately-managed Government aided schools in the year 1967 and they rendered services nearly 9 years in the said schools before taking over the said Schools by the Government.
According to petitioners their services have to be counted for the purpose of seniority and other benefits.
3.
The point that arises in this petition is squarely covered by the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab and others v. Dev Dutt Kaushal and others, AIR 1996 SC 85 : 1995(4) SCT 575 (SC) wherein it has been held as follows :  ``Actually on the take over of the college, the teachers/lecturers had no right as such to be absorbed or to be appointed under the government.
Their appointment in government service was subject to fulfilment of certain conditions specified above.
The gift deed repeatedly states that on such appointment, they shall be treated as `new entrants' and shall be placed at the bottom of the seniority list, as on the date of the absorption, in the relevant grade/category.
The gift deed further stated that in matters not specifically provided for therein, the government's rules, regulations and orders will apply.
In such a situation, it is obvious that the claim for continuance till the attainment of sixty years is simply not acceptable.''
Clause IV of the deed taking over the Schools in the present case reads as follows :-  ``Staff members will be treated as fresh entrants and they will be placed at the bottom of the old Government employees in their respective cadre.''
Thus, the facts in this case are similar and identical with the facts of the case decided by the Apex Court.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.