Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The two petitioners were recruited as Constables in the Haryana Police on November 25, 1986 and December 27, 1986 respectively.
They were allocated to Police Districts, Hissar and Jind.
On March 9, 1989, the petitioners were deputed to the Commando Force.
In March 1993, they were promoted as Head Constables on purely ad hoc basis.
On January 1, 1994, the petitioners were deputed for a refresher course for Commandos at the Police Training College, Madhuban.
While they were undergoing this course, a selection test for deputing constables for the Lower School Course was held at Jind and Hissar.
This test was conducted in Police District Jind on January 28-29, 1994.
The test at Hissar was conducted on January 30-31, 1994.
On February 7, 1994, petitioner No. 1 had submitted a representation pointing out that being on deputation he "had not been called for the B-1 test for the year 1994-95''.
He wanted to know ``about it by appearing before the higher officers'' as to when ``the B-I test is going to be held.''
He sought permission to appear before the higher officers.
On this representation, the Inspector Incharge of the Company made an endorsement dated February 28, 1994 that no information had been received regarding B-1 test from Hissar District.
A copy of the representation alongwith the endorsement thereon is at Annexure P4 with the writ petition.
A similar representation was submitted by petitioner No. 2 which is also appended with Annexure P4.
Even on this representation, a similar endorsement was made on February 8, 1994.
Thereafter, both the petitioners submitted a representation dated nil pointing out that petitioner No. 1 had been sent back to his parent District Hissar on February 14, 1994.
Petitioner No. 2 had also been sent to Hissar after the completion of the Course on March 2, 1994.
During this period, the tests were held in Districts Hissar and Jind.
The petitioners complain that they had not been informed and, thus, they were deprived of the chance to appear in the test.
They prayed that the correct position may be ascertained.
Mr. Rohtash Singh made an endorsement that he had seen the record of Commando Refresher course and that there was ``no TPM or PRM in regard to B.1 test.''
This representation was forwarded to the higher authorities.
In this situation, the petitioners filed the present writ petition on April 19, 1994 with a prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to depute them for the Lower School Course.
They also sought an interim direction for being sent for the course which had already commenced on April 1, 1994.
The petition was listed for hearing on April 21, 1994.
The Bench directed the issue of notice of motion.
On May 3, 1994, learned counsel for the respondents sought time to file the written statement.
Ultimately, the case was listed for hearing on June 15, 1994.
The writ petition was admitted.
It was further directed that the two petitioners shall be provisionally sent to undergo the Lower School Course ``which is going on presently, subject to the decision of the civil writ petition.''
As a result, the petitioners were sent for the course.
The writ petition has now been listed for final hearing.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and 5 to 6 by Mr. Anil Dawra, IPS, Superintendent of Police, Hissar.
It has been averred that the ``petitioner No. 1 was duly informed about the B.1 test held in Police Lines, Hissar in the month of January, 1994 through the Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal (Respondent No. 6) vide his office letters No. 19904-46/CRC dated 2.12.93, 20542-65 dated 2.12.93 and 17-41 dated 3194, 443-75/CRC dated 10194 and 522-29 dated 12194 (Copies Annexure R1 to R/5).''
It has been further reiterated that ``all the eligible candidates for B-I test (including petitioner No. 1) were duly informed.... through their respective Incharge of Units where they were serving at the relevant time.
Petitioner No. 1 himself is at fault for his omissions and commissions as he failed to appear in the B-I test held in January, 1994 despite he was duly informed through Respondent No. 5 that the B-I test of Hissar District was to be held on 28194 vide Annexure R/3".
It has also been stated that information had been sent to Superintendent of Police, Commando, Karnal about the date of B.1 test to be held on January 28, 1994 in District Hissar vide TPM dated December 30, 1993.
A copy has been appended as Annexure R/6 with the written statement.
Thereafter, Respondent No. 6 had directed all the Units Incharge serving under him to inform all the eligible candidates serving in their respective Units.
The allegation that the petitioner No. 1 was not informed about the test, has, thus, been controverted.
3.
With regard to the representations, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P.4 and P.5 with the writ petition, it has been stated that on enquiries made from the office of Respondent No. 5, no record about these representations is available.
It has been further stated that Respondent No. 6 has vide his letter dated May 9, 1994, informed the Superintendent of Police, Hissar that these representations ``were not received/diarised in his office.''
It has also been pointed out that petitioner No. 1 never appeared before any higher officer.
On the basis of these averments, it has been pointed out that petitioner No. 1 has no cause for grievance.
4.
A separate written statement has been filed by the Superintendent of Police, Jind, Respondent No. 4.
It has been stated that petitioner No. 2 had joined the Haryana Police as Constable on November 27, 1986 in the Ist Battalion of Haryana Armed Police.
He was ``duly informed about the B.1 test held in Police Lines, Jind in the month of January, 1994 through the Superintendent of Police, Commando Haryana vide'' letters dated December 2, 1993, December 20, 1993, January 3, 1994 and January 13, 1994.
Copies of these letters have been produced as Annexures R.1 to R.4.
It has been further stated that ``no record about Annexures P.4 and P.5 is available.''
It has also been pointed out that Respondent No. 6 has informed Respondent No. 3 that these two representations were not received/diarised in his office.
On the basis of these averments, it has been pointed out that petitioner No. 2 has no cause for grievance.
Accordingly, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
5.
The case had come up for hearing on August 8, 1996.
During the course of arguments, it was pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners that a copy of the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, 5 and 6 had not been supplied to him.
Learned counsel for the respondents had given him a copy.
The case was adjourned at the request of the counsel.
Even though, the petitioners had sufficient time by the date when the case was finally heard, yet they did not file any replication controverting the averments as made in the two written statements.
6.
Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the respondents were duty-bound to publish a notice in the Papers regarding the B.I test.
They have failed to do so, the petitioners were entitled to be deputed for the course without having qualified the test.
Learned counsel referred to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 587 of 1992 decided on February 14, 1994.
He also relied on the decision in HC Rishi Raj v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(2) SLR 794 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
777.
7.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that the petitioners had been duly informed about the dates of the tests in the two Districts.
The specific averments made in this behalf in the written statements have not been controverted by the petitioners by filing any replication.
Still further, the two petitioners had never taken the tests even in the preceding years.
The learned counsel pointed out that a person who does not qualify in the competitive test, cannot be deputed for the Lower School Course.
Still further, certain discrepancies in the document at Annexure P5 were also highlighted by the learned counsel.
8.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners had been deputed to the Commando Force in March 1989.
On January 1, 1994, they had been deputed to attend a refresher course for Commandos at the Police Training Cllege, Madhuban.
The B.1 test was admittedly held while the petitioners were still attending the refresher course.
It is not the petitioners' case that they had asked for being repatriated to their respective districts so as to enable them to appear in the selection test.
However, they complain that they were not informed about the dates on which the test had to be held.
The respondents dispute this.
It has been categorically averred on their behalf that due intimation had been sent.
The petitioners have not controverted the averments in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents through any affidavit or replication.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the claim made on behalf of the respondents is false.
9.
Mr. Balhara pointed out that on the representation submitted by the petitioners, a copy of which is at Annexure P5, it had been duly observed that there was no intimation regarding the test.
Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the respondents had expressed certain reservations regarding the genuineness of this document.
The representation at Annexure P5 does not appear to be addressed to any officer.
It also does not bear any date.
It records the fact that the petitioners had been sent back on February 14, 1994 and March 2, 1994 respectively.
Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that the representation was submitted after March 2, 1994.
Was it sent by post ?
To whom it was addressed ?
There is no answer to these questions.
Even the remarks recorded on this document by Rohtash Singh or any other person have not been endorsed to the petitioners.
How did they get a copy ?
There is no explanation on the record.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it is not possible to hold that the petitioners had no intimation about the date of the test.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioners have been in service of the department since the year 1986.
They never appeared in the B.1 test held till the year 1994.
In this situation, it appears that the petitioners have suddenly shown interest in the B.1 test only because they have procured an endorsement on their representation that intimation regarding the test had not been received.
Otherwise, it is not understood as to why they had not shown similar interest in the B.1 test during the previous years.
11.
Faced with these facts, Mr. Balhara submitted that according to the decision in Rishi Raj's case (supra), the respondents were bound to publish notice regarding the B.1 test in two Newspapers.
12.
Learned counsel is right to the extent that such directions have been given by the Bench.
However, he was unable to refer to a specific averment in the petition to the effect that such notice had not been published.
In any event, even if it is assumed that such a notice was not published, the respondents having categorically averred that the petitioners had been informed and they having not controverted it, it cannot be said that any prejudice was caused to them.
13.
Mr. Balhara also referred to the decision of the Division Bench in Amir Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 587 of 1992, wherein the Division Bench had decided ``to take a compassionate view''.
The case does not lay down as a matter of law that a person who has once been deputed for a course, has a right to be granted the benefits.
Admittedly, according to the rules in force at the relevant time, only such persons as had been found meritorious could be deputed for the course.
The petitioners have admittedly not appeared in the test.
Consequently, they were not eligible to be deputed for the course.
Merely because, they were sent for the course through the interim directions of the Court, they do not get a right to steal a march over others who had appeared in the test.
No other point was urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.