Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Are the petitioners entitled to claim payment of House Rent Allowance in spite of the fact that they are staying with their respective spouses who are being paid the House Rent Allowance by their employers ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these six writ petitions.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the factual position as appearing in Civil Writ petition No. 461 of 1988.
It may be briefly noticed.
2.
The 14 petitioners are working as teachers.
They are posted in different Government Schools.
Their husbands are Central Government employees.
Neither the petitioners nor their husbands have been alloted any Government accommodation.
However, it is the admitted position that they (the husbands) are being paid House Rent Allowance by their respective employers.
Even the petitioners had been drawing a similar allowance.
On April 13, 1987, the Block Education Officer addressed a communication to one of the petitioners pointing out that an audit objection has been raised regarding the payment of House Rent Allowance to her and it has been pointed out that an excess amount of Rs. 6,710/- paid during the period from August 1, 1972 to January 1985 is recoverable.
Accordingly, the said petitioner was directed to deposit the amount in the treasury.
A copy of this communication has been produced as Annexure P.4 with the writ petition.
It has been averred that similar letters have been received by all the petitioners as well.
The petitioners challenge this action of the respondents on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been alleged that the order of recovery could not have been passed without the grant of a due and reasonable opportunity.
Secondly, it is claimed that since both the petitioners and their respective husbands are serving different employers, they are entitled to receive the House Rent Allowance irrespective of the fact whether or not any payment is being made by the petitioners.
On this basis, it is claimed that the communication dated April 18, 1987 be quashed and the respondents be directed to allow the payment of House Rent Allowance to the petitioners.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pointed out that one of the petitioners viz. Smt. Harmohinder Chanchal who is petitioner No. 14 in this case had field Civil Suit No. 205 on September 26, 1981 in the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Amritsar.
In this suit, she had challenged the order dated January 5, 1979 by which the Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar had with-held the payment of the House Rent Allowance on the ground that her husband who was an employee of the Central Government, was being paid such an allowance.
It was held that the plaintiff was not entitled to claim the House Rent Allowance for the period during which her husband had drawn the allowance.
Accordingly, the suit was dismissed.
She had filed an appeal which was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar vide judgement dated January 19, 1985.
The petitioner did not disclose this fact in the writ petition.
Still further, it has been pointed out that under the instructions issued by the Government vide letters dated June 15, 1970 and April 10, 1972, the House Rent Allowance is admissible only to one of the two spouses and not to both.
Since the petitioner had been drawing House Rent Allowance inspite of the fact that she was not entitled to it, the auditors had raised an objection.
Thereupon, she was asked to refund the amount which she had already drawn.
It has been further pointed out that the House Rent Allowance is admissible to both the spouses if they are "posted at different stations and living in different houses..." Since this is not so and "the petitioner and her husband are working at the same station and sharing common accommodation", she is not entitled to the payment of any House Rent Allowance.
In this situation, it is claimed that there is no merit in this writ petition.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioners, it has been contended by Mr. Gopal Mahajan that the petitioners were actually entitled to the payment of the House Rent Allowance.
This payment had been rightly made.
The respondents were not entitled to recover it.
In any case, they were bound to comply with the principles of natural justice before an order for recovery of the House Rent Allowance already paid could be passed.
Mr. DS Dhillon, counsel for the respondents has controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioners.
5.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Is an employee entitled to the payment of House Rent Allowance even though he/she is sharing the accommodation with the spouse and is not paying any rent ?
(ii) Is the action violative of the principles of natural justice ?
Reg: (i)  6.
The general rules relating to pay and allowances etc. have been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution.
These are applicable to all the civil servants including the petitioners.
The relevant provisions are contained in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I.
Part I Chapter V of these rules relates to the payment of Compensatory Allowances.
Rule 51 inter alia provides as under :-  "Subject to the provisions of rules 52 to 58 and to the conditions that the amount of compensatory allowance is so regulated that it is not on the whole a source of profit to the recipient, a competent authority may grant such an allowance to any Government employee."
Rule 55 provides as under :-  "A house rent allowance may be drawn by a Government employee during leave or transfer in the circumstances specified in clauses (a) or (b) of rule 53 : Provided that he certifies that, his previous rate of expenditure for a house continues during his absence and that he places his house, free of rent, at the disposal of the Government employee, if any, who officiates in his post.
The officiating Government employee cannot, in such case, draw the house-rent allowance attached to the post.
If, however, the officiating Government employee, for a reason which a competent authority considers to be sufficient, refuses accommodation placed at his disposal, he and not the absent Government employee, will draw the allowance."
A combined reading of Rules 51 and 55 indicates that the House Rent Allowance is a compensatory allowance.
"It is related to the rate of expenditure for a house."
Its payment is to be "so regulated that it is not on the whole a source of profit to the recipient."
In other words, the payment of House Rent Allowance is made to compensate the employee for the expense actually incurred by him/her and is not meant to be a source of profit.
The clear implication is that it is only when an employee actually pays the House Rent that he or she is entitled to claim compensation therefor.
Otherwise not.
7.
What is the position in the present case ?
There is not even an averment that any of the petitioners has hired any accommodation or is actually paying any rent.
In this situation, the petitioners have no right to claim payment of the House Rent Allowance.
8.
It may also be mentioned that it is with the object of ensuring that the employees do not make any profit that the Government has issued instructions inter alia clarifying that "if both the husband and his wife are government employees and are posted at the same station, the house rent allowance will be payable to only one of them.
Further, where more than one member of the family is an employee of the Government and is occupying the same accommodation only the head of the family will be entitled to draw the House Rent Allowance."
A copy of the instructions issued by the Government is at Annexure R.3 with the written statement.
In view of this clear provision, it is manifest that the House Rent Allowance is not admissible to all the members of a family but only to an employee who is actually paying it.
It is not meant to unduly enrich an employee.
In view of the above, the claim made on behalf of the petitioners that they are entitled to the payment of House Rent Allowance inspite of the fact that their respective spouses are getting the allowance cannot be sustained.
Reg:(ii)  9.
It was then contended that the action of the respondents in ordering the recovery of the rent already paid is violative of the principles of natural justice.
10.
It is undoubtedly correct that whenever an order is passed to the prejudice of an employee or it carries some civil consequences, the affected person has a right to be heard.
This is so because the grant of hearing enables the authority to pass a proper order.
It enables the authority to assess the facts correctly.
However, in the present case, there is not even a remote suggestion that any of the petitioners is staying separately from her spouse or that she is paying any rent whatsoever.
It has also not been suggested that the rent being paid is more than the house rent allowance.
No rule or instruction has been pointed out to show that a person is entitled to the payment of the House Rent Allowance even though she has incurred no expense.
As already noticed above, the House Rent Allowance is paid to compensate the employee for the expense which has been actually incurred and not to confer any undeserved benefit.
In these cases, there is no evidence of any expense.
Not even a suggestion.
Consequently, neither under the rules nor under the instructions, were the petitioners entitled to the payment of any allowance.
In such a situation, when there is no controversy even on facts, the insistence on the grant of an opportunity would be only an exercise in futility.
No useful purpose would be served.
The courts do not issue futile writs.
11.
Before parting with the case, it may be observed that one of the petitioners had filed a civil suit.
The controversy arising in the suit was akin to that in the present petition.
The suit had been dismissed.
Even the appeal had been dismissed.
Yet the fact was not disclosed in the writ petition.
The petitioner cannot be complimented for this omission.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in these writ petitions which are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.