Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who has retired as a Head Master has filed this petition with a prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant him an increment under rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I Part I on account of his promotion to the post of Head Master, and to release the special pay of Rs. 100/- per mensem as is admissible to the members of the cadre.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Master on November 17, 1960.
On October 10, 1978, the petitioner was appointed as a lecturer.
On November 3, 1987, the petitioner was provisionally appointed against the post of Head Master in his "own pay and grade".
Thereafter, the Director of Public Instructions issued an order dated January 28, 1990 by which various persons who had been "posted against the posts of Head Masters... in their own pay scale..." were "provisionally promoted as Head Masters (P.E.S.
III) (Non- Gazetted).... in the grade of Rs. 700-1580 plus Rs. 20/- as personal pay at the maximum of the scale of pay (revised to Rs. 2000-50-2400-60-2700-75-3000- 100-3500) with a special pay of Rs. 100/- per month prospectively.... from the dates mentioned against each."
The petitioner was promoted as Head Master w.e.f.
November 17, 1987.
In this order, it was further stipulated that "since there is no provision for the promotion of lecturers to the posts of Headmasters in the Punjab State Class III (School Cadre) Service Rules, 1978, the pay of the official as Head Master will be fixed provisionally by the District Education Officers concerned from the date of provisional promotion mentioned above on the basis of the pay drawn as Master under the relevant rules/instructions."
The petitioner represented against the above stipulation in the order.
A copy of the representation dated May 15, 1990 has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
He inter alia pointed out that having worked as a lecturer from October 10, 1978 to November 16, 1987, he was drawing the pay of a lecturer.
In this situation, the petitioner claimed that his pay as a Head Master could not be fixed on the basis of the emoluments which he would have drawn as a Master.
The correspondence continued.
However, the requisite relief having not been granted, the petitioner filed the present writ petition in the year 1995.
While the petition was pending in this court, the respondents passed an order dated July 5, 1996 by which they withdrew the orders dated January 28, 1990 and November 3, 1987 regarding the provisional promotion of the petitioner as Head Master.
This was done for the reason that the petitioner had not given any option regarding the fixation of his pay in accordance with the stipulation in the order of his provisional promotion.
This fact was disclosed in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents by the District Education Officer, Bathinda.
Otherwise, on merits, the petitioner's claim was controverted.
3.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that he had factually worked as a Head Master till his superannuation on April 30, 1994.
The respondents had no jurisdiction to withdraw the order of his posting/promotion passed on November 3, 1987 and January 28, 1990 respectively.
It was further submitted that on his promotion from the post of lecturer to that of Head Master, the petitioner was entitled to the grant of an increment under Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
Lastly, it was contended that the petitioner was entitled to the release of a special pay of Rs. 100/- per mensem.
Accordingly, it was prayed that the petitioner's pay should be refixed after granting him the benefit of an increment and special pay.
His pension should be revised on that basis and arrears paid.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
4.
The three questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Is the action of the respondents in withdrawing the petitioner's order of promotion as Head Master legal and valid ?
(ii) Was the petitioner entitled to the grant of an increment under Rule 44 ?
(iii) Was the petitioner entitled to the special pay ?
Reg : (i)  5.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been posted as a Head Master in his pay grade vide order dated November 3, 1987.
Thereafter, on January 28, 1990, he was actually promoted as a Head Master.
He had held the post and discharged its duties till his superannuation on April 30, 1993.
After the petitioner had actually held the post and discharged its duties, the respondents could not have withdrawn the order.
The order had been implemented.
It had been carried out.
The petitioner had retired.
There was nothing which could have been taken back or recalled.
In any event, the petitioner had a right to be heard before such an order of withdrawal could be passed.
No opportunity whatsoever was given.
The action of the respondents in passing the order dated July 5, 1996 for the withdrawal of the orders dated November 3, 1987 and January 28, 1990 was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
It cannot be sustained.
Reg : (ii)  6.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was initially recruited as a Master.
He was appointed as a lecturer on October 10, 1978.
This post was initially in the pay scale of Rs. 250-600.
However, the pay scale was retrospectively revised w.e.f.
January 1, 1978 and raised to Rs. 700-1300.
Thereafter, the pay scale was raised to Rs. 1800-3200 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
The petitioner claims that he was placed in the senior scale of Rs. 2000-3500 w.e.f.
October 10, 1986.
Thus, in the year 1990, when the petitioner was promoted as Head Master, he was working as a lecturer in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500.
The pay scale of the post of Head Master is also Rs. 2000-3500.
The petitioner claims that with effect from November 17, 1987, when he was promoted as Head Master, he should have been granted an extra increment in view of the provisions of Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rule, Volume I Part I.
Is it so ?
7.
A perusal of Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules shows that "when appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance.... then those attaching to....."the post held by the employees, he "will draw as initial pay the stage of the time scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post."
In other words, the rule postulates that a person who is appointed from one post to another which carries duties or responsibilities of greater importance he will be granted an increment besides his pay which he was drawning on the old post.
It is in the nature of compensation for the extra duties or higher responsibilities.
8.
In the present case, there is nothing on record to show that the post of Head Master carries duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post of a Lecturer.
In fact, both the posts are in the same scale of pay.
Even otherwise, no material has been produced by the petitioner which may indicate that the petitioner had started performing duties of greater importance on his appointment to the post of Head Master.
In this behalf, it also deserves mention that under the rules governing the service, the post of Head Master is filled up by promotion of a Master.
A lecturer is not eligible to be considered for promotion, to this post.
If the petitioner had been promoted from the post of Master, he would have been entitled to the grant of increment in addition to the pay drawn by him as a Master.
However, it is the admitted position that he was already drawing much higher pay as a lecturer than he would have got as a Master.
In this situation, the provision of Rule 44 is not attracted.
In fact, it was only a case of change of cadre from lecturer to Head Master which did not involve the fixation of initial pay under Rule 44.
Accordingly, the petitioner's claim for the grant of an extra increment under rule 44 cannot be sustained.
Reg : (iii)  9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that vide notification dated May 13, 1991, it had been inter alia provided that post of Head Master will carry a special pay of Rs. 100/- per month "prospectively".
This notification was made effective from Feburary 17, 1989.
Accordingly, on January 28, 1990 when the petitioner was promoted as Head Master on the basis of his seniority as a Master, he was entitled to the grant of special pay of Rs. 100/- w.e.f.
Feburary 17, 1989.
The claim made by the petitioner in this behalf deserves to be sustained.
No other point was raised.
10.
In view of the above, it is held that the order dated July 5, 1996 as mentioned in para 3 of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents by which the orders regarding the petitioner's promotion as Head Master were withdrawn is quashed.
It is also held that the petitioner will be entitled to the grant of special pay w.e.f.
the date he assumed the charged of the post of Head Master.
The petitioner's claim with regard to the grant of an increment under Rule 44 is declined.
Consequential reliefs shall follow.
If the petitioner becomes entitled to higher pension, it shall be paid to him alongwith the arrears of salary that may fall due.
The needful --shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
In case of default, the amount of money which is found due to the petitioner shall carry interest @ 12%.
No costs.