Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this case, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 1861981 (Annexure P-3) by which the services of the petitioner were terminated by the respondent board.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed to the post of Sectional Officer (Public Health) purely on temporary basis in the scale of Rs. 200-450 on the basis of an interview held on 18/2041977 vide letter of appointment dated 3151977, copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-1.
In the said letter of appointment, inter alia, it was mentioned that one year will be probation period which period can be extended to three years by the competent authority.
Pursuant to the said letter of appointment, the petitioner joined service on 2561977.
Later on, the petitioner became regular employee of the respondent board as is evident from the seniority list which was circulated vide memo dated 13111979 copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-2.
In Annexure P-2 it has clearly been stated that seniority list of the technical staff working on regular basis in the Punjab Housing Development Board, which is provisional one, is being sent herewith.
Name of the petitioner has been mentioned at Sr. No. 6 in the seniority list circulated along with Annexure P-2.
3.
The services of the petitioner were, however, terminated by the respondent board without holding any inquiry vide order dated 1861991 copy of which is Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The relevant portion from the said order reads as under :-  "Your services are no longer required as Sectional Officer, PH, in the Punjab Housing Development Board.
As such you are hereby given one month's notice, in accordance with the terms and conditions of your appointment letter.
Your services in this Board will stand terminated on the expiry of one month of this notice."
The aforesaid order of termination has been challenged in this writ petition as stated earlier.
4.
On 15101996 this petition came up for hearing and on that day the respondent board was directed to file an affidavit spelling out as to which condition of appointment letter was applied while terminating the services of the petitioner.
The petitioner was also directed to file an affidavit as to whether he was gainfully employed during the pendency of the writ petition as the writ petition remained pending for a period of about 15 years.
Pursuant to this order, the respondent board filed the affidavit dated 16.11.1996.
In this affidavit it was stated that the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis with one year probation extendable upto 3 years and since his reports were damaging, his services were terminated as per terms and conditions of his appointment letter.
The petitioner, however, has not filed any affidavit as directed in the order dated 15101996.
5.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that the petitioner was appointed in the services of the respondent on 2561977 and his probation period could be extended maximum upto a period of three years and as such he is deemed to have been confirmed on 2561980.
In support of this submission he placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in Dharam Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1968 SC 1210 and State of Gujarat v. Akhilesh C Bhargav, AIR 1987 SC 2135.
He further submitted that since neither any charge sheet was issued to the petitioner nor he was given any opportunity the impugned order terminating his services was illegal and as such was liable to be set aside.
6.
Mr. Sandhu, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent board, however, submitted that the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis and since his work was not found satisfactory during the period of probation, his services have been terminated as per terms and conditions of his letter of appointment.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
8.
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis vide letter of appointment dated 3151977 (Annexure P-1) and he joined duty on 2561977.
Annexure P-2 further shows that the petitioner is the regular employee of the respondent board as on 13111979.
It is also an admitted fact that the petitioner was appointed on probation but the initial period of probation was one year which could be extended upto three years.
In terms of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dharam Singh (supra), the petitioner must be deemed to have been confirmed on his post after the expiry of maximum period of three years of probation.
Since the petitioner joined duty on 2561977, he is deemed to have been confirmed on 2561980.
After such confirmation, respondent board had no power to dispense with the services of the petitioner on the ground that his work or conduct during the period of probation was unsatisfactory.
It follows that on the date of impugned order i.e. 1861981, the petitioner had the right to hold his post and the impugned order deprived him of this right and this order amounted to removal from service by way of punishment.
Admittedly the procedure laid down under the rules for removal has not been followed and the petitioner has not been allowed opportunity to defend himself, the impugned order dated 1861981 (Annexure P-3) cannot be sustained.
9.
In view of the above discussion the writ petition is allowed and order dated 1861981 (Annexure P-3) terminating the services of the petitioner is set aside and the respondents are directed to re-instate the petitioner forthwith.
Since the petitioner has failed to file an affidavit in compliance to the order dated 15101996 I direct that the petitioner shall be paid only 25% of the amount of back wages.
Petitioner shall, however, be entitled to all other consequential benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.