Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was discharged from the Army on August 20, 1970 prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to fix and release his Service Pension as well as Gratuity etc. A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on September 21, 1956.
He made a request for discharge from the service as he wanted to look after his agricultural land.
His request was accepted.
On August 20, 1970, the petitioner was discharged from service.
3.
The petitioner asserts that he had served in various operational areas and had been awarded various medals etc.
In spite of that, no service pension was granted to him.
Consequently, he served a legal notice dated April 29, 1996 on the respondents pointing out that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Ministry of Defence vide letter dated October 30, 1987, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition, he was entitled to the grant of service pension.
The respondents having not granted him the requisite relief, he has approached this court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government, the "combatants having service of 10 years or more are entitled to service pension..." He, consequently, prays that the respondents be directed to release his pension.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner has been heard.
Relying on the instructions dated October 30, 1987, he has contended that a combatant is entitled to the grant of special pension and gratuity on completion of 10 years of service.
Is it so ?
5.
The grant of pension to the members of the Armed Forces is governed by the provisions of Army Pension Regulations, 1961.
Regulation 132 provides that Service Pension shall be admissible to a person who has served for 15 years.
Since the petitioner had not completed 15 years of service, he is not entitled for the service pension.
Vide letter dated October 30, 1987, the Government had circulated the instructions regarding the implementation of the decision on the recommendations of the Fourth Central Pay Commission regarding pensionary benefits for the Armed Force Officers and personnel retiring or dying in harness on or after January 1, 1986.
In this behalf, it was inter alia provided that in case of "personnel below officer rank... who are not transferred to the reserve, but are discharged in large numbers in pursuance of Government policy - (i) of reducing the strength of establishment of the Armed Forces; or (ii) of re-organisation, which results in disbandment of any unit/formation"... Special pension and gratuity shall be admissible to combatants who have served for 15 years or more which shall be equal to the normal service pension and in case of those, who had served for 10 years or more but less than 15 years at a rate "equal to the service pension..."  6.
A perusal of this letter clearly shows that a special provision was made only to help persons who were discharged on account of either re-organisation or reduction of the strength of the establishment.
The petitioner was admittedly not discharged from the Army on account of reduction in the strength of the establishment.
On the contrary, he was discharged as he wanted to look after his lands.
Consequently, he cannot base any claim on these instructions.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the instructions dated October 30, 1987 are unconstitutional as these apply only to the personnel who have retired on or after January 1, 1986.
8.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
On one hand, the learned counsel relies on the instructions to make a claim for pension, on the other hand, it is suggested that these are invalid.
However, in view of the finding that the petitioner's case is not covered by these instructions as he was not discharged on account of reduction in strength or disbandment, the submission is wholly irrelevant.
9.
It was also submitted that the petitioner had served in operational areas.
It may be so.
Yet, the claim for pension cannot be sustained unless it is shown that the petitioner fulfils the prescribed conditions.
He has not completed the period of service provided under the regulation.
His case does not fall within the instructions issued by the Government.
Pension is not a bounty.
It is a right.
However, it can be sustained only when the case falls within the regulation conferring the right.
In the present case, the claim cannot be sustained.
10.
Learned counsel had referred to the decision of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Gurnam Singh v. Union of India, 1995(4) RSJ 1 : 1995(4) SCT 278.
This case related to the grant of disability pension.
It has no relevance to the facts of the present case.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.