Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in these cases are aggrieved by the orders of their repatriation from the Department of Crime Investigation, Haryana to their parent Units.
They allege that their repatriation has resulted in reversion to lower posts.
They pray that the orders be quashed.
The facts as averred in Civil Writ Petition No 15641 of 1996 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a constable on May 9, 1979.
From September 8, 1972 to March 1977, the petitioner served in the Central Bureau of Investigation.
In April 1977, he was deputed for the Lower School Course.
He passed.
He was included in List `C' and promoted as a Head Constable in October 1977.
He was then allocated to the 4th Batallion of the Haryana Armed Police.
While working in the Armed Police, the petitioner was deputed to the Crime Investigation Department (for short the CID).
In July 1983, the petitioner was promoted as an Assistant Sub Inspector.
He was still further promoted as Sub Inspector on October 5, 1986.
The petitioner claims that he has passed various courses and was awarded 55 commendation certificates.
He also qualified the Intermediate School Course in October 1990.
After passing the course, he was deputed to the CID.
However, on June 24, 1996, the petitioner was ordered to the "reverted to the post of ASI in the garb of so called repatriation...under Rule 2125..." A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P4 with the writ petition.
The petitioner claims that he was entitled to be confirmed as an ASI in the year 1985 and as a Sub Inspector w.e.f.
October 14, 1988.
The order of repatriation and reversion is illegal.
It is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Consequently, he prays that the order dated June 24, 1996, a copy of which is at Annexure P4 with the writ petition, be quashed and the respondents be directed to confirm him on the date of completion of two years of service as Head Constable, Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that Civil Writ Petition No. 14042 of 1995 filed by Head Constable- Satnam Singh was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court on November 9, 1995.
The Special Leave Petition filed by the petitioner was also dismissed by their Lordships vide order dated March 20, 1996.
The order passed by the Division Bench had been followed by another Bench in CWP Nos. 15606 and 15913 of 1995.
Similarly, various other Benches of this court had dismissed almost identical writ petitions filed by other persons.
On merits, it has been pointed out that the Crime Investigation Department has no cadre of its own.
The appointments are made by taking personnel on deputation.
These persons are given officiating promotion from one rank to another.
However, the official retains his original position in the parent cadre/unit to which he belongs.
It has been specifically pointed out that persons who are taken on deputation earn 2-3 officiating promotions in the CID while persons senior to them in their parent cadre continue to work in lower ranks.
The official has the option to go back to his parent cadre when he is entitled to be considered for substantive promotion.
The petitioner had been promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector "on March 1, 1983 on ad hoc/officiating basis against CID vacancy.
This promotion was not covered under rule 131 and he was sent back to his parent unit on 141190 in his substantive rank of Head Constable from where he was deputed for Intermediate School Course from 151190 to 8.5.91."
However, ``the petitioner was again deputed to CID on 26891 in the rank of Head Constable.
The petitioner was promoted to the rank of ASI w.e.f.
22.1.92 in his parent unit and this promotion is covered under rule 13 of the Punjab Police Rules and was allowed to continue in CID on deputation after his promotion to the rank of ASI from his parent unit.
The petitioner has been confirmed in the rank of Head Constable in his parent unit w.e.f.
1283 at his turn."
The rest of the contentions regarding confirmation etc. have been controverted.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Counsel stated that the factual position as also the pleadings in the other cases were almost identical.
5.
On behalf of the petitioners, it was contended by the learned counsel that they having held higher posts for long periods of time, shall be deemed to have completed the maximum period of probation and would thus be entitled to be deemed to have been confirmed.
Resultantly, their reversion on the pretext of repatriation would be arbitrary and illegal.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners was controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
Rule 2125 of the Punjab Police Rules inter alia provides that "posts....in the Criminal Investigation Department shall be filled up by deputation of suitable men from district...." Clause (2) provides that "a police officer on deputation to the Criminal Investigation Department will retain his original position in the cadre of his district or range.
While in the Criminal Investigation Department, he will be eligible for officiating promotion in that branch.
On reversion from Criminal Investigation Department, he will assume his place in his original cadre...." It has been further provided in Clause (3) that "when an officer borne on the rolls of a district or range reaches a place in seniority which would entitle him to be considered for substantive promotion if he were serving in the establishment to which he belongs permanently he shall be informed and given the opportunity of returning to district police work..." It has been further laid down in clear and categorical terms that "no officer on deputation to the Criminal Investigation Department shall be substantively promoted to Head Constable or higher rank unless both the Deputy Inspector General, Criminal Investigation Department and the Deputy Inspector General of range to which he belongs agree that he is qualified for such promotion by all the prescribed standards."
7.
A perusal of the provision clearly indicates that the posts in the CID are filled by deputation of men from districts.
Persons who are deputed to CID retain their original position in the parent district or range.
They are eligible for officiating promotion in the CID.
On reversion, they assume their place in the original cadre.
As soon as they become due for substantive promotion in the parent cadre, they have a right to go back to the parent district/unit.
It is also indisputable that a person on deputation is merely on loan from one employer to another.
He is deputed temporarily.
His rights with the parent employer are fully protected.
This general principle of law is fully conserved in the specific statutory provision contained in Rule 2125.
8.
In these cases, it is the admitted position that the petitioners had been deputed to the CID.
They were given officiating promotions.
The promotions were not substantive.
The petitioners were never placed on probation.
Various persons senior to them in their parent cadres had not been promoted.
Their claims had not even been considered.
Thus, the officiating promotions were granted only against the vacancies in the CID.
These promotions did not confer a right on the petitioners to be either confirmed or to be allowed to continue on deputation.
Resultantly, the respondents were entitled to order their repatriation against their substantive posts.
This is precisely what has been done in these cases.
9.
The above view appears to have been expressed by different Benches in various cases to which a reference has been made by the respondents in their written statement.
It may further be mentioned that in Kulwant Singh v. The State of Haryana, CWP No. 15999 of 1996 decided on April 8, 1997 : 1997(2) SCT 695, a Division Bench has clearly held that "the petitioners have neither any right for permanent absorption in the CID nor have any right to be considered for regular promotion in the CID, especially when seniors in the feeder cadre were still working on lower ranks."
We are in respectful agreement with the view expressed by the Division Bench.
No other point was urged.
In view of the above, the petitions are wholly lacking in merit.
These are dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.