GS Singhvi, J - Whether the appointment of the respondent No. 3 as Senior Resident is liable to be quashed on the ground that he was not eligible for such appointment is the only issue which requires adjudication in this writ petition.
2.
The petitioner did his MBBS in the year 1977 and MD in the year 1994.
He applied for selection and appointment as Senior Resident in response to the advertisement Annexure P2.
His grievance is that the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 ignored his candidature and selected the respondent No. 3 notwithstanding the fact that the said respondent is not qualified to be appointed as Senior Resident in view of clause 1(6) of the notification No. 22/1/92-1 HB-III/3897 dated 2441996 issued by the Government of Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare.
The petitioner has questioned the eligibility of the respondent No. 3 by alleging that the said respondent worked as a Registrar from 441992 to 2451993 and as he did post graduation while working as Registrar, the respondent No. 3 was not eligible to be considered for selection and appointment as Senior Resident.
3.
The stand of the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 is that the respondent No. 3 was appointed as Registrar vide order dated 4.4.1990 and he joined on 25.4.1990.
Subsequently he was re-designated as Junior Resident vide government letter dated 14121992.
According to the respondents No. 1 and 2, the respondent No. 3 did not complete his tenure as Registrar and, therefore, he was not disqualified from being considered for appointment as Senior Resident.
4.
In a separate reply, the respondent No. 3 has contested the petitioner's assertion that he i.e. the respondent No. 3 worked as Registrar for a period of three years.
The respondent No. 3 has pleaded that he was granted admission to post graduate course vide order dated 3051991 issued by the Principal, Medical College, Amritsar and he had worked as Registrar only for a period of one year and seven months during his post-graduation.
According to the respondent No. 3, the posts of Registrars were abolished in the year 1992 and he along with other serving doctors who were doing post graduation were declared as Junior Residents vide government letter dated 14121992.
The respondent No. 3 has pleaded that the tenure of the Registrar/Demonstrator is 3 years as per the government notification No. 7(16)-SHB III-79/15044 dated 2791982 and as his term as Registrar was brought to an end w.e.f.
14121992 he cannot be placed in the category of candidates who have done post graduation as Registrar/Demonstrator.
The respondent No. 3 has also pleaded that a Registrar undertakes teaching to the under-graduate students and para-medical health workers in addition to the administrative duties and patient care and he is entitled to the benefit of summer/winter vacation whereas a Junior Resident is not allowed the benefit of summer/winter vacation and, therefore, the two posts cannot be treated as equivalent.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the order Annexure P3 by which the respondent No. 3 has been selected and posted as Senior Resident cannot be declared illegal.
Clause 1(6) of the notification Annexure P1 on which reliance has been placed by Shri Chopra in support of the case set up by the petitioner that the respondent No. 3 was not eligible to be considered for selection as Senior Resident reads as under :-  ``The candidates who have done post graduation as Registrars/Demonstrators are not eligible for the post of Senior Resident.''
6.
The argument of Shri Chopra is that by having secured admission to the post graduate course while working as Registrar, the respondent No. 3 incurred disqualification to be considered for the post of Senior Resident and, therefore, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 could not have considered the candidature of the respondent No. 3 and selected him for the post of Senior Resident.
He submitted that if the selection of the respondent No. 3 is nullified, then the petitioner would become entitled to be selected and posted as Senior Resident in the speciality of Paediatrics.
Shri Chopra further argued that the post of Junior Resident is equivalent to the post of Demonstrator/Registrar and, therefore, mere designation of the respondent No. 3 as Junior Resident cannot remove the disability attached to the candidature of the respondent No. 3.
On the other hand, the learned Deputy Advocate General and Shri Mahajan argued that the respondent No. 3 did not complete his post graduation while working as Registrar and in fact he was working as Junior Resident at the time of completion of post graduation and, therefore, he has been rightly considered eligible for selection as Senior Resident.
7.
There can be no doubt that the respondent No. 3 would have been ineligible to be considered for selection to the post of Senior Resident if he had done post graduation as Registrar/Demonstrator.
However, the facts of this case show that the respondent No. 3 was appointed as Registrar w.e.f.
25.4.1990.
His tenure as Registrar was brought to an end w.e.f.
14121992 due to abolition of the posts of Registrars.
The government issued order Annexure R3/2 and declared him as Junior Resident.
While working as Registrar, the respondent No. 3 was granted admission to the post graduate course in MD Paediatrics vide order dated 3051991.
However, on the date of completion of his post graduate course, the respondent No. 3 was working as Junior Resident.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the respondent No. 3 did post graduation in Paediatrics as Registrar/Demonstrator.
The argument of Shri Chopra that the post of Junior Resident should be treated as equivalent to that of Demonstrator/Registrar cannot be accepted for the simple reason that if the government wanted to disqualify the persons doing post graduation while working as Junior Residents, then nothing prevented it from incorporating the post of Junior Residents in clause 1(6) of the notification dated 2441996 which was issued more than three years and four months after the government had declared the petitioner and nine others as Junior Residents vide order Annexure R3/2.
The absence of the post of Junior Resident in that order shows that the government did not consider it appropriate to disqualify those doctors who did post graduation while working as Junior Residents.
We, therefore, do not find any reason or justification to hold that the respondent No. 3 was not eligible to be considered for selection to the post of Senior Resident.
8.
There is another reason why the plea of the petitioner does not merit acceptance.
Clause 1(6) contains a provision which disqualifies a candidate from seeking selection to the post of Senior Resident.
Therefore, the rule of strict construction deserves to be applied while interpreting the provision contained in that clause.
We cannot re-write the language of clause 1(6) or make addition therein in order to sustain the plea of the petitioner that the respondent No. 3 was not eligible to be considered for the post of Senior Resident.
For accepting the argument of Shri Chopra, we shall have to re-write clause 1(6) and say that the candidates who seek admission to the post graduate course while working as Registrar/Demonstrator/Junior Resident are not eligible for the post of Senior Resident.
That is simply not the function of the Court and we do not find any justification to tread into the field which lies within the exclusive domain of the government.
In view of the above conclusion, we hold that the petitioner has failed to make out a case for quashing the order Annexure P3.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.