SB Sinha, J - The petitioner No. 1 which is a Confederation of the Associations/Unions of Bank Officers having its office at New Delhi and branch office in Calcutta along with 4 others filed this writ application against certain banks and the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Banking Operation as also the Indian Bank Association having its office at Stadium House, 6th Floor, NN Road, Bombay as respondents.
Later on an application for addition of party was filed wherein 4 members of the SBI serving in these Islands were added as writ petitioners.
2.
The short question involved in this writ application is as to whether the employees serving in different nationalised banks situated within the local limits of Andaman and Nicobar Administration should be granted special allowance or not.
The petitioner states that as the banks in question are nationalised in terms of the provisions of Sections 9 and 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1970, the nationalised banks are bound to carry out the directives of the Central Government in the matter of its functioning.
According to the petitioner, keeping in view, the hazardous nature of duties required to be performed by the concerned employees posted in the North-Eastern Region, the Central Government in terms of its letter dated 29th November, 1984 addressed to the Chief Executives of all Public Sector Banks gave the following directions:-  ``1(vi) With effect from the date of implementation of these concessions officers transferred from other parts of the country to the north-eastern region will also be entitled to ad hoc out-of-turn increase in salary specifically for the duration of their active duty only in a post in the north-eastern region.
The out-of-turn, ad hoc increase in salary will be regulated in the manner as the salary is fixed when an officer is placed in the immediately next higher scale.
Such fixation shall not confer any other benefit than the temporary monetary gain in basic pay and D.A and other attendant/consemental benefits for the specific duration of active duty in any post in the north-eastern region.
However, the officer will have the option to choose either the ad hoc increase in salary as mentioned above or 25% of his basic pay, subject to a maximum of Rs. 400/- pm''.
3.
It has further been averred that the Central Government again in terms of its letter dated 24th May, 1989 fixed special allowance for those Central Government employees who were serving within the territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the following terms:  ``The undersigned is directed to refer to this Ministry's OM No. 20014/16/86-E.IV/E.II(B) dated 14121983 as amended from time to time and to say that the question of working out of a package of incentives to attract personnel for serving in the Island territories has been engaging the attention of the Government.
Accordingly, the President is pleased to decide that an Island Special Allowance on a graded basis in lieu of the existing Special (Duty) Allowance may be granted to the Central Government Civilian employees, having `All India Transfer Liability' on their posting to these Islands in the following manner.''
4.
Mr. SC Bose, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has raised a short question in support of this application.
The learned counsel submits that keeping in view the fact that the duties undertaken by the employees of the nationalised banks posted in north-eastern region as also in Andaman and Nicobar Islands being hazardous, there is absolutely no reason as to why the employees of the nationalised banks would not be entitled to the special allowance in terms of the aforementioned letter dated 2541989 as contained in the Annexure `B' to the writ application and at the rates specified therein.
The learned counsel submits that keeping in view the geographical situation and the fact that only 159 employees are working in nationalised banks, financial burden upon the concerned nationalised banks would be absolutely marginal.
5.
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) was enacted for the acquisition and transfer of undertaking of certain banking companies.
Section 8 of the said Act provides, that if the corresponding new bank shall in the discharge of its functions be guided by such directions in regard to matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Governor of the Reserve Bank give such a direction to the new bank within the meaning of the provisions of the said Act, therefore, has to be given after consultation with the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India by the Central Government.
Such directions must also be in public interest.
Apart from the fact that no such direction has been issued, neither the Reserve Bank of India nor the Union of India have been impleaded as parties in this application.
Section 9 merely empowers the Central Government to make certain schemes in respect of matters specified therein, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Act.
Sub-section 2 of Section 9 provides that such scheme may provide for all or any of the matters specified therein in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of Section 9.
Neither Section 8 nor Section 9, however, have any application to the fact of the present case.
So far as Section 19 of the said Act is concerned the same merely provides for regulation making powers.
6.
Admittedly no direction in terms of the provisions of the said Act or under the Banking Regulation Act has yet been issued by the Central Government.
The petitioners, therefore, do not have any legal right for obtaining a writ and/or in the nature of mandamus directing the nationalised banks to pay unto their employees such special allowance only because the Central Government had been so doing.
The service conditions of the employees of the nationalised banks are not and cannot be at par with that of the Central Government.
7.
Furthermore, in the instant case, the State Bank of India has been impleaded as a party.
As indicated hereinbefore 4 employees of the State Bank of India have got themselves added as parties to the writ application.
Conditions of service of the employees of the State Bank of India are governed by the State Bank of India Act, 1955 which does not contain any such provisions.
It is now settled law that for the purpose of obtaining for a writ or in the nature of mandamus the petitioners must show existence of a legal right in themselves and a corresponding legal duties in the respondents.
The petitioners have failed to do so.
By reasons of the aforementioned letter dated 2451989 as contained in Annexure `B' to the writ application, the petitioners have not derived any right to obtain special allowance for the employees posted in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, inasmuch as, the said letter concerns the employees of the Central Government only.
If the Central Government intends to issue any directions it has to do so in terms of the provisions of the said Act, and/or the Banking Regulation Act and unless and until the said direction is issued, this Court is not in a position to implement the same.
Furthermore, the dispute with regard to payment of such special allowance cannot be enforced by invoking a writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
8.
For the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this application and, thus, it is accordingly dismissed.
But in the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.