KS Shrivastav, J - The petitioner assails the legality of the order of termination passed by the third respondent in proceedings No. II-2/89-69-EC-I, dated 2661989.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Constable in the Central Reserve Police Force (for short `CRPF') and was enrolled as its member on 2711988.
He was attached the 69th Bn.
of CRPF after completion of Recruit's basic training vide order dated 6101989 and thereafter he was posted in the 69th Bn.
at Nagpur where he joined his duties on 1111989.
The third respondent on 2661989 terminated the services of the petitioner with immediate effect under Rule 16 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 (for short `CRPF Rules 55') read with Rule 5(1) of Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965 (for short `CCSTS Rules 65') and was given an entitlement to claim a sum equal to his pay plus allowance for one month.
3.
The petitioner alleges that CCSTS Rules 65 are not at all applicable in his case and he is governed only by the CRPF Rules 55 which provides one month's clear-cut notice for his termination and further alleges that his superior Officer used to comment that he was not qualified for the post and, therefore, was liable to be terminated and as such the order of termination casts a stigma on him and in reality it is an order of punishment without holding proper enquiry and, therefore, it is illegal.
4.
The respondents denied the claim of the petitioner and have alleged that the petitioner is governed by CCSTS Rules 65 also and, therefore, the order of termination is valid, particularly because it has been passed without stigma and on the ground that his overall performance was not good.
5.
It is a matter of record that during the pendency of these proceedings, the Director, Employment and Training, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, vide letter dated 17101989 informed the respondents, in answer to their query dated 981989, that the petitioner did not possess requisite qualification for appointment to the post of Constable because no ITI certificate in Motor Mechanics had been issued to him in the month of August, 1986.
6.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the allegations made in the supplementary affidavit regarding the alleged forged certificate are indicative of the fact that he had obtained employment on the basis of a forged certificate and on this ground only the impugned order of termination was passed without enquiry and, therefore, the impugned order is, in reality, an order of punishment and not a simple order of termination.
It is further contended on behalf of the petitioner that, Rule 102 of CRPF Rules 55 provides that in the absence of any provision made in these rules regarding service conditions of the members of the Force, the rules that are made applicable to the other Officers of the Government of India shall be made applicable.
Because Rule 16 of CRPF Rules 55 specifically provides one month's notice by the appointing authorities for discharging a member of the Force, the question of application of CCSTS Rules 65 does not arise and no aid can be taken from the provisions of those rules to terminate the services of the petitioners with one month's pay in lieu of one month's notice.
7.
On the other hand, it has been contended on behalf of the respondents that there is no provision in CRPF Rules 55 for providing one month's pay in lieu of one month's notice to temporary Government Servants and, therefore, by virtue of Rule 102 of the CRPF Rules 55, the service of a temporary Government Servant can very well be terminated with the aid of Rule 5(1) of the CCSTS Rules 65 by declaration of entitlement of one month's pay in lieu of one month's notice.
The query was made subsequent to the institution of the writ petition and, therefore, it cannot be said that the order of termination was passed because the petitioner had utilised a forged certificate.
The performance of the petitioner was not good and on considering his overall performance, his services were dispensed with, with immediate effect through the impugned notice and no stigma is cast on him and, therefore, the writ petition being devoid of substance is liable to be dismissed.
8.
Rule 16 of the CRPF Rules 55 provides that, during the period of engagement of three years of a member of the Force, he shall be liable to be discharged from service at any time on one month's notice by the appointing authorities and at the end of the period of engagement of three years, such members who are given substantial status shall be considered for quasi permanency under the provisions of the CCSTS Rules 65 whereas in the case of those members who are not declared quasi permanent shall continue as temporary Government employees unless they are discharged as per schedule to that.
Such temporary Government Servants shall be liable to be discharged on one month's notice while the services of the quasi permanent Government Servant shall be liable to be terminated on three months' notice in accordance with the said rules as amended from time to time.
Rule 102 of the CRPF Rules 55 provides that the conditions of service of the Force in respect of matters for which no provision is made in these rules, shall be the same as are for the time being applicable to the services of the Government servants of corresponding services.
9.
On a combined reading of Rule 16 and Rule 102 of the CRPF Rules 55, it is revealed that during the period of engagement of three years, the status of a member of the Force is that of a temporary Government employee only and even after the completion of the period of three years, if quasi permanent status is not given to a particular member, he shall be continued as a temporary Government employee and his services are liable to be terminated on one month's notice only while the service of a quasi permanent employee is liable to be terminated on three months notice in accordance with the CRPF Rules 55.
Thus, the status of a member who is in the Force and is not given a permanent status even after expiry of three years, continues a temporary Government employee and his services are liable to be terminated on one month's notice.
It is pertinent to note that there is no provision in Rule 16 of the CRPF Rules 55 for giving one month's pay in lieu of one month's notice in case of temporary Government employees and, therefore, by virtue of Rule 102, in my considered view, the provisions of Rule 5 of the CCSTS Rules 65 are applicable to the members of the Force who are temporary Government employees.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, I reach the conclusion that the services of a temporary Government Servant are liable to be terminated on one month's notice and vide proviso to Rule 5 of the CCSTS Rules 65 his services can be terminated forthwith provided it is declared that he is entitled to claim a sum equal to pay plus allowance in lieu of the period of notice, that is one month's notice.
11.
It is a matter of record that the writ petition was admitted for hearing on 371989 and interim directions were given to the respondents on 1271989 in W.P.M.P No. 12587/89.
The ITI certificate produced by the petitioner was sent for verification to the Director of Technical Education and Training, Hyderabad, on 981989 and the reply of the Director was given on 1781989 that the certificate was not genuine.
12.
When the third respondent had no knowledge about the genuineness of the impugned certificate prior to the date of termination of the petitioner on 2661989, it cannot be said that his services were terminated because he had utilised a forged certificate as a genuine certificate for obtaining the job.
A look at the order of termination shows that there is no stigma cast on the petitioner.
The impugned order is silent regarding the cause of termination of the petitioner.
In the counter it is alleged that on the basis of the overall performance of the petitioner during the relevant period, his services were terminated.
Under these circumstances, the question of lifting the veil does not arise.
13.
It is well settled that if the order of termination casts a stigma on the Government servant in the sense that it contains a statement casting aspersions on his conduct or character, the said order can be treated by the Court as an order of punishment, but if the statement in the order refers only to the assessment of his work and does not, at the same time, cast aspersions on the conduct or character of the Government Servant, then, it cannot be concluded that the order, in reality, is an order of punishment.
The test is how a reasonable person would read or understand the impugned order to know whether the order is stigmatic or not.
14.
As noted above, the impugned order is simple order of discharge without casting any aspersions on the petitioner or attaching any stigma to his character, particularly because there is no imputation on the ground of integrity or any turpitude like misconduct or inefficiency in it and, therefore, the contention of the learned Counsel of the petitioner that the order of termination has been made by way of punishment cannot be accepted.
Similarly, the order of termination cannot be said to be invalid or inoperative, merely on the ground that one month's pay and allowances have been given in lieu of one month's notice, because no injustice or prejudice can be said to have been caused to the petitioner as he has not been put to any financial loss.
15.
In result, there appears to be no merit in this writ petition and, therefore, it is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.