Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner prays that the respondents be directed to admit/promote him to the `Degree Programme'.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology has been established to provide technical education in various areas.
The Institute admits candidates to different courses on the basis of their inter se merit determined through an entrance test.
The petitioner had appeared in the entrance test for admission to the Diploma Course in the year 1993.
He had qualified the test and was admitted to the Diploma Course in Food Processing.
He fell ill. As a result, he could not attend classes.
He was short of attendance.
Resultantly, he could not achieve the prescribed Cumulative Grade Point Average.
Faced with this situation, the petitioner requested that he be granted fresh admission in the year 1994.
This request was accepted and he was allowed to repeat the course with the 1994-96 batch.
He appeared in the 7th Trimester examination held in the year 1996.
The result of the Diploma Programme was declared by the Respondent-Institute on February 26, 1997.
The result of 25 students was declared.
However, the petitioner's result was withheld.
His result was separately declared.
He had obtained a cumulative Grade Point Average of 819 in the 10 Points Scale.
3.
On the declaration of the result, the petitioner approached Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 for seeking admission to the Degree Programme.
He was informed that he could not be admitted as he belonged to the 1993-95 batch.
The petitioner represented.
Having failed to secure admission, he has filed the present writ petition.
He alleges that according to Rule 512, a candidate who secure a CGPA of 60 is eligible for admission to the higher Programme.
He having secured a Cumulative Grade Point Average of 819 and having been placed at No. 14 in the merit list, should have been admitted to the Degree Programme.
4.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
The petitioner's claim is contested primarily on the ground that under the rules, it has been inter alia stipulated that a student shall be eligible for promotion when he secures a CGPA of 6 and clears the credit requirements ``on or before the commencement of the major test of a particular batch.''
Since the petitioner had joined with the 1993 batch but has qualified with the 1994 batch, he does not fulfil the second requirement.
Consequently, the respondents aver that the petitioner is not eligible for promotion to the Degree Programme.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
It is true that the petitioner had joined the Diploma Course in the year 1993.
On having failed to attend classes due to illness, the petitioner had sought admission with the 1994 batch.
Once he had been admitted to the course, his claim for further promotion has to be considered on the basis of his merit.
The mere fact that he had initially joined the course with the 1993 batch, cannot mean that he would be ineligible for admission/promotion to the Degree Programme in spite of his position in the merit list.
It deserves mention that Rule 512 inter alia provides as under :-  ``5.12 Admission to the Higher Programme (Promotion) (a) Students must have CGPA equal or higher with 60 in order to qualify the higher promotion.
(b) Such students, who pass the Certificate/Diploma Programme may apply for admission to the higher module.
Only 50% of the seats the admitted students will be filled by the Institute strictly on the basis of merit and (disciplinary action/court case/pending against them) provided his conduct and character are good during his previous stay.
Only those students, who clear the credit requirement on or before the last day of commencement of major test of a particular batch or included in the list of the result gazette of a particular batch etc. are entitled for the admission to the next higher programme.
Students who complete all the credit requirement at a later stage are not permitted for such promotion even if seats are vacant.
However, they may apply for admission in the next academic session along with the current students.''
A perusal of the above provision shows that students who pass the Diploma Programme are entitled to apply for admission to the higher module against the 50% seats which have to be filled up ``strictly on the basis of merit''.
In the present case, the respondents have not considered the petitioner's claim on the basis of his merit.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that only those candidates who secure the requisite merit in the batch, have to be considered.
Since the petitioner had initially joined the course with the 1993 batch, his claim for promotion cannot be considered with the candidates who belonged to the 1994 batch.
7.
It is true that in Rule 512(b), it has been mentioned that ``students who complete all the credit requirements at a latter stage are not permitted for such promotion....'' However, it has also been provided that such students can ``apply for admission in the next academic session along with the current students.''
If the provision is harmoniously construed, it follows that if a student of the 1993-94 batch does not complete the credit requirements within the prescribed period, he may not be permitted promotion along with his batch-mates.
He can, however, apply for admission in the next academic session.
8.
In the present case, since the petitioner had failed to fulfil the credit requirements with the 1993 batch and completed it with the 1994-96 batch, he was not entitled to get promotion with the 1993-95 batch but with the 1994-96 batch only.
This is precisely what he is claiming.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondents also pointed out that Rule 9 permits internal promotion from lower to higher module only to a candidate who completes the Programme ``within the required duration''.
Since the petitioner had not passed the course within the required period, he was not eligible for promotion.
Rule 9 provides as under :-  ``9.
Internal Promotion from Lower to Higher Module : There is a system of automatic internal promotion from lower to higher Programme.
Fifty per cent of students admitted in a course shall be promoted to the higher module strictly on the basis of merit.
For promotion, a student must complete the programme within the required duration, with minimum CGPA of 600 subject to the availability of a course.''
A persual of the above provision shows that the rule permits promotion when a candidate ``completes the programme within the required duration with minimum CGPA of 600....'' The petitioner having joined the course in the year 1994 and having completed it in the year 1996 with an average of 819, it cannot be said that he is ineligible.
On his admission with 1994 batch, he had severed his connection with the 1993-95 batch.
Thus, he is not ineligible under the provisions of Rule 9.
10.
It may also be mentioned that a similar matter has been considered by a Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 18843 of 1996.
In this case, the candidates had been initially admitted in the year 1993.
They were, however, unable to continue with the course on account of the shortages of lectures.
Consequently, they were admitted along with the 1994 batch, in the certificate course.
Their result was withheld.
They were even denied promotion to the Diploma Programme.
The writ petition was allowed.
The respondents were directed to admit them to the Higher Course.
Similar is the position in the present case.
11.
In view of the above, the petitioner is entitled to succeed on principle as well as precedent.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the Degree Programme on the basis of his merit with the 1994-96 batch.
The needful shall be done within one week.
A copy of this order shall be furnished dasti to the counsel for the parties for further action.
No costs.