Iqbal Singh, J - The challenge in this petition is to the passing of order, Annexure P-3, dated 871996 by respondent No. 4 promoting respondent No. 5 as Chargeman and appointing him on the post of Foreman.
2.
The petitioner joined the Department of Irrigation on 191980 and at present is working as Chargeman (Gate and Gears).
According to petitioner, there is only one sanctioned post of Chargeman (Gate and Gears) in the cadre of Junior Technician.
Likewise, there is only one post of Foreman.
Necessary qualifications for the posts of skilled and semi-skilled staff working in various departments was prescribed by the Third Punjab Pay Commission in its recommendations, Annexure P-1.
Respondent No. 5 was working as Switch Board Attendant in the Harike Division.
He filed a civil suit regarding his entitlement to be promoted as Chargeman in which the petitioner was not made a party.
In that suit, respondent No. 4 in his written statement took the stand that respondent No. 5 could not be promoted as Chargeman as he did not fulfil even the basic qualification for the said post as the minimum qualification for promotion to the post of Chargeman was matriculation with two years Diploma from Industrial Training Institute which respondent No. 5 did not have.
However, respondent No. 3 on the recommendations of respondent No. 4 promoted respondent No. 5 as Chargeman notwithstanding that he did not fulfil the basic qualification for this post and further appointed on the post of Foreman without any right.
The representation of the petitioner vide Annexure P-4 was not heard and no action was taken.
The petitioner, therefore, has come to this Court by way of this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order, Annexure P-3, and for issuance of any appropriate writ, order or direction to grant the relief.
3.
The respondents in their reply took the stand that there are only two sanctioned posts of Chargeman in Harike Canal Division, Ferozepur.
Shri Ashok Kumar and the petitioner are working as such.
There is only one sanctioned post of Foreman.
Shri Ashok Kumar is senior Chargeman to the petitioner.
Minimum probation period/experience of two years is essential.
The petitioner does not fulfil the basic minimum experience.
The qualification prescribed by the Third Punjab Pay Commission in Chapter 26 is applicable only for filling posts through direct recruitment for future appointments as mentioned in para 269 of Chapter No. 26.
Therefore, the case of respondent No. 5 was considered on the basis of seniority-cum-merit as this was a case of promotion and not direct recruitment.
After promotion, respondent No. 5 was adjusted against the vacant post of Foreman as there was no vacant post of Chargeman and he was never appointed as Foreman which is clear from Annexure P-1.
4.
Respondent No. 5 in its separate written statement took the plea that he joined the service on 171978 as Beldar and was designated as Switch Board Attendant on 3.11.1980 whereas the petitioner joined service as Gauge Reader on 191980 and was designated as Switch Board Attendant on 1121986.
The petitioner obtained diploma in electrician from Training Institute of Technology (T.I.T.)
which is not recognised Institution by the State of Punjab and therefore, the petitioner has no right to be considered for the post as alleged.
Post of Junior Technician is filled by direct recruitment to the extent of 75% and 25% by way of promotion and the requisite qualification prescribed for promotion quota is apprenticeship certificate from the trade concerned and respondent No. 5 fulfils requisite qualification, keeping in view his qualification and experience, he was promoted against the vacant post of Foreman and cannot be said to be promotion on such post.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
Third Punjab Pay Commission in Chapter 26 regarding skilled and semi-skilled staff in para 26.6 has suggested a provision on the following pattern for incorporating in the rules :-  Sr. No. Revised Designation and revised scale of pay.
Suggested mode of recruitment.
Suggested qualification for direct recruitment.
1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
Helper (810-1440) Direct recruitment Under Matric with knowledge of trade concerned.
2.
Junior Technician.
a) Direct recruitment 75% Matric with 2/3 years National Trade Certificate/National Apprenticeship Certificate in the trade concerned.
b) Promotion from Sr. No. (i) above 25%.
xx xx xx xx  6.
It will be worthwhile to reproduce para.
269 in regard to the qualifications for further appointments which runs as under :-  "It is recommended that the afore-mentioned skilled and semi-skilled staff may be placed in the revised scales as proposed by us in this chapter against their existing scales and qualifications.
Where the minimum qualification prescribed for category in existing service rules are higher than those proposed by us against the existing pay scale of that category, that category may be given a higher revised scale/designation recommended by us for such qualifications.
Needless to say that such higher qualification must be an essential job requirement.
Where the minimum qualification prescribed for a category may be given the revised scale designation recommended by us against such existing pay scale and the qualifications suggested by us may be adopted and incorporated in the rules and made applicable to all further appointments."
From the above recommendations it is clear that recruitment to the post of Junior Technician is to be made 75% by direct recruitment and 25% by promotion and the qualification is matric with 2/3 years National Trade Certificate/National Apprenticeship Certificate in the trade concerned.
The stand of respondent No. 4 in its written statement filed in the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Ferozepur vide Annexure P-2, was that minimum qualification for promotion to the post of Chargeman was matriculation with two years Diploma from Industrial Training Institute.
Now, let us see whether respondent No. 5 fulfils this qualifications.
There is nothing on record to show that respondent No. 5 was having the above minimum qualifications.
Annexure P-3 is silent to this effect.
No any other document has been produced by any of the respondents.
What has been produced by respondent No. 5 is Annexure R-5/2, a diploma certificate from the Training Institute of Technology, India.
This is not a diploma from ITI nor he has placed on record any certificate of having passed matric examination or its equivalent.
When confronted with this, the learned counsel for the respondent has nothing to say.
His argument on which much stress was laid is that it is not a case of direct recruitment but of promotion for which no qualification was required carries no weight, in view of the stand taken by respondents No. 1 to 4 in their written statement referred to above.
There is no escape from this stand.
Perusal of promotion order, Annexure P-3, shows that promotion has been made only on the basis of recommendations made by Executive Engineer, Harike Canal Division, Ferozepur.
This order cannot be sustained in view of minimum prescribed qualifications.
The argument of the learned counsel for respondent No. 5 is that even petitioner is not entitled to the promotion as he also does not have the requisite qualification is not a sound argument to sustain the promotion of respondent No. 5.
Respondent No. 5 may seek any remedy against the petitioner in accordance with law, if so advised, but he cannot protect his own promotion on the ground that the petitioner is not qualified for the post he is holding.
In view of above discussion, we quash order, Annexure P-3.
No order as to costs.