RL Anand, J - Municipal Council, Ferozepur City through its Executive Officer, has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari seeking quashment of the orders passed by the Lok Adalat, Punjab and Haryana High Court on 2412000 in C.W.P.
No. 3972 of 1988 and the order dated 422000 passed in CM No. 2285 of 2000.
The petitioner's counsel has further sought the direction of this Court for the Lok Adalat to decide the case in accordance with law.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
3.
Smt. Ram Lubhai, respondent No. 4, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3972 of 1998 under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against the State of Punjab, Director, Local Government, Punjab and Deputy Director, Local Government, Ferozepur, praying that directions be given to the respondents to give her family pension and arrears with consequential benefits of pension of her late husband Shri Mohinder Paul, who was employed as a Driver with Municipal Committee, Ferozepur and who retired from service on 3111991.
Shri Mohinder Paul unfortunately expired on 2761997.
It was the claim of Smt. Ram Lubhai that after the retirement of her husband, the Government of Punjab issued notification dated 28.7.1994 vide which the employees of the Committees were made eligible to the grant of pensionary benefits with effect from 1.4.1990.
It was also notified by the government that the employees who had already retired before the issuance of the notification were required to exercise their option within a period of four months.
It was the further case of Smt. Ram Lubhai that Shri Mohinder Paul, her husband, exercised his option to that effect which was addressed to the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Ferozepur.
In spite of compliance of all the formalities of the notification dated 28.7.1994 the pensionary benefits have not been released to her.
In order to get that relief Civil Writ Petition No. 3972 of 1998 was filed.
Smt. Ram Lubhai prayed to the Lok Adalat of Punjab and Haryana High Court that her claim may be settled in accordance with law, as a result of which, the President of the Lok Adalat issued notice to the contesting respondents and the notice to the Municipal Committee, Ferozepur was issued through its Executive Officer.
Notice was served as per the report of the office but when the matter was taken up by the Lok Adalat on 2412000, no body put in appearance on behalf of the Committee or on behalf of the Executive Officer.
In this view of the background, the matter was disposed of by the lok Adalat which passed the following operative order :-  "No doubt, the option annexure P-3 allegedly exercised by Mohinder Paul on 2131995 was disputed by the Deputy Director, Local Government, Ferozepur vide his letter dated 7.11.1997 Annexure R-1.
But the report of the Deputy Director is obviously based on what was intimated to him by the Executive Officer.
It was for this reason that vide our order dated 17111999, we had directed issuance of notice to the Municipal Committee, Ferozepur through its Executive Officer after its being impleaded as a party.
The Municipal Committee was duly impleaded as a party and notice was issued to the Executive Officer.
The office report is that the service is complete.
But no one has put in appearance on behalf of the Municipal Committee or the Executive Officer.
In this view of the matter there being no rebuttal to the assertion of the petitioner that the option Annexure P-3 was exercised by Mohinder Paul deceased on 2131995, we entertain the same as option exercised by him in time.
Consequently, we direct that the pensionary benefits as permissible under the government notification dated 28th July, 1994 should be allowed to Mohinder Paul deceased.
The pension payable to him should be worked out alongwith other retiral benefits and paid to the petitioner widow till the date of the death of Mohinder Paul on 2761997 and the family pension payable to her after that date should also be worked and allowed within a period of three months from today alongwith interest @ 12% PA with effect from 111997 till the date of actual payment of the amount of pension payable to Mohinder Paul, family pension payable to the petitioner and other retiral benefits.
We further direct that whatever refund is required to be made by the petitioner on account of the contributory Provident Fund alongwith interest calculated in accordance with the terms conditions of the notification dated 28th July, 1994 shall be adjusted out of the amount of arrears and interest payable to the petitioner widow and the balance amount paid to her besides future regular family pension.
The above directions shall be meticulously complied with and shall constitute a decree under Section 21 of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987."
4.
The Committee, later on, filed an application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC before the Lok Adalat praying that the order dated 2412000 may be recalled and that the Committee may be heard on merits on the prayer made by Smt. Ram Lubhai for the disposal of her case in the Lok Adalat.
5.
The main ground taken up by the Committee in the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC was that the Committee was not made aware that the matter was pending before the Lok Adalat and for that reason, no effective appearance could be made by the Committee before the Lok Adalat of the High Court.
This prayer of the Committee did not find favour with the President and the Member of the Lok Adalat who passed the order dated 422000 and dismissed the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC by making the following observation :-  "Every notice which is issued for appearance before the Lok Adalat makes a specific mention that the matter is fixed before Lok Adalat.
If despite that the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, Ferozepur did not communicate this fact to the counsel, the Executive Officer is to blame for it.
We find no reason to set aside the order dated 2412000.
The application is dismissed."
6.
Being not satisfied with the orders dated 2412000 and 422000, the Municipal Council, Ferozepur City, has filed the present writ petition and has given challenge to the aforesaid two orders.
7.
We have heard Shri P.C.
Goyal, Advocate, for the petitioner and after hearing him, we are of the considered opinion that this petition is without any merit and deserves to be dismissed in limine.
8.
It was submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that though the counsel for the petitioner received a telephonic call from the Executive Officer of the Committee that he had received a notice from the High Court regarding hearing of Civil Writ Petition No. 3972 of 1998, but he was not made aware that the writ petition would be taken up by the President of the Lok Adalat of the High Court.
It was submitted that Executive Officer gave the instructions to the counsel to take time from the Court in order to ascertain about the nature of the controversy.
The Executive Officer could not give the specific instructions to the counsel that the matter was pending before the Lok Adalat and for that reason, the proper representation on behalf of the Committee could not be given before the Lok Adalat, as a result of which, a great prejudice has been caused to the Committee in the passing of the order dated 2412000 and subsequently on 422000, vide which the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC was dismissed.
It was also submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that the principles of natural justice, equity and fair play demand that the orders passed by the Lok Adalat should be set aside and an opportunity should be given to the Committee to represent its case on merits.
9.
We are not convinced with the submissions raised by the counsel for the petitioner.
10.
The committee did not appear after due service.
Every summons which is issued by the Lok Adalat calling upon the parties to appear before it, clearly indicates that the summons had been issued by the Lok Adalat.
When a specific mention to that effect is made, and still the party does not think proper to appear or abstains from the Court, no fault can be attributed to the Court itself on this premise.
Moreover, in the main writ petition of Smt. Ram Lubhai, the Municipal Committee was duly impleaded as a party and notice was issued to the Executive Officer.
There was due service.
If the Executive Officer did not inform his counsel by furnishing full particulars of the case, pending before the Lok Adalat, respondent-Smt. Ram Lubhai cannot be blamed.
Thus, the Lok Adalat was justified in proceeding with the matter in the absence of the Committee.
11.
We have even considered the merits of the case in order to probe as to whether Lok Adalat had committed any illegality while giving relief to the destitute widow of Shri Mohinder Paul.
As stated above, the State of Punjab formulated a Scheme and issued notification dated 28.7.1994 and the employees of the Municipal Committees were also made eligible to the grant of pensionary benefits with effect from 1.4.1990.
There is no dispute that Shri Mohinder Paul expired on 2761997.
Therefore, the benefits of the pensionary scheme were available to Shri Mohinder Paul, who had given the option in this regard and that was also addressed to the Executive Officer.
This was the only requirement which was to be completed by Shri Mohinder Paul who did so on 2131995.
After the death of Shri Mohinder Paul, it was obligatory on the Committee to work out the retiral benefits and those ought to have been paid to his widow who was also entitled to the family pension on account of the death of her husband.
This has not been done so.
It is a settled principle of law that retiral benefit is a civil right of a public servant and this benefit also enures for the benefit of the family after the death of such public servant.
The Committee did not fulfil its obligation under the Scheme as a result of which the directions dated 2412000 were rightly given by the Lok Adalat.
12.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is totally devoid of any merit and the same is hereby dismissed in limine with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.