GD Sharma, J - The petitioner, namely, Atiqa Bano is an employee in the Education Department and through the medium of this petition, she has claimed the charge allowance from May, 1991 onwards as she according to her has been holding the post of Joint Director Schools, Kashmir.
She has also prayed that by a writ of mandamus, the respondents may be directed to assign her the job of Joint Director Schools as already she stands appointed against that post from May, 1991.
The writ petition discloses that she has been fighting litigation with the Department in other writ petitions also, both in Jammu and Kashmir Wings.
She has referred to filing of a writ petition in the year 1992 in Jammu Wing of this Court when respondent No. 2 herein had not allowed her to work as Joint Director, School Education, Kashmir, and her pay was withheld.
2.
According to the petitioner, the writ petition is pending for disposal and no notice has yet been issued to respondents.
During the pendency of that writ petition (wherein she had sought amendment of the relief Government Order No. 146-Edu.
of 1993 dated 821993 was issued and the persons working as District Education Officers were re-designated as Chief Education Officers and adjusted as such on ad hoc basis in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500, for a period of six months.
She has alleged that she was the seniormost Education Officer but her seniority was wrongly shown and she filed writ petition No. 1115/86 before the Srinagar Wing of the Court (factual statement is self- contradictory as made in the writ petition).
3.
According to her, in terms of Government order No. 146-Edu of 1993 dated 821993 (annexure-B) the post of Joint Director has been down-graded to the level of Chief Education Officer and this has given her a new cause of action and has challenged the said order on the ground that respondent-State in this order has given an impression that the adjustment of the petitioner as Chief Education Officer was a promotion which fact is not correct because she already was working as District Education Officer and that the adjustment of the District Education Officer as Chief Education Officer on ad hoc basis is arbitrary and illegal.
The abolition of District Education Officer's post was not wanted.
She has clamied that she should be given the grade of Chief Education Officer w.e.f.
11.2.1987 when the post of District Education Officer was abolished.
She has claimed her promotion as Chief Education Officer w.e.f.
11.2.1987 and her appointment as Chief Education Officer in higher grade w.e.f.
8.3.1993 is illegal.
That by virtue of Annexure `D' (Government order No. 146-Edu of 1993), the petitioner has been adjusted against the post of Joint Director School Education and they have thus down-graded the post to the level of Chief Education Officer which is not permissible under law.
Respondent No. 1 is not competent to downgrade the post of Joint Director to that of Chief Education Officer.
The working of Joint Director School Education carries higher responsibilities than that of a Chief Education Officer and under law she is entitled to the charge allowance from the date she was posted as such (May, 1991 onwards).
The impugned order is illegal and militates against the import of Art. 87 of the J&K Civil Services Regulations.
The functions of Joint Director have been defined and they are separate from the functions of Chief Education Officer.
She has been allowed to work against a clear vacancy with added responsibilities.
She has sought the issuance of writ of certiorari for quashing Government Order No. 146-Edu.
of 1993 so far as it down-grades the post of Joint Director to that of Chief Education Officer.
Other reliefs sought for have been stated above.
4.
The respondents in their objections have pleaded that the averments of the writ petition are vague, superfluous and do not disclose any cause of action.
There is no infringement of any legal, fundamental or statutory right of the petitioner and the writ petition is not maintainable.
On facts, it is pleaded that vide Government Order No. 146-Edu.
of 1993 the petitioner was adjusted as Chief Education Officer on ad hoc basis in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 for a period of six months or till the post is filled up by the DPC/PSC, whichever is earlier and was posted as Joint Director School Education in her own pay and grade of Chief Education Officer against an available post i.e., the post of Joint Director which was down-graded to the level of Chief Education Officer.
It is specifically pleaded that petitioner was not posted as Joint Director but was posted in Directorate of School Education, Kashmir as District Education Officer in her own pay and grade against the post of Joint Director.
This arrangement was done for the purpose of drawal of salary in favour of the petitioner.
It is also stated that the post of Chief Education Officer is in higher pay scale as compared to the post of District Education Officer as the same is to be filled up from the categories of Principals, Higher Secondary School, Deputy Chief Education Officers, District Education Planning Officer with five years service in that class possessing Master's Degree with B.Ed.
The post requires to be filled up through DPC/PSC and it is why ad hoc arrangement was made for a period of six months.
The post of Joint Director requires to be filled-up by the DPC/PSC from the cadre of Chief Education Officers.
It is denied that petitioner automatically had become Chief Education Officer after abolition of the post of District Education Officer.
As stated earlier, the post of Chief Education Officer is higher to the post of District Education Officer as is envisaged in the Jammu and Kashmir Education (Gazetted) Recruitment Rules, 1992 issued vide SRO 83 of 1992.
The posts of Chief Education Officers were to be filled-up after framing the recruitment rules and the present adjustment was made without the existence of such rules and only on ad hoc basis.
The post of Chief Education Officer was filled up on the recommendations of the DPC/PSC w.e.f.
821993 after examining the eligible candidates i.e., District Education Officers and Principals.
No person junior to the petitioner has been cleared as Chief Education Officer and she cannot be given any claim for becoming the Chief Education Officer w.e.f.
11.2.1987.
It is reiterated that the post of Joint Director School Education was down-graded to the level of the post of Chief Education Officer only for the purpose of drawal of salary in favour of the Chief Education Officers who were posted against the said posts of Joint Directors and the petitioner was not the only Chief Education Officer who was allowed to draw her salary against the downgraded post.
The Government is competent to down-grade any post for meeting the exigency of the service of its employees and in this case the post of Joint Director was downgraded in the best interest of the Government and the public.
It is also pleaded that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of any charge allowance.
5.
Mr. Pandita, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that impugned order Annexure `D' was passed without giving any opportunity to the petitioner of being heard and it runs contrary to Cabinet decision No. 53 dated 921987.
Also, the said order Annexure `D' has been superseded by Cabinet decision Annexure `A'.
He has also contended that the petitioner has been allowed to continue as incharge Joint Director (as per annexures F, G and G-1) and in terms of the impugned order annexure `D' the post of Joint Director has been downgraded to the post of Chief Education Officer for giving monetary benefits and she was allowed to work as Chief Education Officer only for six months and this runs contrary to SRO 83.
The order passed by the Additional Secretary is in violation of rule 12 of the business rules and in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In support of his contentions, he has cited the case of Lalit Kumar v. State and others, KLJ 1995 page 20 and OP Bhaskar v. State of J&K, KLJ 1993 page 633.
The order of reversion i.e., Annexure `D' according to the learned counsel runs against the principles laid down in Abdul Samad Bhat v. State and others, KLJ 1986 page 271.
The petitioner is the seniormost Chief Education Officer and keeping all these facts into consideration, she is entitled to the grant of charge allowance.
6.
Mr. Chouhan, learned counsel has controverted the arguments by stating that from May, 1991, there was no post of Joint Director because the new Education Policy had come into force.
The rules were framed on April 7, 1992.
In the absence of these rules, the petitioner could not work as Joint Director on the relevant time i.e., in May, 1991.
The petitioner was not holding the post of Chief Education Officer on substantive basis as she was posted as District Education Officer along with the post.
The post of Joint Director is a selection post and she was never posted as Joint Director.
She was working against that post which has been downgraded and under business rule 12, the Government had the power of downgrading the post.
7.
I have considered the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
8.
Mr. Pandita, learned counsel in one breath has stated that Government order No. 146-Edu.
of 1993 dated 821993 (Annexure-D) is illegal because the same was made without hearing the petitioner herein and is in violation of Cabinet decision No. 53 of 921987.
From the perusal of the said order, it appears that the order is of innocuous nature and runs with the opening words that it does not cause any prejudice to the seniority of others.
In terms of this order, the District Education Officers/Principals were adjusted as Chief Education Officers on ad hoc basis in pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 for a period of six months or till the posts are filled up by the DPC/PSC.
9.
The petitioner herein who was working in the Directorate of School Education, Kashmir was posted as Joint Director School Education, Kashmir, in her own pay and grade of Chief Education Officer, against an available vacancy.
The salary of Chief Education Officer against the post of Joint Director was deemed to have been downgraded to the level and pay scale of Chief Education Officer.
This order was passed by the Additional Secretary to Government, Education Department.
10.
Rule 12 of the Jammu and Kashmir Government Business Rules provides that every order or instrument of the State shall be signed either by the Chief Secretary, the Additional Chief Secretary, Additional Secretary, a Joint Secretary, Additional Joint Secretary, the Deputy Secretary or an Under Secretary to the Government or such other officer as may be specifically empowered by the Government in that behalf and such signatures shall be deemed to be the proper authentication of such order or instrument.
11.
The present order has been signed by the Additional Joint Secretary and it cannot be said that the order is not a Government order.
The order in question is an adjustment order whereby the Officers mentioned therein were adjusted against different posts and under law it was never required that petitioner herein had the right to be heard before the order could be passed.
12.
Cabinet decision No. 53 of 921987 dealt with the organisational set up of the Education Department.
At para 14 of this decision, it was provided that the recruitment rules of the Education Department shall be suitably redrafted.
Taking into consideration all relevant factors, these rules were framed on April, 7, 1992 vide SRO 83, wherein the post of Joint Director School Education was shown in the grade of Rs. 3150-4500 and Chief Education Officer in the grade of 2350-4050.
The recruitment method for Joint Director School Education was by selection from class three whereas in respect of Chief Education Officer by selection from class five with at least five years service in that class possessing Master's degree with B.Ed.
In the Government order No. 146-Edu.
of 1993 (impugned annexure D) it was specifically mentioned that the petitioner herein had to draw her salary as Chief Education Officer against the post of Joint Director and the post of Joint Director was deemed to have been downgraded to the level and pay scale of Chief Education Officer.
The petitioner was posted as Joint Director School Education, Kashmir in her own pay and grade of Chief Education Officer.
Against the back-drop of these facts, it cannot be said by any reasoning that Government order No. 146 of 1993 (Annexure D) is unconstitutional.
13.
Now the question which falls for consideration and determination is whether the petitioner herein is entitled to receive the charge allowance.
14.
Mr. Pandita, the learned counsel has stated that under Article 187 of Civil Services Regulations, the petitioner was entitled to the charge allowance.
From a bare reading of Article 187, it transpires that where a Government servant is assigned the additional charge of another identical or equivalent post covered under sub-clauses II and III of Art. 85(2), charge allowance at the rate of 1/10th of minimum of pay of that post may be allowed.
It is to be seen whether the present case falls within the purview of sub-clauses II and III of Article 85(2) or not.
The facts of the present case disclose that the petitioner herein was posted as Joint Director School Education, Kashmir in terms of Annexure `D' in her own pay grade of Chief Education Officer.
There was no additional charge assigned to her which is the requirement of sub-clauses II and III of Article 85(2).
15.
Sub-clause B of Article 187 deals with the appointment against a higher post and there should be formal appointment in question; only then one becomes entitled to the charge allowance which element is lacking in the present case.
The post of Joint Director was available in May, 1991 and at that time petitioner was not substantively holding the post of Chief Education Officer.
Viewed from all angles it can be said that neither the Government order No. 146-Edu.
of 1993 (Annexure `D') can be quashed as illegal nor the petitioner herein is found entitled to any charge allowance.
The law cited at the Bar by Mr. Pandita has no bearing with the facts of the present case.
Accordingly, this petition is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.