VK Bali, J - Charanjit Kumar through present writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of mandamus so as to direct the respondents to consider him as having been appointed as the Peon on regular basis after the completion of three years service from the date he was assigned the duties of Peon.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that initially the petitioner was appointed as labourer on October 11, 1983 with respondent-Corporation on daily wage basis.
Thereafter, he was appointed as labourer on daily wage basis vide order dated August 21, 1984.
He was posted in Legal Section at the Head Office of respondent-Corporation at Patiala.
It is the case of petitioner that since then he has been working against the post of Peon without any break.
He is a matriculate.
Even though he was appointed as labourer, he had been doing the duty of a Peon like a regular Peon.
He was, however, paid salary of a labourer on daily wage basis.
It is further the case of the petitioner that there are posts of regular peons available in the department but neither he is being given regular appointment nor the pay admissible to Peon is being given to him.
He submitted a representation to the respondent on August 14, 1987, requesting it to treat him as a regular peon.
His case was favourably recommended by the Chief Legal Officer wherein it was acknowledged that the petitioner had been working as Peon in the Legal Section since the date of his appointment.
It is further the case of the petitioner that as per Regulations framed by the respondent-Corporation dealing with mode of appointment and qualifications, he is qualified for appointment to the post of Peon.
On July 10, 1992 the respondent-Corporation directed its Depot Manager that labourers should not be asked to do other jobs and it is the in wake of this order that he was likely to be retrenched from service.
3.
The counsel representing the petitioner vehemently contends that it will be wholly unjust for the respondent-Corporation to show the petitioner exist door after having allowed him to work with it for over a period of ten years particularly when similarly situated persons filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3669 of 1992 which was allowed by the Division Bench of this Court on July 22, 1993, and the Corporation was directed to consider the case of the petitioner, in the said case, as having been appointed on regular basis after completion of three years service.
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed by the respondent-Corporation and in the reply filed by it, it has been pleaded that the petitioner was never appointed as Peon.
He was appointed as labourer on daily wage basis and was never assigned the duties of a Peon, as also that the petitioner could not be appointed to the post of Peon in contravention of the rules and regulations governing the conditions of appointment and service of the employees of the Corporation.
There were 120 daily wage labourers working in the Corporation and as per the seniority list maintained by the Corporation, name of the petitioner figures cast Sr. No. 30.
The Corporation was adjusting the employees from this list against regular Class-IV posts as per their suitability and seniority.
As and when the turn of the petitioner would come, he would be given a suitable post as per the rules and regulations of the Corporation.
It is the positive case of the respondent-Corporation that the petitioner was performing the duties of a labourer only since the date of his appointment and had never performed the duties of a Peon.
Insofar as DB judgment of this Court, referred to above, is concerned, it is the case of the respondent-Corporation that in the said case specific orders were passed by the competent authority saying that the petitioners in the said case had been assigned regular duties of Clerks.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the records of the case.
We find no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner, noted above.
It is proved on the records of the case that the petitioner was assigned the job of a labourer and was never appointed on the post of a Peon.
The claim of the petitioner that duties of Peon were assigned to him has been denied by the respondent-corporation.
In these circumstances, the Corporation can, at the most, regularise the services of the petitioner as labourer and in that direction, an endeavour is being made.
As mentioned above, the respondent Corporation has made a seniority list of the labourers and as and when turn of the petitioner would come for his absorption in regular job on Class IV post, he shall be regularised against the said post.
We have gone through the judgment recorded in C.W.P.
No. 3669 of 1992 relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It was found as a matter of fact that "it was not a stop-gap or local arrangement made on ad hoc basis that any officer of the Corporation assigned the petitioners duties of the posts of Clerks rather by regular orders of the competent authorities of the Corporation, the petitioners have been entrusted with the duties of the posts of Clerks/Typists etc. on regular basis for the last more than ten years."
It is in these circumstances that the Bench observed that to ignore them for appointment on regular basis as Clerks and not releasing them salary of the said post i.e.
Clerk, would amount to exploitation of labour on the part of the Corporation.
We find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same in limine.
No orders as to costs.