VK Bali, J (Oral) - This order shall dispose of two connected Civil Writ Petition Nos. 6305 of 1986 and 1973 of 1987 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
C.W.P.
No. 6305 of 1986:  Challenge in the present petition primarily is to order, Annexure P-8, passed by the Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Haryana, Irrigation Department, dated August 22, 1986 vide which pending enquiry against the petitioner-G.L.
Rampal, cut of 10% in his pension has been imposed.
There is no need at all to advert to detailed facts as have been given in the petition and sufficient it to say that petitioner retired from the post of Superintending Engineer on January 31, 1985.
Prior thereto i.e. on July 1, 1984 he was charge-sheeted.
He filed his reply on August 8, 1984 and by the time he retired, the enquiry had not progressed even a wee bit.
The position, as is obtainable today, remains the same.
Mr. Jaggia, learned counsel representing the petitioner contends that after receipt of reply of the petitioner, even an Enquiry Officer has not been appointed.
2.
In the facts, as have been mentioned above, twin relief asked for is to quash order, Annexure P-8, vide which pension of the petitioner to the extent of 10% has been stopped as also to quash enquiry initiated against the petitioner pursuant to charge-sheet, Annexure P-2.
Insofar as first relief is concerned, cause of petitioner seems to be squarely covered by Full Bench decision of this Court in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1993(4) SLR 655, wherein it has been ruled that "State cannot escape its liability to pay pension solely in anticipation of the liability of the pensioner being fixed in disciplinary proceedings."
Insofar as, thus, order Annexure P-8 is concerned, the same deserves to be quashed.
So ordered.
3.
Insofar as pendency of the enquiry against the petitioner is concerned, no definite rule or precedent has been shown that merely on account of delay caused in concluding the enquiry proceedings, the same should be dropped.
However, it cannot be denied at the same time that the Government does not have unfettered powers to carry on with the enquiry for whatever time it might like.
Quashing of enquiry proceedings, however, depends upon nature of charges levelled against a delinquent employee.
Considering the nature of charges as spelled out in Annexure P-2, the Court is of the opinion that respondent-State should have completed the enquiry by now.
However, considering totality of the facts and circumstances of this case, it is ordered that the enquiry must be completed within six months from today, failing which it shall be deemed to have been dropped.
4.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is partly allowed.
Whereas, order, Annexure P-8 is quashed, a direction is issued to the State to pay the petitioner all his retiral benefits and in that context to pay the with held pension within a period of one month from today.
As mentioned above, enquiry must be completed within six months failing which it shall be deemed to have lapsed.
No costs.
C.W.P.
No. 1173 of 1987  5.
There is no need to mention the facts as, during the pendency of the writ petition, order Annexure P-16 has been passed vide which all dues of the petitioner have been ordered to be released.
Mr. Jaggia, however, states that even though letter was issued way back on March 31, 1993 as also that the enquiry initiated against the petitioner was dropped, yet nothing at all has actually been paid to the petitioner.
A direction is issued to the respoondent-State to pay to the petitioner all his retiral benefits as per decision taken by the Government itself vide later dated March 31, 1993 Annexure P-16.
Inasmuch as there has been no justification whatsoever for withholding various amounts as mentioned in Annexure P-15, all dues be paid to the petitioner with simple interest to be calculated at the rate of 18% from the date amounts were required to be paid to the petitioner.
No order as to costs.