Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the condition imposed in the order dated 26.7.1996 Annexure P2 passed by respondent No. 2 to the effect that the petitioner shall however not be paid any arrears of pay from 9121988 to the date to his actual joining as he has not actually worked as Transport Sub Inspector during this period.
2.
Petitioner joined service as a Clerk in the Haryana Transport Department in the year 1972.
While posted at Bahadurgarh at Road Tax Barrier in the year 1989, a case under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (bearing FIR No. 247 dated 671988, Police Station Bahaduragarh) was registered against him on account of alleged acceptance of Rs. 20/- as bribe.
He was placed under suspension.
Petitioner was convicted and sentenced by Special Judge, Rohtak, on 15.6.1989 against which he filed an appeal (Crl A. No. 295-SB of 1989) in this Court.
Appeal was accepted, his conviction and sentence was set aside.
Consequent upon his acquittal in the said case, petitioner was reinstated in service on 14.7.1995.
It was ordered that the period for which the petitioner remained under suspension will be treated as period spent on duty for all intents and purposes.
Petitioner was also paid the arrears of pay and allowances for the suspension period of the post of a clerk from the date he had been suspended.
3.
On the basis of seniority, petitioner was entitled to be promoted as Transport Sub Inspector.
Respondents after considering the case of the petitioner passed order dated 26.7.1996 Annexure P2 thereby promoting him as Transport Sub Inspector with effect from 9121988 in the scale of Rs. 1400- 2600.
However, a rider was imposed in the said order that petitioner shall not be paid arrears of pay and allowances from 9121988 to-date as he had not actually worked as Transport Sub Inspector during this period.
4.
Petitioner has challenged the condition imposed in Annexure P2 regarding non-payment of the arrears on the ground that when a promotion is given from retrospective date, the consequential benefits accruing from such promotion cannot be denied and the principle of no work no pay is not applicable in such cases; that once an employee is promoted with effect from retrospective date, he cannot be deprived of his pay and allowances from the date of his promotion and any condition imposed to the effect that such employee would not be entitled to pay and allowances as a result of the promotion would be illegal.
5.
In the written statement filed, stand taken by the respondents is that since the petitioner had not actually worked on the promoted post of Transport Sub Inspector from the deemed date of promotion to the date of actual joining, he was not entitled to the arrears of pay and allowances on the promoted post for the said period.
6.
It is the admitted position that petitioner had never refused to work on the higher post.
Had he refused to work on the higher post in spite of the fact that his promotion and posting order had been issued, it may have been possible for the respondents to contend that petitioner was not entitled to the arrears in the difference of pay on the promoted post.
If due to pendency of litigation petitioner was not given the promotion with effect from the due date depriving him of the right to work on the high er post, he cannot be denied the arrears of salary.
In a case like the present one where promotion was denied on account of pendency of litigation and a retrospective promotion is given then the employee would be entitled to the arrears of salary.
In such a situation if an employee is promoted from a retrospective date, he should normally be deemed to have worked on the higher post entitling him to the payment of arrears of salary.
When the criminal case ended in favour of the petitioner, he was reinstated in service with the stipulation that the period for which he remained under suspension will be treated as duty period for all intents and purposes.
He was paid the arrears of pay and allowances for the suspension period of the post of clerk from the date he was placed under suspension.
When retrospective promotion is given to him the condition that he would not be paid the difference in arrears of salary on the promoted post could not be imposed.
Such a condition is unsustainable in law.
The rule of ``No work No pay'' would not be applicable to such a case.
While dealing with somewhat similar situation, their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India etc. v. KV Jankiraman Etc. ect, 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2010, held as under :-  ``When an employee is completely exonerated in criminal/disciplinary proceedings and is not visited with the penalty even of censure in dictating thereby that he was not blamed-worthy in the least, he should not be deprived of any benefits including the salary of the promotional post.
The normal rule of ``no work no pay'' is not applicable to such cases where the employee although he is willing to work is kept away work by the authorities for no fault of his.
This is not a case where the employee remains away from work for his own reason, although the work is offered to him.
It is for this reason that FR 17(1) will also be inapplicable to such cases.''
7.
For the reasons stated above, this petition is accepted, the impugned condition imposed in the order Annexure P2 depriving the petitioner of pay and allowances from the date of his retrospective promotion as Transport Sub Inspector is quashed.
As a consequence thereof, a mandamus is issued to the respondents to release the arrears of pay and allowances admissible to the petitioner on the post of a Transport Sub Inspector with effect from 9121988 and to refix the pay of the petitioner after giving him the benefit of increments due on the promoted post.
Petitioner shall also be entitled to any further consequential benefits admissible to him as a result of promotion.
No costs.
Petition allowed.