Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who had retired as Principal, Government Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar on August 31, 1982, was served with a show cause notice dated January 18, 1988 calling upon him to explain as to why a cut of 10% be not imposed on his pension.
The petitioner has filed the present writ petition to challenge this show cause notice on the ground that it is ``ultra-vires Rule 2.2(b) of the Pension Rules'' and `` it offends against Article 300-A of the Constitution of India''.
He prays that this notice be quashed and the respondents be directed to release all the retiral benefits.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner's son was a candidate for admission to the MDS Course.
He had produced a copy of the detailed marks certificate of the First professional examination of BDS indicating that he had secured 290 marks.
This certificate was attested by the petitioner.
Thereafter, original application and the selection list were got removed by the petitioner `` with the connivance of his subordinates after taking over as Principal of Punjab Government Dental College and Hospital, Amritsar where his son got admission in MDS on the basis of forged certificate''.
A charge sheet was issued to the petitioner.
It has been further stated that the enquiry was going on against the petitioner before he had retired.
After his retirement, the full pension was sanctioned on provisional basis.
However, it was subject to the finalisation of the enquiry pending against him.
The Vigilance Department submitted its final report holding the petitioner guilty.
This report was received on August 10, 1987.
Thereafter, the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
He sent a reply through his counsel and asked for ``the supply of certified copies of the material/documents of the Vigilance Department which were supplied on 961988 under registered cover by the Government to his counsel''.
The respondents maintain that cut can be imposed in the pension under Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II.
Consequently, the show cause notice is legal and valid.
It calls for no interference.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. KK Jagia has contended that the petitioner was entitled to the commutation of his pension.
Since the respondents had not allowed commutation of pension, the show cause notice served on the petitioner is illegal.
He further submits that the petitioner had asked for copies of certain documents vide his representation dated January 27, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition.
However, since copies were not supplied, it was not possible for the petitioner to submit an effective reply.
Lastly, the counsel has contended that allegations similar to those as levelled against the petitioner had also been made against his son, Dr. Tej Paul Singh.
On the basis of the facts recorded by the Enquiry Officer, the punishment of compulsory retirement was imposed on Dr. Tej Paul Singh.
He had filed a writ petition which was allowed by a learned Single Judge of this Court.
The decision of the writ petition is reported as 1993(8) SLR 90.
In this case, it had been specifically observed by the learned Judge that ``there is no evidence on the record to show that the petitioner had submitted a forged certificate.''
Consequently, in view of this finding, even the allegations against the petitioner cannot be sustained.
5.
This writ petition had been initially listed for hearing along with a number of other petitions.
Various questions of law regarding the interpretation of the service rules as raised in these cases were referred to a Full Bench.
The matter was settled by the Full Bench vide its decision dated January 12, 1993.
It was inter alia held that the ``State is bound to release 100% pension at the time of superannuation, may be provisional''.
It was also held that the Government can withhold the gratuity or other retiral benefits or postpone payment thereof during the pendency of an enquiry.
According to the Full Bench, ``pension cannot be adversely affected before a finding of guilt is recorded''.
It was specifically held that superannuation had no effect on the pendency of enquiry proceedings and that the recovery of the Government dues can be made from gratuity or other retiral benefits.
6.
In accordance with the decision of the Full Bench, the petitioner has been allowed payment of 100% pension on provisional basis.
As for the petitioner's claim for commutation, the Government can consider and decide the matter.
However, this can't be a ground to challenge either the validity of the enquiry proceedings or show cause notice issued to him.
7.
The short question that really arises in this case is - Is the show cause notice given to the petitioner illegal and invalid ?
8.
In view of the decision of the Full Bench which was given in this very case, it is evident that enquiry proceedings can be continued even after the retirement of a civil servant.
If a person is found guilty, a cut in his pension can be imposed.
If the Government has suffered any loss, it can be recovered from the retiral benefits like gratuity etc.
It is, thus, implicit that if on the basis of the enquiry proceedings, a civil servant is found guilty, the competent authority can proceed to pass orders for imposing cut in his pension and/or for ordering recovery of the loss suffered from the dues of the civil servant.
However, in the present case, it has been categorically stated on behalf of the respondents that the charges have been proved against the petitioner.
In view thereof, he has been given a show cause notice which has been impugned.
The show cause notice is calculated to give the petitioner an opportunity to explain his position and to show as to why the proposed action be not taken against him.
The action of the respondents is in conformity with the principles of fair play and natural justice.
It is to enable him to give his version.
It is not really understood as to how and why the petitioner has any grievance against the issue of the show cause notice.
9.
Mr. Jagia submits that no effective opportunity is being given to the petitioner as the request made by him vide letter dated January 27, 1988 for the supply of certain documents has been declined.
10.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
In para 16 of the writ petition, the petitioner has only averred that ``in reply, the petitioner through his counsel approached the said authority for the supply of certified copies of material documents specified in this behalf.
A copy of the said request made through a registered letter dated 2711988 is enclosed as Annexure P.6.
No reply to the same has been received to this date''.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that ``the petitioner through his counsel approached the Government for the supply of certified copies of the material/documents of the Vigilance Department which was supplied on 961988 under registered cover by the Government to his counsel.''
The petitioner has not filed any replication to controvert this.
The statement that the documents had been supplied to him vide letter dated June 9, 1988 has not been disputed.
In spite of this, the plea is being raised that the documents have been denied.
It is wholly untenable in view of the categorical stand taken on behalf of the respondents.
11.
Lastly, it has been contended that in view of the findings recorded by a learned Single Judge of this Court in Dr. Tej Paul Singh's case (supra), no action can be taken against the petitioner.
12.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
The charge against the petitioner was as under :-  ``Dr. Ishar Singh while posted as Principal, Government Dental College, Amritsar, at the material time acted fraudulently and dishonestly with a view to obtaining admission for his son Dr. Tej Paul Singh, in the MDS Course in Dental College and Hospital Amritsar, by attesting a forged copy of the original certificate issued in favour of his son, wherein higher marks than actually secured by his son in the BDS Examination were falsely shown and thereafter caused the disappearance of original record pertaining to the admission of his son with the connivance of his subordinates''.
13.
A perusal of the above shows that the petitioner was accused of having attested a forged copy of the certificate issued in favour of his son, wherein higher marks than those actually secured by him were wrongly shown.
It was further alleged that he had ``caused the disappearance of the original record pertaining to the admission of his son with the connivance of his subordinates''.
These were not the charges against Dr. Tej Paul Singh.
Consequently, any decision in the case of Dr. Tej Paul Singh which was against a totally different order cannot operate as res judicata as contended by the counsel for the petitioner in the present case.
The contention raised by Mr. Jagia in this behalf is wholly untenable and cannot be sustained.
14.
No other point has been urged.
15.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition dismissed.