RS Mongia J (Oral) - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 5690 of 1991 as also Civil Writ Petition No. 16604 of 1991.
Both these writ petitions have been filed by the same petitioner.
2.
The petitioner had joined the Indian Navy on April 8 1962 and was released therefrom on April 8 1972.
After his release from the Navy he joined as a Clerk in the Sub Office Cadre of the Agriculture Department on October 17 1977.
After the department of Agriculture was bifurcated a separate Directorate came into being as Horticulture Department to which the petitioner was allocated.
The petitioner was given benefit of Rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency Concession Rules 1965 and his service in the Navy rendered during the period of emergency i.e. October 26 1962 to January 10 1968 was reckoned towards his increments by giving him deemed date of appointment.
3.
On May 7 1987 vide Annexure P.1 Director of Horticulture Punjab addressed a communication to all subordinate offices of Horticulture Department for filling up posts of Clerks in the Head Office.
The said letter when translated into English reads as under :-  `` Subject: For filling up of the posts of Clerks in Head Office.
Some of the posts of Clerks are likely to be filled up in the Head Office.
All the Clerks who are working in the subordinate offices and fulfil the following conditions of eligibility and desire to come on Junior post they should send their names within 15 days from the issue of this letter through proper channel.
Eligibility Conditions: 1.
Matric First Division or Inter Second Division or BA 2.
Must have knowledge of typing (Preference will be given to those knowing English and Punjabi typing as well).
3.
Must have been appointed on regular basis in the Subordinate Office through the Subordinate Services Selection Board.''
4.
The petitioner considering himself to be eligible applied for being appointed as a Clerk in the Head Office.
Vide order dated July 9 1987 the Director of Horticulture Punjab Issued appointment letter to the petitioner and to some other similarly situated persons appointing them as Clerks in the Head Office.
The appointment order reads as under:-  ``Sarvshri Gurnam Singh Senior Clerk Prem Singh Senior Clerk and Smt. Sarabjit Kaur Clerk presently working in the Subordinate Offices Cadre of Horticulture Department are adjusted against vacant posts of Clerks in the Directorate Cadre of Horticulture Department Punjab with immediate effect.
They will have to lose their seniority and will be considered junior to the officials already working on the cadre of Headquarters office.
Their lien will however remain in subordinate offices cadre till their confirmation in Directorate Cadre.
Their pay shall be fixed as per rules.''
The petitioner was not given benefit of military service rendered during the period of emergency for fixing his seniority pay etc. in the Head Office.
This led the petitioner to file Civil Writ Petition No. 5690 of 1991.
During the pendency of the said writ petition an order was passed by the Director of Horticulture on October 31 1991 wherein it is mentioned that the petitioner had been earlier adjusted in the head office cadre against the post of the Clerk vide order dated July 9 1987 with a clear stipulation that the lien would remain in the subordinate office and since the petitioner had not been confirmed in the cadre of the Head Office and further as he had been granted benefit of increments in lieu of military service in the subordinate office he was being given the benefit of seniority also in the subordinate office by reckoning his military service during the period of emergency and was accordingly promoted to the post of Senior Assistant (Accounts) in the subordinate office and was ordered to be posted in the office of the Assistant Director Horticulture Kapurthala.
This order was passed subject to the decision in the former writ petition No. 5690 of 1991.
The said order has been made subject-matter of challenge in the latter writ petition i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 16604 of 1991.
5.
It is the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner's appointment as a Clerk in the head Office was in fact by way of direct recruitment as would be evident from the communication dated May 7 1987 (Annexure P.1) to which reference has already been made above.
Choice was given to the Clerks working in the subordinate offices to apply for appointment in the Head Office as Clerks.
Each clerk could not even apply unless he had the requisite qualifications as mentioned in Annexure P.1.
It was out of the applicants who had applied in response to the communication at Annexure P.1 that an order of appointment as Clerk dated 9th July 1987 (already reproduced above) was issued.
Though in the order the word `adjustment' had been used yet in fact if was an appointment.
Learned counsel further submitted that since the appointment vide order dated July 9 1987 was by way of direct recruitment the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of military service under Rule 4 of the 1965 and it could not be denied to him because the petitioner had availed of that benefit in the subordinate office.
Reliance has been placed on a judgment of this Court in Bharpur Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1991(2) SCT 526(P&H) : 1991(2) SLR 736 wherein it was held that where a person after discharge from the Army joined the subordinate office as a Clerk and was granted the benefit of increments in lieu of his service rendered in the Armed Forces and later on joined the Head Office would still be entitled to the benefit of military service under Rule 4 of the 1965 Rules.
It was further contended that where Haryana Government introduced a rule in the 1965 Rules that the benefit of military service under Rule 4 shall only be confined to first appointment the said rule was struck down by a Division Bench of this Court in Raj Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1981(3) SLR 436.
He further submitted that though lien of the petitioner was kept in the subordinate office but the petitioner could not be recalled vide order dated October 31 1991 (Annexure P 6 annexed with the latter petition) without his consent.
The petitioner had worked in the Head Office for almost four years when the impugned order at Annexure P 6 in the latter petition was passed.
It cannot be at the whims and fancies of the department that a person can be shuttled between the Head Office and the subordinate office.
Learned counsel for the respondents however argued that it is apparent from the order (Annexure P-1) in this writ petition already reproduced above that for being appointed regularly in the head office a Clerk had to be Matriculate 1st Division or Intermediate Second Davison or BA The petitioner was not Matriculate 1st Class nor was he Intermediate IInd Class or BA Under the circumstances the petitioner had no right to be confirmed in the head office as he lacked the minimum academic qualifications for being appointed as a Clerk.
Since his lien had been retained in the subordinate office the petitioner could always be recalled to the parent cadre before his confirmation in the head office.
In the subordinate office the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of Military service rendered during the Emergency under rule 4 of 1965 Rules towards seniority increments etc.
Initially the benefit of Military service rendered during the emergency was given to the petitioner towards his increments in the subordinate office but later on benefit towards seniority was also given in the subordinate office towards seniority and vide order dated October 31 1991 (Annexure P-6) in C.W.P.
No. 16604 of 1991 the petitioner was promoted to the post of Senior Assistant (Accounts).
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties I find no merit in these writ petitions.
Even if the appointment of the petitioner vide order dated July 9 1987 (Annexure P(2) in the first writ petition is taken to be direct recruitment the question that arises is did the petitioner have any right to continue ?
Normally the petitioner would have had the right to continue but it is clear from the averments that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualifications for being appointed as a Clerk in the Head Office.
He lacked the academic qualifications inasmuch as he was not matriculate 1st Class or intermediate 2nd class or BA Therefore the respondents were justified in not confirming him in the head office and sending him back to the subordinate office where he held his lien.
It is not the case that any relaxation in qualification could be or had been given.
The petitioner on being reverted to his parent cadre would have the right to reckon his Military service rendered during the emergency towards increments seniority and other benefits as envisaged by rule 4 of the 1965 Rules.
Increments had already been given on that count and while reverting him he was also given the benefit of Military service rendered during the emergency towards seniority.
Counting that service towards seniority if any clerk junior to the petitioner in the subordinate office was promoted prior to the year October 31 1991 when Annexure P-6 in the latter writ petition was issued the petitioner would be entitled to be considered for promotion w.e.f.
the date any of his junior was promoted to the higher rank.
The petitioner now cannot make any grievance that benefit of Military service rendered during the period of Emergency has not been given for the purpose of seniority in the subordinate office as it has actually been given.
He will be entitled to all other benefits envisaged by rule 4 of the 1965 Rules.
7.
Subject to the observations made above I find no merit in these writ petitions which are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.