VK Bali, J (Oral) - Daljit Singh Riar and others through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seek writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to pay to them the Rural Area Allowance on the pattern as admissible to the Punjab State employees who are similarly situated.
2.
It is the case of the petitioners that the respondent-State of Punjab had decided to introduce Grant-in-aid Rules w.e.f.
March 22, 1968 under which the Privately Managed Recognised Schools were granted parity of pay scales and allowances and the Government undertook to pay 95% of the grant-in-aid to the teachers and allied staff payable to the Privately Managed Recognised Schools' staff at the rate at which their counterparts in Government schools were paid and the Management was required to meet only 5% of the deficit on this account.
The petitioners are working against the aided posts in the said schools which are getting 95% grant-in-aid from respondent-State.
The employees of the Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools had been pressing for parity of pay scales and allowances with the employees of the same status in Government service.
Punjab State enacted an Act known as the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, governing the employees of such schools.
Section 7 of the Act aforesaid reads thus:-  ``Salaries of employees :- Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, the scale of pay and dearness allowance of the employees shall not be less than those of the employees of the State Government holding corresponding posts in the schools run by the State Government;  Provided that where the scales of pay and dearness allowance of the employees are less than those of the employees of the State Government holding corresponding posts in the schools run by the State Government, the Director shall direct the concerned Managing Committee to bring the same at par with those of such employees of the State Government.''
3.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the 3rd Punjab Pay Commission, there had been revision of pay scales and allowances of the Punjab State employees effective from January 1, 1986.
In the year 1988 the Punjab State discontinued certain allowances payable to its employees and instead made a uniform policy of paying house rent Allowance to the employees posted in cities/towns and Rural Area allowance to those who were posted in the rural areas.
The instructions with regard to payment of Rural Area Allowance were issued vide letter dated August 30, 1988 (Annexure P.1).
This facility was, however, not extended to the employees of the Privately Managed Recognised schools.
As mentioned above, it is this allowance which has been asked for in the present petition.
4.
There is absolutely no need to go into the details of this case as also the grounds on which the relief asked for by the petitioners has been opposed in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 as the matter appears to be squarely covered in favour of the petitioners by a decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition 3510 of 1993, Satish Kumar Duggal and others v. State of Punjab and others, rendered by Division Bench of this court of May 17, 1994.
While relying upon number of judgments, Division Bench directed the respondents to pay the petitioners, in the said case, rural area allowance at the same rates as were mentioned in the order, Annexure P-3, in the said case, from the date it fell due to them according to the said order.
It was further observed that the expenditure on this account shall be apportioned between the State Government and the Management in the same proportion in which they share the burden of the existing emoluments of the teachers.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State of Punjab could not dispute that the matter is actually covered by a Division Bench judgment in Satish Kumar Duggal's case (supra).
That being the position, this petition is disposed of by directing the respondents to pay to the petitioners rural area allowance at the same rates as are admissible to the employees of the Government Schools as contained in Annexure P-1 from the date it fell due to them.
The expenditure on this account shall be apportioned between the State Government and the Management in the same proportion in which they share the burden of the existing emoluments of the teachers.
No order as to costs.