Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing the impugned instructions Annexure P-3 to the extent these deprive the petitioners of higher standard pay scales the which they are entitled on completion of 10 and 20 years service each and further by issuing a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant to the petitioners the benefit of higher pay scale on completion of 10 and 20 years service to which they became entitled under the Government instructions Annexure P-2.
2.
Petitioners are working as JBT teachers in various schools under the Department of Education Haryana Govt. Keeping in view the lack of promotional avenues in the various categories of posts, respondent-State with a view to remove stagnation of its employees of Group `C' and `D' categories, decided to grant time bound higher standard pay scales to its employees in place of the earlier schemes of providing additional increments after 8 and 18 years service contained in its letter No. 1/138/92-IPR(FD) dated 781992 vide its policy decision Annexure P2 dated 821994.
As per this policy every employee of Group `C' or `D' category who has not got any promotional scale/higher time scale/selection grade in his service career and has completed 10 years/20 years or more regular satisfactory service is entitled to a higher standard pay scale with effect from 111994 or from a date falling due thereafter.
3.
In view of the policy decision Annexure P2, JBT teachers, who fall under Group `C' category are entitled to higher standard pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 on completion of ten years regular satisfactory service and Rs. 1600-2660 on completion of 20 years regular service.
All the petitioners have put in more than ten years of service and a few of them have put in more than 20 years of service.
4.
In the policy decision Annexure P2 it has been provided that if an employee foregoes his promotion or seeks reversion to a lower post at his own request he will render himself ineligible for the benefit of higher standard scale under these instructions.
Relevant provision reads as under -  "4.
An employee who foregoes promotion or seeks reversion to a lower post at his own request will render himself ineligible for the benefit of higher standard scale under these instructions."
5.
Finding that there were certain difficulties in implementing the instructions Annexure P2, some of the departments sought certain clarifications from the Govt. One of the points raised was as to whether an employee is eligible for higher standard pay scale who foregoes promotion and if he is not eligible for grant of first higher standard pay scale whether or not he is to be granted 2nd higher standard pay scale after 20 years of service.
In response to the clarifications sought, goverment issued instructions Annexure P3 dated 29.12.1995 terming it to be clarificatory in nature.
With regard to the particular query referred to above, the following clarification has been given by the government:-  "23.
There is clear provision under para 4 of the instructions dated 821994 that an employee who foregoes promotion or seeks reversion to a lower post at his own request will render himself ineligible for the benefit of Higher Standard Pay Scale but in the instant case employee on completion of 20 years of service would be eligible for the Ist Higher Standard Pay Scale."
6.
Petitioners during the years 1990, 1992 and 1993 had foregone their promotions to the post of Head-Teacher/Head-Master and Head Mistress etc. Petitioners' case is that by virtue of instructions Annexure P3, petitioners who had foregone their promotions in 1990, 1992 and 1993 before the coming into force of instructions Annexure P2 have been made ineligible for the benefit of higher standard pay scale.
Petitioners have challenged the instructions Annexure P3 on the ground that the instructions Annexure P3 are fresh instructions and not clarificatory in nature which intend to supersede the earlier instructions Annexure P2 with retrospective effect and under the garb of these clarifications, respondent-authorities by way of implications are denying the benefit of higher standard pay scale to even those employees who had foregone their promotions prior to the coming into force of instructions Annexure P2; that the petitioners because of their personal difficulties had foregone their promotions during the years 1990, 1992 and 1993 prior to the issuance of instructions Annexure P2 and the benefit which accrued to them though even by way of concession could not be taken away with retrospective effect.
For this reliance has been placed upon a judgment of Supreme Court in Ex. Capt.
KC Arora and another v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
97 and a judgment of this Court in Beant Singh Bedi v. State of Punjab and others, CWP 3397 of 1991, decided on 12121991.
That the language used in clause 4 of Annexure P2 makes it clear that only those persons who forego their promotion or seek reversion to a lower post on their request after the issuance of Annexure P2 would render themselves ineligible for the benefit of higher standard pay scale and the same would not be applicable retrospectively where an employee had foregone his promotion prior to the issuance of instructions Annexure P3.
7.
Stand taken by the respondents in the written statement is that instructions Annexure P3 are clarificatory in nature which were issued in pursuance to certain queries raised by different departments; that from the over-all reading of instructions Annexure P2, it is clear that benefit of open ended higher standard pay scale was made available to `C' and `D' categories of employees at 10/20th year point provided the employees had not got any promotion.
It was made clear that any employee who forgoes promotion or seeks reversion to a lower post will render himself ineligible for the benefit of higher standard pay scale under instructions Annexure P2.
Since the petitioners were given a chance of promotion which they did not accept, it it cannot be held that they are victims of stagnation and, therefore, entitled to the benefit of higher standard pay scale under the instructions Annexure P2.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
8.
A reading of Annexure P2 shows that the State of Haryana issued these instructions to remove stagnation of its employees who had not got any promotion in their service career by granting time bound higher standard pay scale of group `C' and `D' categories after 10/20 years of regular satisfactory service.
These instructions came into force with effect from 111994.
These instructions were issued to provide some relief by way of higher standard pay scale for those employees who had not even earned one promotion in their career.
It was specifically provided in Clause 4 of these instructions that an employee who foregoes promotion or seeks reversion to a lower post at his own request will render himself ineligible for the benefit of higher standard pay scale under these instructions.
An employee who had got achance of promotion cannot be held to be victim of stagnation and entitled to the benefits of instructions Annexure P2.
From the overall reading of the instructions Annexure P2, particularly Clause 4, it cannot be said that only those employees who forego their promotion or seek reversion to a lower post in future i.e. after the coming into force of the instructions Annexure P2 would render themselves ineligible for the benefit of higher standard pay scale under these instructions.
Employees who had foregone their promotion or had sought reversion to a lower post at their own request even prior to the coming into force of the instructions Annexure P2 would also render themselves ineligible for higher standard pay scale under instructions Annexure P2.
The ratio in Ex. Capt.
KC Arora's case (supra) and Beant Singh Bedi's case (supra) would not be applicable to the facts of the present case.
In those cases, it was held that the subsequent instructions issued were not clarificatory in nature.
Instructions Annexure P2 had been issued for providing relief to group `C' and `D' category of employees with the clear stipulation that an employee who foregoes promotion or seeks reversion to a lower post at his own request would render himself ineligible for the benefit of higher standard pay scale.
On a query raised by some of the departments, government simply clarified its stand which in essence remains the same and under these circumstances the instructions Annexure P3 would be deemed to be clarificatory in nature.
The instructions Annexure P3 cannot be taken to be fresh instructions taking away the rights which had accrued to the petitioners by virtue of instructions Annexure P2.
9.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in this petition and the same is ordered to be dismissed with no order as to costs.