GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for directing the respondents to absorb the petitioner in the CID Wing of the Police Department and to quash his repatriation to the Police Wing of the Department.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the petitioner joined service of the Police Department, Punjab as head constable on 151958.
In the year 1972, he was deputed to the Intelligence Wing of the Police Department, which is popularly known as CID While working in the CID Wing, the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector in the year 1985 and then as Sub Inspector.
On 3041996, the petitioner was given a notice to explain why disciplinary action be not taken against, him due to his failure to take interest in the official duties and consuming of liquor while on duty.
The petitioner submitted his reply dated 751996 and ten days thereafter the Additional Director General of Police, Intelligence, Punjab passed the impugned order Annexure P-4 repatriating the petitioner from CID Wing to his parent cadre.
This order has been challenged by the petitioner on the following grounds :-  (1) After having rendered 24 years service in the CID Wing, a right has been acquired by the petitioner to the absorbed in that Wing and, therefore, the respondents have no jurisdiction to repatriate him to the so- called parent cadre.
(2) The impugned order has been passed as a measure of punishment and as no opportunity of hearing was afforded to him before the passing of the impugned order, the same should be declared illegal and against the principles of natural justice.
3.
In the reply, the respondents No. 1, 2, 3 and 5 have pleaded that the petitioner was taken on deputation in the CID Wing on 27.9.1981 at his own request and not in the year 1972 as claimed by him.
The respondents have alleged that the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector in his parent department on 911983.
Thereafter, he was promoted as ad hoc Sub Inspector on 1511987 against CID vacancies.
The respondents have pleaded that on receipt of a report from the Superintendent of Police (Security), CID, Punjab (Annexure R-3), the explanation of the petitioner was called for regarding his habit of consuming wine while on duty and not taking of interest in the maintenance of the Government vehicles even while he was posted in MT, CID Headquarters.
The respondents have stated that as a deputationist, the petitioner has no right to be absorbed in the services of the CID Wing and action of the respondents to repatriate him to the parent cadre does not affect any of his legal or fundamental rights.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner filed an additional affidavit dated 181996 wherein he has stated that Shri Gurdev Singh and Shri Harmel Singh, who had been recruited as Constables along with him have retired from service as Inspectors and another person is likely to be promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police and had the petitioner been continued in his parent department then he was certain to be promoted as Inspector on regular basis.
In another affidavit dated 2981996, the petitioner has made an attempt to give reasons for his inability to undergo the Intermediate School Course by stating that he could not do so on account of illness of his wife and other family circumstances.
Learned Deputy Advocate General produced copies of letters dated 4101989, 1931990, 1891990, 2531991 and 18.3.1992 to show that as and when the petitioner was given opportunity to undergo Upper School Course, he expressed his unwillingness to undertake that Course and this is the reason why the petitioner could not get promotion in the parent department.
5.
First contention urged by Shri Madan Dev, learned counsel for the petitioner is that after having served for over two decades the petitioner has acquired a valuable right to remain in the service of CID Wing of the Police Department and in the absence of any provision for continuing a person on deputation for such a long period, the petitioner should be deemed to have been permanently absorbed in the service of the CID Wing.
Second contention urged by Shri Madan Dev is that the deputation of the petitioner has been brought to end on the basis of allegation of explicit misconduct and as no enquiry consistent with the rules of natural justice was made before passing of the order Annexure P-4 the same is liable to be quashed as arbitrary and unjustified.
Shri Cheema, learned Deputy Advocate General submitted that the petitioner shall get all the benefits which may have been accorded to the other persons serving in the parent department.
6.
The issue whether a person sent on deputation to CID Wing acquires a right to be absorbed in that Wing permanently came to be considered in C.W.P.
No. 11747 of 1995 Satbir Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(4) SCT 393 (P&H) (DB) decided on 251996.
A Division Bench to which one of us was a party analysed the provisions of Rules 13.1, 133, 134, 138, 1312, 1318 and 2125 of the Punjab Police Rules and observed :  "A careful reading of the above quoted rules reveals that while Rule 13 deals with the regular promotion, Rule 2125 specifically deals with deputation to the CID and officiating promotion while a person on deputation with the CID department.
Rule 2125(2) unequivocally postulates repatriation of a deputationist to the parent wing/district.
Admittedly, the petitioner was on deputation with the Criminal Investigation Department and he received officiating promotions as Assistant Sub-Inspector and Sub-Inspector against the Criminal Investigation Department vacancies.
Such promotions cannot be treated as promotions made under Rule 13 of the Rules.
Therefore, the edifice on which Shri Balhara has built up his contention with reference to Rule 138 is missing.
In our opinion, the petitioner, who received officiating and fortuitous promotions while on deputation under Rule 2125(2) cannot claim that he should be treated as placed on probation and should be treated as automatically confirmed after the expiry of period of probation.''
7.
The plea of the deputationists to be continued on deputation on the ground of long lapse of time has also been negatived in Satbir Singh v. State of Haryana (supra) wherein the Court has observed :-  ``Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that after having been allowed to continue on deputation for a period of more than five years, the petitioner must be deemed to have acquired a right to remain on deputation also merits rejection.
Rule 2125 speaks of deputation for a period of three years in first instance which can be extended on the discretion of the Deputy Inspector-General, Criminal Investigation Department.
The only limitation on the exercise of power of extension is that such extension shall not be for more than 2 years at a time.
Thus, the Rule clearly contemplates more than one extensions.
Moreover, there is no provision in the Rules which speaks of automatic absorption of a deputationist in the Criminal Investigation Department.
Therefore, the fact that the petitioner has continued on deputation for a period of more than 6 years cannot ensure to his benefit and he cannot claim automatic confirmation or absorption in the Criminal Investigation Department.''
8.
In the same very decision, the Division Bench has also dealt with the argument that reversion of the deputationist should be treated as stigmatic.
In that case, it was urged on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned order has been passed in the background of the allegation of indulgence of the petitioner in smuggling of narcotics and as no enquiry was held by the competent authority the order of repatriation should be declared as void and be quashed on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
This plea has been negatived by making the following observations :-  ``This brings us to the last contention of the learned counsel that the impugned orders are stigmatic and, therefore, the same should be quashed.
Learned counsel laid emphasis on the fact that as per the reply, the repatriation of the petitioner has been ordered because of the report containing allegation of his involvement in the smuggling of narcotics and as no inquiry was held by the respondents, the impugned action should be nullified as being contrary to the principle of natural justice.
Perusal of the order (Annexure P) and the Savingram dated 19101995 shows that they do not in so many words cast aspersion or stigma on the petitioner.
The petitioner was serving in a sensitive wing of the Police Department as a deputationist.
His continuance on deputation depended on satisfactory work and conduct.
While on deputation the petitioner did not acquire any right and the respondents could repatriate him to his parent unit/district at any time.
However, his rights in the parent unit/district were to be protected.
In this background, if the respondents decided to repatriate the petitioner to his parent unit, i.e. 3rd Battalian H.A.P., Hisar, after receiving the report of his involvement in the smuggling of narcotics, it is not possible to hold that the petitioner has been stigmatised or that he has been punished by the respondents.
The reports about the activities of the petitioner merely furnished the motive for passing an order of repatriation of the petitioner to the parent unit.
That order has not resulted in depriving the petitioner of any of his right in the parent unit and, therefore, he cannot plead that the respondents have acted in violation of the principles of natural justice.
Absence of any right in the petitioner to continue on deputation for indefinite period also buttresses the conclusion that the order of repatriation which necessarily results in placing the petitioner in his rank within the parent unit does not infringe any vested right of the petitioner.
His posting as Head Constable is a necessary corollary of the termination of his deputation.
Thus, we do not find any illegality in the impugned orders.''
In our opinion, the judgment in Satbir Singh's case completely answers the criticism and challenge to the impugned order of repatriation of the petitioner to his parent unit.
In this case notice was given to the petitioner only with the object of assessing his suitability for the purpose of further continuance in the CID Wing.
The enquiry with regard to the allegation of bad conduct of the petitioner merely furnished a motive for taking a decision to send him back to his parent unit and there is nothing in the impugned order or attending circumstances to show that the allegation of misconduct constituted the basis of the impugned order of repatriation.
Moreover, none of the rights which the petitioner may have enjoyed in the parent unit during the intervening period has been denied to him.
Rather, the statement made by the learned Deputy Advocate General should be sufficient to dispel any doubt in the mind of the petitioner that he may not be given those benefits in the parent unit which his juniors may have got in the meanwhile.
9.
There is another reason for not giving any relief to the petitioner by directing the respondents to absorb him as Sub Inspector in his parent unit.
Six letters which the learned Deputy Advocate General produced before the Court and to which reference has been made hereinabove clearly show that the petitioner was given opportunity to undertake the Course when other similarly situated employees of the parent unit were deputed for undergoing such Course.
One every occasion the petitioner expressed his unwillingness to go for the Course.
This amply demonstrates complete lack of inclination of the petitioner to undertake the training.
Therefore, he is not entitled to complain that the respondents have acted arbitrarily by not posting him as Sub Inspector after repatriation from the CID Wing.
The situation in which the petitioner may find himself in the parent unit is his own creation and the respondents cannot be blamed for not having allowed him to continue as Sub Inspector in the parent unit.
On the basis of the above discussion, we hold that the writ petition is meritless and the same is liable to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
We, however, make it clear that the petitioner shall get all those benefits in the parent unit which he may have derived but for his deputation to the CID Wing.
Petition dismissed.