Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for the quashing of termination order dated 491993, copy of which is Annexure P-6 to the writ petition.
The action of the respondent has been termed as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
2.
The case of petitioner, in brief, is that she had applied for the post of Junior Clerk in the respondent-Bank in pursuance of an advertisement dated January 30, 1991 issued by the respondent-Co-op.
Bank Limited, Jalandhar.
The minimum qualifications for eligibility were graduation from a recognized University.
The other condition was that the candidate should have passed Punjabi examination of Matriculation standard.
The petitioner attached requisite documents to prove her qualifications.
The petitioner did Graduation from Varanasy Sanskrit Vishwavidyala University.
3.
The petitioner was called for interview on February 11, 1991.
Being found suitable for appointment, she was given appointment letter on February 15, 1991 and was posted as Junior Clerk at Bhogpur Branch.
To the great surprise of the petitioner, she received a communication dated June 7, 1993 from the respondent-Bank asking her to submit her explanation as to whether her degree was genuine and Varanasy Sanskrit Vishwavidyala University was a recognized University.
The petitioner gathered information from Oxford College of Education, Jalandhar where she took examination that the said University was recognized University and a number of persons had qualified from the said University and received employment in Punjab.
The petitioner gave explanation in the above terms.
The petitioner was dismissed from service in an unjust and unfair manner.
The petitioner had not concealed any fact and acquired qualifications from an Institute which was recognized and as such she could not have been dismissed.
4.
The respondent filed written statement controverting the pleas raised by the petitioner.
The petitioner also filed rejoinder to the written statement.
5.
Ms. Sushma Chopra, learned counsel for the respondent contends that a Division Bench of this Court in Balwinder Singh v. The Nawanshahr Central Co-op.
Bank Ltd, 1995(3) SCT 272 has held that Varanasy Sanskrit Vishwavidyala Varanasy is not the University or a deemed University.
The University Grants Commission has treated it to be a fake Institution and the degrees awarded by it are not recognized by the University Grants Commission or any other agency for any purposes.
The counsel further contends that the petitioner had obtained a degree from a fake University and as such is not entitled to be retained in service as she has no right to continue in service.
6.
After having considered the submissions and perusing the paper book, this Court is convinced that the present case is squarely covered by the ratio of Balwinder Singh's case (supra) in which it is held that the persons holding degrees awarded by fake and bogus institutions are not entitled to be retained in service only because they were selected and they have no right to continue in service.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.