Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner retired as a Master on December 31, 1991.
He complains that inspite of submission of various representations and reminders, the retiral benefits were not released by the respondents.
Consequently, he approached this Court in February 1994 with a prayer for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents "to sanction" release and pay the pensionary benefits to the petitioner with interest at the rate of 18%.
2.
In the reply filed by the District Education Officer, Ambala on behalf of respondents No. 1, 2, 4 and 6 it has been stated that the petitioner had "submitted his pension case on 551993 which was received by the department on 761993."
The pension was finally released to the petitioner on February 23, 1994.
3.
A separate reply has been filed on behalf of the Chandigarh Administration, Respondent No. 3, with whom the petitioner was on deputation at the time of his retirement.
In this reply, it has been stated that the petitioner had not submitted "his pension papers complete in all respects before the date of his retirement/superannuation".
According to the respondent, the papers were received from the District Education Officer, Chandigarh on May 13, 1993 and were forwarded to the parent State of Haryana on May 27, 1993.
In view of the above, the respondents maintain that they have not delayed the payment of retiral benefits to the petitioner.
4.
Mr. Chauhan, learned counsel for the petitioner states that even in February 1994, the petitioner had not been paid the full amount of gratuity.
In fact, the respondents had unauthorisedly withheld payment of Rs. 10,000/-.
Mr. Jaswant Singh admits that the payment of Rs. 10,000/- had been withheld as a No Due Certificate had not been issued.
Mr. Chauhan maintains that the amount of 10,000/- has not been paid till today in spite of the fact that No Due Certificate had been issued.
5.
A person who retires from service is entitled to expect that all the retiral benefits like pension and gratuity etc. shall be paid to him at the earliest opportunity.
The lengthy procedure prescribed by the Government and the lethargic way in which the cases are dealt with result in a totally avoidable hardship to the retired employee.
In spite of acknowledgement of the fact that this malaise exists, no remedial measures seem to have been taken.
Consequently, the retired employee is forced to approach the Court.
It not only costs him in terms of money, time and energy but also adds to avoidable litigation.
The Goverment is the custodian of the record.
It knows the period for which an employee has served.
It has all the facts.
It should be possible for the competent authority to work out the pension and order payment immediately after retirement.
Be that as it may, so far as the present case is concerned, the fact remains that even in February 1994, when the respondents decided to pay the pension and gratuity to the petitioner, they withheld an amount of Rs. 10,000/-.
If anything was due from the petitioner, they should have known and demanded it.
The issue of a No Due Certificate is a duty which has to be performed by the office and not by the retired employee.
This did not furnish an adequate ground for withholding the dues of a retired employee.
Even otherwise, even if it is assumed that the pension papers had been submitted by the petitioner in May 1993, the case should have been dealt with expeditiously and the payment should have been made within three months after the receipt of papers.
There was no justification for waiting till February 1994 before releasing the dues.
Mr. Jaswant Singh states that the service book of the petitioner was not complete.
The service book is maintained by the office and it is their duty to complete it.
The civil servant who is teaching in a school is not required to complete the service book.
In this situation, it is apparent that the payment of the retiral dues was unduly delayed.
6.
In view of the above, it is directed that the amount of Rs. 10,000/- which has been retained by the State of Haryana shall be released to the petitioner immediately with interest at the rate of 15% with effect from March, 1992.
In case the payment has already been made, the interest shall be payable only till the date the payment was made.
In regard to the delay in payment of pension etc. the full facts are not available as the learned counsel for the respondents is not in a position to produce the original record.
It would be open to the petitioner to submit a representation giving the full facts regarding the date on which he had submitted the pension papers and the time taken by the respondents in releasing the dues.
He shall be entitled to make a demand regarding interest for the period by which the payment was unduly delayed.
Otherwise, he would also be entitled to file a civil suit in this behalf.
This is all the more appropriate in view of the claim of respondents that the petitioner had not submitted his pension papers till May 1993.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.