Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these 12 cases are working in the Fire Brigades being managed by the Municipal Corporation, Amritsar or the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
The short question that arises for consideration in these 12 writ petitions is - Are the petitioners entitled to continue in service till the age of 60 years or can they be retired at the age of 58 years ?
Arguments in these cases have been addressed by Mr. HS Gill, Senior Advocate.
He has referred to the facts as averred in Civil Writ Petition No. 554 of 1996.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The two petitioners had joined service as Firemen in the years 1963-64 with the Municipal Committee, Ludhiana.
On the promulgation of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the 1976 Act), a corporation was established in Ludhiana and the services of the employees working with the Committee were taken over by the Corporation.
According to the petitioners, no rules have been framed determining their service conditions under Section 75 of the Act.
It is further alleged that even if certain rules have been framed, these shall not be applicable "to the workmen who are governed by the Special law i.e. the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 ....." (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The petitioners point out that in case of the Firemen employed with the Fire Brigade, Chandigarh, the Central Administrative Tribunal has held that the employees are governed by the provisions of Fundamental Rule 56(1) and have a right to continue in service till they attain the age of 60 years.
Relying on the same provision, the petitioners claim that they are entitled to continue in service till the age of 60 years.
They allege that the respondent-corporation wanted to retire them in January 1996 when they had attained the age of 58 years.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer that the orders dated August 7, 1995 by which the petitioners were informed that their date of retirement is January 31, 1996, be quashed and that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to permit them to continue in service till they attain the age of 60 years.
3.
The Respondent-Corporation contests the petitioners' claim.
It has been pointed out that the petitioners are availing of all the facilities as provided for under the Punjab Civil Service Rules in respect of house rent allowance, casual leave, provident fund and gratuity etc. Consequently, even in the matter of the age of retirement the petitioners are governed by the provisions of the said rules.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out that Fundamental Rules 56(1) has no application.
It has been pleaded that the provisions of "the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946..... have no applicability".
In any event, the appropriate Government i.e. the Government of Punjab has framed the Model Standing Order No. 39.
According to the provision contained in this Model Standing Order, in case where there is no agreement or settlement regarding the age of retirement, it has been provided that "retirement on superannuation shall be on completion of 58 years of age......." In view of this provision in the Model Standing Order, the action of the Respondent-Corporation in ordering the retirement of the petitioners on the last date of the month in which they had attained the age of 58 years was legal and valid.
Accordingly, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioners is that the Fire Brigade Department of the Municipal Corporation is an 'industrial establishment'.
The petitioners are workmen, In accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of the Act, it was incumbent on the Respondent-Corporation to submit a Draft Standing Order to the Certifying Officer in respect of every matter set out in the Schedule to the Act.
The appropriate authority had to consider and examine the fairness and reasonableness of the provisions of the Standing Order A copy had to be forwarded to the Trade Union in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.
Thereafter, the employer as well as the Trade Union had to be given an opportunity of being heard.
After consideration of the matter, the certifying officer had to certify the Standing Order In the present case, nothing of the sort has been done.
Consequently, there is no Standing Order prescribing the conditions of service governing the personnel working in the Fire Brigade.
That being so, the petitioners, are entitled to continue in service as long as they are physically fit and are in a position to perform their duties.
Since the general rules which permit retirement at the age of 58 years have not been notified under section 13 of the Act, these can't be invoked to order the retirement of the petitioners.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents have submitted that even if general rules framed by the State Government under the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 or the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules are ignored, the State Government has in exercise of its powers under Section 15 of the Act, made rules which were published in the Government Gazette dated June 23, 1978.
These rules are called the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Punjab Rules, 1978.
In Rule 39, provision for superannuation was made.
However, the rule did not specify any age.
On noticing this lacuna, the State Government issued the rules called the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Punjab First Amendment) Rules, 1987.
These were published in the Government Gazette dated March 6, 1987.
By rule VII, Clause 39(1) was substituted as under :-  "VII) In Clause 39, for sub-clause (1), the following sub/clause shall be substituted, namely - (1) The age of retirement of superannuation of a workman shall be such as may be agreed upon between the employer and the workman under an agreement or as specified in a settlement or award which is binding on both the workman and the employer.
Where there is no such agreed age, retirement on superannuation shall be on completion of fifty eight years of age by the workman."
In view of the above provision, learned counsel for the respondents submit that the petitioners were rightly ordered to be retired on attaining the age of 58 years.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Are the petitioners governed by the provisions of Rule 39 as amended vide notification dated March 6, 1987 and have been thus, rightly retired ?
8.
It is true that in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of the Act, every industrial establishment has to submit a draft of the Standing Order to the Certifying Officer for consideration.
This draft has to be broadly in conformity with the Model Standing Order that may be in force.
Thereafter, the provisions of Sections 4 and 5 lay down the procedure that has to be followed before the Certifying Officer can finalise the Standing Order Section 7 specifies the date of the operation of the Standing Order It is the admitted position that in the present case, neither the Municipal Corporation Amritsar nor the Corporation at Ludhiana have framed any Standing Order.
In this situation, the question that arises is - Are the conditions of service of the petitioners governed by the Model Standing Order as amended vide notification dated March 6, 1987 ?
9.
Section 15 of the Act empowers the "appropriate government" to make rules "to carry out the purposes of this Act".
Clause (2) specifically provides that such rules may "set out model standing orders."
It is, thus, clear that power to frame rules including the Model Standing Orders vests in the appropriate government.
Section 12-A further provides for the application of the Model Standing Orders Clause (1) which is relevant for the present case provides as under :-  "12A.
Temporary application of model standing order : (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 3 to 12, for the period commencing on the date on which this Act becomes applicable to an industrial establishment and ending with the date on which the standing orders as finally certified under this Act come into operation under Section 7 in that establishment, the prescribed model standing orders shall be deemed to be adopted in that establishment and the provisions of Section 9, sub-section (2) of section 13 and section 13-A shall apply to such model standing orders as they apply to the standing orders so certified."
10.
A perusal of the above provision shows that notwithstanding the provisions contained in sections 3 and 12, the model standing orders are to be "deemed to be adopted" by an establishment which has not framed any Standing Order.
This provision introduces a fiction.
It provides that even though an industrial establishment has not submitted a draft of the Standing Order as contemplated under Section 3 and such a draft has not been certified by the appropriate authority, yet the provisions of the Model Standing Order shall be deemed to have been adopted with effect from the date the provisions of the Act become applicable to the establishment.
It continues in force till "the standing orders as finally certified under this Act come into operation under Section 7 ...."  11.
Mr. Gill submits that the appropriate Government can only frame Standing Orders in respect of such industrial establishments as are managed by it and not in respect of the employees of the Municipal Corporations.
12.
There is no warrant for such a submission Section 15 is very wide in its ambit.
It authorises the appropriate government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act.
The primary purpose of the Act is to require the employers in industrial establishments "to define conditions of employment.........." Every employer is expected to specify the conditions which would govern the employees.
It is calculated to avoid un-certainty and to ensure that every workman knows the conditions of his service.
It is likely that certain industrial establishments may not at all proceed to frame the Standing Orders.
In order to reduce uncertainty, the legislature has provided that from the date on which the Act becomes applicable and till such time as the Standing Orders come into operation, the conditions of service governing the employees shall be determined in accordance with the Model Standing Orders.
The Model Standing Orders can be promulgated by the appropriate Governments'.
There is nothing in the Act which may indicate that the 'Model Standing Order' can be framed only in respect of those Industrial establishments as are managed by the Government.
These are applicable to every 'Industrial Establishment' which has no Certified Standing Orders.
Of course, if even the Government does not frame any 'Model Standing Orders', there may be a gap or lacuna.
However, it cannot be so after the 'Orders' are framed.
These would then be applicable to all such industrial establishments as have not got any certified standing orders.
13.
Mr. Gill then submitted that the 'Model Standing Orders' can be applicable only as a temporary measure and not for years.
14.
It is true that the application of the Model Standing Order is 'temporary' in nature.
In fact, the provisions of Section 12-A contain a clear indication in this behalf.
However, it does not mean that the application is only for a period of six months or a year.
The provision specifies the duration.
The 'application' begins with the date on which the Act becomes applicable to the Industrial Establishment.
It ends only when the certified Standing Orders come "into operation".
The period having been specified by the Legislature, it cannot be said that the application of the Model Standing Orders in the present case is violative of the provisions of Section 12-A inasmuch as it is not temporary but has continued for years.
In fact till such time as the industrial establishment frames its own Standing Order and it is duly certified, the provisions of the Model Standing Orders shall continue to apply.
15.
In view of the above, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioners that the provisions of the Model Standing Orders are not applicable to the employees of the Municipal Corporation is rejected.
The next question is what is the position under the Model Standing Order ?
16.
The provisions of Clause 39 as amended vide notification dated March 6, 1987 has been noticed above.
It postulates that the age of retirement can be fixed by an agreement between the employer and the employee.
It can also be specified in a settlement or award.
However, in a case like the present one where there is neither any agreement nor a settlement or award, the employee shall retire on superannuation when he completes 58 years of age.
The validity of this provision has not been challenged.
It incorporates a reasonable rule.
The age of retirement fixed under this provision is the same as in the case of various other Class III employees working in the Corporation.
It is also the same as applicable to the civil servants.
In view of this provision, the action of the Respondent-Corporation in ordering the retirement of the petitioners at the age of 58 years cannot be said to be either illegal or unfair.
In fact, it was in complete conformity with law.
It was, thus, valid.
17.
Initially, Mr. Gill had referred to certain decisions of different courts.
However, in view of the provisions of the 1987 rules as pointed out by Mr. Satinder Khanna during the hearing, learned counsel very fairly stated that it was not necessary to notice the decisions.
In fact, the decisions referred to by the learned counsel do not relate to the question as it finally emerged during the hearing.
Consequently, these decisions are not being referred to.
18.
In view of the above, the question raised at the outset is answered against the petitioners.
It is held that the employees like the petitioners working in the 'Fire Brigades' being managed by the Municipal Corporations of Amritsar and Ludhiana can be retired on attaining the age of 58 years.
19.
In the pleadings, the petitioners had basically relied on the provisions of Fundamental Rule 56(b).
In fact, there was vagueness in the stand taken by the petitioners.
However the solitary contention raised by the learned counsel was based on the provisions of the Industrial Employment Standing Orders Act, 1946.
This contention, in view of the above reasons, is not sustainable.
20.
No other contention has been raised by any of the counsel.
21.
In view of the above, no ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, all these writ petitions are dismissed.
As a result, even the interim orders passed by this Court by which the respondents were restrained from retiring the petitioners shall stand vacated.
However, since the petitioners have performed their duties and got their salary, the respondents shall not be entitled to recover or withhold the wages which may have been paid or had accrued to the petitioners till today.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.