Sat Pal, J. - In this case, the petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal dated 8th October, 1994 (Annexure P-1) passed by the Disciplinary authority and the order, dated 5th January, 1996 (Annexure P-4) passed by the appellate Authority.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioner who was employed as Secretary with the respondent - Bank was placed under suspension vide order dated 19th December, 1991 pending the Disciplinary proceedings.
Thereafter, he was issued change sheets dated 14th July, 1992, 11th December, 1992, 27th September, 1993 for certain acts of misconduct committed by him.
The charges were enquired into by the Inquiry Officer appointed by the Disciplinary authority and the Inquiry Officer held him guilty of the charges.
Thereafter, the petitioner was dismissed from service vide order, dated 8th October, 1994.
The appeal filed by him was also rejected by the appellate authority vide order dated 5th January, 1996 (Annexure P-4).
Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders, the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
Mr. SP Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that the petitioner was placed under suspension on 19th December, 1991 and in terms of rule 303 of the rules applicable to him, the Manager of the respondent-Bank was required to refer the case of the petitioner to the Board since the Inquiry proceedings could not be completed within one year from the date of suspension.
He, therefore, contended that since the matter was not referred to the Board within one year after the date of suspension, the disciplinary proceedings initiated and the impugned orders were liable to be set aside.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel placed reliance on the decision of this Court dated 24th July, 1984 in CWP No. 1730 of 1983, (The Faridabad Central Cooperative Bank Ltd v. Deputy Registrar (Planning) Cooperative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh).
4.
Mr. Hemant Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-Bank, however, drew our attention to Para 7 of the written statement and submitted that in the present case, the matter was referred to the Board and the Board vide its resolution dated 4th October, 1994, took the decision to dismiss the petitioner from the service of the Bank.
He, therefore, contended that the writ petition was without any merit and as such should be dismissed.
5.
Before dealing with the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, it will be relevant to refer to rule 303 which reads as under:  "303.
The manager may arrange to complete the inquiry proceedings and action thereon within the Ist year of suspension, failing which the case will be referred to Board."
In terms of the above rules, the Manager may arrange to complete the inquiry proceedings and action thereon within Ist year of suspension, failing which the case is required to be referred to the Board.
No doubt the petitioner was placed under suspension on 19th December, 1991 and the inquiry proceedings could not be completed within one year from the date of suspension but before passing the final order, the matter was put up before the Board in its meeting held on 4th October, 1994 and the Board itself took the decision to dismiss the petitioner from the service of the Bank vide its resolution dated 4th October, 1994.
No prejudice has been caused to the petitioner by referring the matter to the Board after expiry of one year.
Rule 303 otherwise is only a directory rule.
We, therefore, do not find any merit in the contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The decision of this Court in the case of Faridabad Central Cooperative Bank (supra) is also not of any assistance to the petitioner.
In that case, the Manager was not found competent to initiate action proposing the punishment of dismissal and accordingly, the order of dismissal was held to be without any authority.
In the present case, as stated herein above, the decision to dismiss the petitioner from the service of the Bank was taken by the Board itself.
6.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any merit in this petition and accordingly dismiss the same with no order as to costs.