Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was appointed to the Punjab Civil Medical Service, Class II, on March 14, 1988.
This appointment was made on ad hoc basis.
On January 1, 1991, the petitioner's services were regularised.
The petitioner was a candidate for admission to the Post Graduate Course leading to the degree of M.D.
(Medicine).
He appeared in the entrance examination held in the year 1991.
A number of candidates including the petitioner filed various writ petitions which were decided by the Division Bench vide its order dated May 8, 1992.
It was observed that ``about forty seats belonging to the All India Basis Quota in the Post-graduation courses at Medical Colleges of Amritsar and Patiala are lying untilised, as the candidates nominated against those seats have not chosen to join the respective colleges for admission.
It was, accordingly, directed that the seats shall be filled up from amongst the petitioners.''
In pursuance of these directions, the respondents issued a No Objection Certificate vide their letter date June 19, 1992.
A copy of this certificate is at Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
It was stipulated that the petitioner ``shall be entitled to extra-ordinary leave and lien shall be retained in service for the duration of the course.''
Accordingly, the petitioner was admitted to the course.
He executed a bond by which he undertook to serve the Punjab Government for five years on the completion of the Post Graduate Course.
He also submitted an affidavit stating inter alia that he ``should be treated on extra-ordinary leave during the period of Post Graduation and .... lien may be retained in service.
The petitioner alleges that these conditions were imposed in pursuance of the instructions issued vide the ``Punjab Government letter dated 23.7.92 which deals with the conditions of service of those doctors undergoing post-graduate degree/diploma and super speciality courses''.
The petitioner further alleges that these instructions are illegal, invalid and suffer from the vice of discrimination.
He claims that he is entitled to the payment of full salary for the period during which he was studying for the Post Graduate Course.
Accordingly, he prays that the instructions issued by the State Government be quashed and that the respondents may be directed to pay him the salary as has been paid to his batch-mates.
2.
The petitioner filed a Civil Misc. application No. 3176 of 1993 by which he sought permission to place on record a copy of the instructions issued by the Government vide circular letter dated January 20, 1993.
In these instructions, it was inter alia provided that PCMS doctors who have completed three years regular service and rural service including ad hoc service of three years would be admitted against 60% seats and given full salary during the course of study.
Those who are working on merely ad hoc basis would be required to resign their posts and would be paid stipend in accordance with the prevailing instructions.
A copy of these instructions was taken on record as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
The petitioner also filed Civil Misc. application No. 4647 of 1996 with which he produced the copy of the instructions issued by the Department vide letter dated September 2, 1993.
In these instructions, it was inter alia provided that ``the regular PCMS Doctors who have completed three years rural service (including ad hoc) and whose record is alright would be given 60% quota seats on their selection to the Govt. Medical Colleges and would be appointed as Junior Residents and for the period of course they will be given full salary''.
Alongwith this, he also produced the certificate dated May 8, 1992 as Annexure P-6.
The Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab had certified that the petitioner had rendered rural service from March 14, 1988 till the issue of the certificate.
The claim of the petitioner, consequently, was that he is not only a regular member of the PCMS Class II but had also rendered rural service for more than four years.
Consequently, he was entitled to the payment of full salary for the period during which he was studying.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia stated that since petitioner had rendered only one year, six months and 19 days' regular service, he was not entitled to the grant of study leave.
Still further, the petitioner having filed an affidavit on June 18, 1992, he cannot claim any salary.
Accordingly, the respondents maintain that the petitioner is estopped from claiming the salary.
It is, consequently, prayed that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
With regard to the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated January 20, 1993, the Additional Director has filed an affidavit that the petitioner had not completed three years' regular service and was, consequently, not entitled to the benefit claimed by him.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr Doabia submits that all the persons who had studied for the Post Graduate Course alongwith the petitioner, have been paid full salary.
He has also pointed out that Dr. Sudhir Sethi had filed Civil Writ Petition No 5488 of 1992.
The Writ Petition was allowed at the motion stage vide order dated July 16, 1992.
Dr. Sethi had been admitted to the course on August 27, 1991.
Since the respondents had paid him the full salary in spite of the fact that the instructions dated July 23, 1991 were in force, there is no ground for treating the petitioner differently.
Learned counsel further pointed out that from the year 1993 again, the Government had changed instructions and provided that a person who is a regular member of the PCMS Class II and has rendered three years' rural service is entitled to full salary.
Accordingly, the counsel submits that the action of the respondents in not giving full salary to the petitioner was arbitrary and unfair.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Ms. Jaishree Thakur, learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
It is the admitted position that the payment of salary etc. to the members of PCMS Class II who were admitted to a Post Graduate Course was initially governed by the instructions dated August 3, 1987.
These instructions were set aside in Civil Writ Petition No. 822 of 1988 decided on September 17, 1991.
The decision of the learned Single Judge was affirmed by the Division Bench in LPA No. 541 of 1992.
This fact has been noticed by the Division Bench in the case of Dr. Sudhir Sethi v. The State of Punjab etc., CWP No. 5488 of 1992 decided on July 16, 1992.
Still further, it is also the admitted position that according to the instructions issued by the department in the year 1993, a person who has completed three years' rural service and is a regular member of PCMS Class II is paid full salary for the period during which he is studying.
In this situation, it is clear that the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated July 23, 1991 are no longer in force.
Consequently, it is really not necessary to examine the validity of the instructions in this case.
6.
In view of the above, the only question that arises for consideration in this case is - Have the respondents acted fairly in denying full salary to the petitioner ?
7.
It is true that at the time of admission, the petitioner was told that he will have to apply for extra-ordinary leave.
It is also true that the petitioner had filed an affidavit in which he had inter alia stated that he may be granted ordinary leave for the duration of the course.
In this situation, the writ court shall not ordinarily intervene.
However, the fact which deserves notice is that in CWP No. 5488 of 1992 Dr. Sudhir Sethi v. The State of Punjab, the claim of a person who was also admitted after the issue of instructions dated July 23, 1991 has already been upheld by a Division Bench of this Court.
Still further, it is also established that even the persons who had joined the Post Graduate Course after the petitioner and have no better qualifications than him are eligible for the grant of full salary.
The instructions produced by the petitioner with Civil Misc. application No. 4647 of 1996 clearly show that a regular member of the PCMS is entitled to full salary if he has rendered three years' rural service.
The petitioner admittedly fulfils this qualification.
The certificate in this behalf has been issued by the Director and a copy thereof is record as Annexure P-6.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it appears that all persons who joined the course before and after the petitioner have been paid full salary.
In this situation, it does not seem to be just and fair to treat the petitioner differently from the other members of the Service.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
It is held that the petitioner shall be entitled to the grant of full salary for the period during which he was studying for the Post Graduation Course.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.