PS Mishra, CJ.
- A son, dependent upon his father and the step-mother who were the bread-winners of the family, lost the latter and sought accordingly compassionate appointment.
The appellants, however, did not accept his claim on the ground that since his father was still working, he was not a dependent of the step-mother and under the scheme of such compassionate appointment, if the bread-winner father was still alive, his dependent son, even though the step-mother had died, could not claim compassionate appointment.
Learned single Judge has, however, taken notice of the fact that the father of the writ petitioner and the step-mother were together earning for the family.
He has also accepted that for the purposes of the earning of the family there could be no division between the dependents upon the income of the father and dependents upon the income of the mother, a step-mother included.
One can legitimately, however, subscribe to the above upon which the appellants have placed reliance that if father continued to be the bread-winner of the family, there was no occasion for extending any compassion to appoint his son.
But the learned single Judge has, in this behalf, taken notice of the following :  "Under the scheme of compassionate appointments, employment would be provided to one of the dependents of workers disabled permanently and those who met with death while in service.
The relevant provision of the agreement is extracted below : "940.
Provision of Employment to Dependents : 941.
Employment would be provided to one dependent of workers disabled permanently and those who met with death while in service.
This provision will be implemented as follows : 942.
Employment of one dependent of the worker who dies while in service.
(i) The dependent for this purpose means the wife/husband as the case may be, unmarried daughter, son and legally adopted son.
If no such direct dependent is available for employment, younger brother, widowed daughter/widowed daughter-in-law or son-in-law residing with the deceased and almost wholly dependent on the deceased may be considered to be the dependents of the deceased.
(ii) The dependents to be considered for employment should be physically fit and suitable for employment and aged not more than 35 years provided that the age limit shall not apply in the case of spouse."
Interpreting the said provision of agreement, the learned Senior Counsel for the Respondents Sri K Srinivasa Murthy submits that the petitioner cannot get the advantage of the said agreement as he is the son of Sri M Appanna and not the son of the deceased employee Smt. M Jayamma though he may be the son of the first wife of Mr. M Appanna.
On the other hand, the learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is the son of the first wife of Mr. M Appanna and therefore he is the dependent of the family and thus he falls under the definition of dependent.
Therefore, his case has to be considered in the light of the agreement entered into between the Management and the Union.
He also submits that in a similar case where the father and mother were working in the company and when the father died, son was given employment under compassionate appointments scheme though the mother is working.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted an office order dated 1161989 before this Court.
In view of this, it is not open for the company to contend that the father is still working and therefore the petitioner cannot get employment.
Learned single Judge has, however, taken notice of the meaning of "dependent" and held as follows :  "Under the said agreement, the dependent has been defined to mean 'the wife/husband, as the case may be, unmarried daughter, son and legally adopted son'.
If no such direct dependent is available for appointment, the younger brother, widowed daughter/widowed daughter-in-law or son-in-law residing with the deceased and almost wholly dependent on the deceased shall be considered for appointment.
In the instant case, admittedly, the petitioner is the son depending on the family of both Mr. Appanna and Smt. Jayamma and therefore he has to be treated as a dependent of the family though he is a son of the first wife of M Appanna.
Though the management contends that the petitioner is also not a dependent of the family, the same cannot be accepted inasmuch as the claim of the petitioner has been rejected on the ground that he is a step-son.
It is also not brought out in the counter that in case the mother and father are employed in the company and if one employee out of them expires, whether compassionate scheme to be complied with or not to the dependent in the family, but yet as per the proceedings dated 1161989 the learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that such a procedure is there".
Learned single judge has accordingly issued the following directions : "1.
The Management shall consider the case of the petitioner treating the petitioner as dependent of the family consisting of Sri Appanna and Jayamma and if he falls in the parameter fixed under the agreement, his case shall be considered and necessary orders shall be issued within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and 2.
The Management shall also keep in view the subsequent office orders issued in Office Order No. P RG(P)/5A/974 dated 1161989 wherein the appointment to a dependent employee was provided even though the mother of the employee is still working in the company.
With the above directions, the writ petition is disposed of.
No costs."
2.
There has been some attempt before us on behalf of the appellants to suggest that it does not follow from the agreement aforequoted that on the death of the step-mother, when father of the writ petitioner-respondent was still working, the son could be extended any compassionate appointment as the dependent of the family.
A plain reading of the agreement goes in support of the contention.
Learned single Judge has, however, noticed the interpretation of the agreement by the appellants to extend the benefit of compassionate appointment, when one of the two working parents dies, as the office order extends similar compassionate appointment to other persons.
He has, however, taken care not to issue a direction to give appointment to the writ petitioner-respondent.
He has asked the appellants to consider the case of the writ petitioner-respondent in the light of the office order afore-quoted and the others orders issued from time to time in this behalf.
Learned Counsel for the appellants, however, tried to persuade us to take the view that if any such appointment has been given in the past, the same is contrary to the agreement and thus may be a wrong doing on the part of the appellants, but the Court should not issue a mandamus or direction to repeat the wrong which the appellants have committed.
The principle, as stated by the learned Counsel for the appellants, is sound and correct.
It is universally acknowledged by the Courts that no mandamus or direction be issued to do a wrong thing only because in the past certain wrong things have been done.
It is, however, not possible, on the materials as placed before us, to hold that the management has not genuinely interpreted the agreement and issued compassionate appointment orders in similar cases.
One who issues an order and interprets it or one who is a party to the agreement and has already interpreted it, will not change the interpretation from case to case.
It may not be wrong in such a situation to hold against the appellants that its Contemporanea Exposito will bind it and shall be obliged to extend the same privilege to the writ petitioner-respondent as it has extended in other cases.
Learned single Judge has left it to the wisdom of the appellants and has given a direction to decide the case of the writ petitioner-respondent in the light of various orders issued by it.
We do not think any case, for interference in the appeal, has been made out.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.