GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who stands discharged from Army w.e.f.
3171992, has filed this petition for issue of a mandamus to the respondents to pay him disability pension in accordance with the Pension Regulations of the Army.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on 511980 after being subjected to medical examination.
He was placed in medical category 'A' (AYE).
After 8 years and 9 months of service, the petitioner was treated for hypertension.
On the recommendations of the medical board, he was placed in medical category BEE.
His disability was accepted to be 20% and he was discharged w.e.f.
3171992 on the basis of the recommendation made by the medical board.
He made representation for grant of disability pension which was turned down by the CCDA (Pension), Allahabad.
This is evident from Annexure P-1, dated 2141993, conveyed to the petitioner by the Commanding Officer, Artillery Records.
Appeal filed by the petitioner against the decision of the CCDA (Pension) has also been rejected by the Government of India on the ground that the disability on account of which he was released from service was constitutional and there was no record of exceptional or unusual mental or physical stress due to service factor.
The petitioner has challenged the decision of the respondents to deny him pension on the ground that when no note was recorded about any disease or disability at the time of entry in the military service and no other reason has been recorded by the medical board to come to a conclusion that the disease of the petitioner was not such which could be discovered at the time of entry in the service, disability pension cannot be denied to him.
In their reply, the respondents have admitted that the petitioner was discharged from service w.e.f.
3171992 and that his disability has been assessed at 20%.
However, they have stated that this assessment was for a period of 2 years only.
The respondents have pleaded that the petitioner was found to be suffering from "essential hypertension" which cannot be attributed to military service.
The respondents have submitted that there is no causal relationship between the disease from which the petitioner suffers and the military service and, therefore, he is not entitled to claim disability pension.
The respondents have relied on Para 173 of the Army Pension Regulations and Rule 7(c) of Appendix-II to support their plea that "essential hypertension" is a constitutional disease and it cannot be treated as a disability attributable to the military service.
3.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the respondents produced the original record of the medical board and argued that the petitioner's father and mother also suffered from hypertension and, therefore, disease of the petitioner must be treated as hereditary and the rejection of the claim of the petitioner for grant of disability pension is justified.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on Para 173 of the Army Pension Regulations as well as Rule 7(b) of Appendix-II and argued that in the absence of any note recorded at the time of the petitioner's entry in the service and in the absence of any material to show that in the opinion of the medical board, the disease could not be detected on medical examination, the benefit of presumption contained in first part of Rule 7(b) of Appendix II should be given to the petitioner.
He placed reliance on a judgment of this court dated 9111995 in Civil Writ Petition No. 10834 of 1995 Ex. Hav.
Randhir Singh v. Union of India and others.
4.
There is no controversy between the parties that at the time of petitioner's entry in the service he was subjected to medical examination and there is no mention of any disease in the record prepared at the time of petitioner's enrolment in military service.
It is also borne out from the record that the medical board or any other competent authority has not recorded any reasoned conclusion that the disability disease suffered by the petitioner is such which could not have been detected at the time of his entry in the service.
Therefore, we find merit in the contention of the learned counsel that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of presumption contained in first part of Rule 7(b), namely, that the disability should be deemed to have been arisen during the course of the service and is attributable to military service.
The fact that the petitioner had served in the field operation during his 12 years service has also not been contested by the respondents and this clearly supports the contention of the learned counsel that the disability due to which the petitioner has been boarded out from service is attributable to military service.
The judgment of this court dated 9111995 squarely applies to the case of the petitioner and therefore he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
5.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexures P-1 and P-6 are quashed.
The respondents are directed to grant disability pension to the petitioner on the basis of the report of the medical board showing his disability to be 20%.
Appropriate action shall be taken by the respondents within three months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.