NK Agrawal, J - Challenge in this petition is to the selection of respondent No. 4 as Lecturer in Education in the University College of Education, Kurukshetra, on the ground that the petitioner is more meritorious than respondent No. 4 and that respondent No. 4 does not possess the requisite qualification and, therefore, could not be selected.
2.
On 711991, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, advertised one post of Lecturer in Education.
Petitioner applied for the said post along with other candidates.
However, the University did not hold the interview for the said post.
Instead of making regular selection, petitioner was appointed on part time basis during the currency of academic session against that post on 10.9.1991 at a fixed honorarium of Rs. 1,000/- for taking 10 to 12 periods per week.
Appointment of the petitioner was repeated on the same terms twice i.e. on 21.10.1992 and 16.8.1993.
Thereafter on 26111993, petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis on an initial salary of Rs. 2,200/- per month in the pay scale of Rs. 2200-75-2800-100-4000 plus usual allowances admissible under the University rules subject to her being medically fit.
Appointment was upto 3131994 or till regular selection was made or the classes were over, whichever was earlier.
Petitioner's services were terminated in terms of her letter of appointment.
Thereafter, she was appointed as a Lecturer in D.A.V.
College of Education, Abohar (Punjab), on 911995.
3.
Kurukshetra University issued a fresh advertisement No. 6/94 in The Tribune dated 15.5.1994, advertising the post against which the petitioner had been working along with three other posts of Lecturers in different subjects.
A total of 33 candidates applied for the posts out of which 23 candidates were found eligible after scrutiny and called for interview.
On the date of interview i.e. 381995, only 13 candidates appeared before the Selection Committee.
Petitioner was not selected, aggrieved against which, present writ petition has been filed.
According to the petitioner, respondent No. 4 did not have the requisite qualification whereas the stand taken by the respondents is that respondent No. 4 had the requisite qualification.
4.
We have heard the counsel for the parties.
Comparative merit has to be seen by the Selection Committee.
We cannot substitute our opinion as against the opinion of the Selection Committee because we are not sitting in appeal to reassess the relative merit of the candidates concerned who had appeared for interview.
Petitioner cannot successfully urge before us that she had been given less marks in the oral interview held though her performance was better, the same being not the scope of exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that the selection process was not fair.
Petitioner had a right to be considered and accordingly, she was given an opportunity to participate in the selection.
She was duly considered but was not found suitable.
Petitioner, having participated in the selection process and taken a chance, cannot turn around and contend that the process of interview was not fair.
6.
Petitioner's case is that the qualifications required for the post of Lecturer in Education is prescribed in Appendix IX-B, Serial No. 1 to 5 of the University Calendar Volume I, relevant extract of which has been attached as Annexure P-8.
According to this, a candidate should possess Master Degree in the relevant subject and Masters Degree in Education or equivalent Degree of a foreign university.
Where both the degrees are part of essential qualifications, the candidate should have 55% marks (Grade 'B' in seven point scale) in either M.A./M.Sc.
or M.Ed.
and in the other Degree he should have a minimum of 50% marks.
Petitioner has referred to the qualifications prescribed for Lecturers and Principals in the recognised colleges of education, whereas in the present case, the selection is for the post of a Lecturer in Education in University College of Education, Kurukshetra.
Qualifications for Lecturers in Education in the University College of Education, Kurukshetra, have been prescribed in Ordinance XXI of the University Calendar Volume I, which was amended added vide Executive Council Resolution No. 17 of 971993, copy of the extract has been attached as Annexure R-1/1.
As per this Ordinance, a candidate was required to have a good academic record with at least 55% marks in Masters degree in Education and also Masters Degree in the relevant subject from an Indian University or equivalent degree from a foreign University.
Respondent No. 4 possesses the requisite qualifications as given in Annexure R-1/1.
Thus, there is no force in the submission made by the counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 4 did not possess the requisite qualifications for the post of lecturer in Education in the University College of Education, Kurukshetra.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in this writ petition and dismiss the same, with no order as to costs.