Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Teacher in an aided school, is aggrieved by the action of the Director of Public Instructions (School) by which he had refused to approve her appointment.
A few facts may be notices.
2.
The petitioner qualified the Two year Diploma Course in Art and Craft conducted by the Department of Industries, Haryana, in the year 1979.
Soon thereafter, in the year 1980, the petitioner was appointed as an Art and Craft Teacher at the M.H.R.
Higher Secondary School, Bhatinda.
She continued to work in the school till the year 1992 when the department sanctioned a regular post of the Art and Craft Teacher at the School.
This post was advertised.
The petitioner applied for the post.
She was considered and selected.
On September 8, 1992, the School Management appointed the petitioner.
Simultaneously, it forwarded her case to the District Education Officer, Bhatinda for approval.
By an undated letter, he returned the letter in original with the observation that "the candidates who have passed Art and Craft Training from Haryana State are not recognised in Punjab".
As a result of his order, the Govt. did not release the aid in respect of the post held by the petitioner.
It is in this situation that the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
She alleges that the action of the respondents is wholly illegal, unfair and arbitrary.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It is submitted that the Diploma Course qualified by the petitioner was recognised by the State of Punjab till September 16, 1985.
However, vide letter dated September 17/20, 1985, the Department of Education decided to derecognise the Diploma awarded by the State of Haryana.
As a result, on September 8, 1992, when the petitioner was appointed on regular basis, she did not possess a recognised qualification.
Consequently, the Department did not approve her appointment.
4.
Mr. Jasbir Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the qualification acquired by the petitioner in the year 1979 was duly recognised by the State of Punjab at that time.
Once the petitioner had acquired that requisite qualification, the subsequent derecognition could not prejudicially affect her right or her eligibility for appointment to the post of Art and Craft Teachers.
He further submits that in any case vide order dated March 14, 1995, the respondents have withdrawn the letter dated September 17, 1985.
In view this of the matter, the counsel contends that the action of respondents cannot be sustained.
He has also placed reliance on a decision of a Full Bench of this Court in Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) SCT 770 (P&H) : 1993(1) RSJ 327.
On behalf of the respondents Mr. DS Dhillon submits that even though the qualification acquired by the petitioner in the year 1979 was recognised at the relevant time, she was not eligible to be appointed as an Art and Craft Teacher in the year 1992.
On this basis, the learned counsel submits that the action of respondent is unexceptionable.
5.
Admittedly, the qualification of Diploma as acquired by the petitioner was recognised by the Punjab State in the year 1979.
In the meantime, the petitioner had been appointed as an Art and Craft Teacher in the school in the year 1980.
The continued to hold this post till September 8, 1992, when she was appointed on regular basis.
It was virtually a continuous appointment.
The mere fact that in the year 1985 the Department had decided to derecognise the qualification did not mean that the Diploma awarded to the petitioner in the year 1979 had been retrospectively obliterated or become totally useless.
In other words, a qualification acquired by a person at a time when it duly recognised would continue to be valid in spite of its derecognisation on a subsequent date.
The effect of the order of September 17, 1985 could at best be that if a person qualified the Diploma course after that date, he may not be eligible for appointment to the post of Art and Craft Teacher.
The administrative order issued by the State Govt. could be effective only prospectively and not retrospectively.
In fact, Mr. Dhillon concedes this position, in view of the decision of the Full Bench in Neelam Kumari's case (supra).
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Vide letter dated March 14, 1995, the Department has cancelled the order dated September 17, 1985.
The result of cancellation is that the letter by which the Diploma course was derecognised does not exist any more.
A photo copy of this letter has been produced.
It is taken on records as Mark 'A'.
As a consequence, the very basis on which the respondents declined the request of the school for approval of the petitioner's appointment does not exist any more.
7.
In view of the above, the action of the respondent in refusing to approve the appointment of the petitioner as an Art and Craft Teacher is set aside.
The respondents are directed to reconsider the matter in the light of the observations made above.
The petitioner's case shall be examined for approval with effect from September 8, 1992.
The consequential reliefs in the nature of release of grant-in-aid shall fellow.
The needful shall be done by the respondents within 2 month form the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.