GS Singhvi, J - Although these petitions have been filed for quashing of different orders passed by the District Magistrate, Bhatinda, having regard to the nature of the issue raised in both the petitions, I am deciding them by a common order.
2.
A few facts :-  Civil Writ Petition No. 2862 of 1985.
At the relevant time, the petitioner-Charan Singh was holding the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
On an allegation made by one Balwant Singh of Bhatinda that he had been arrested in a case under Sections 107 and 151 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in order to help one Gamdoor Singh, an enquiry was ordered by the District Magistrate, Bhatinda under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The enquiry was entrusted to District Officer for Removal of Grievances (Executive Magistrate, Bhatinda).
It is alleged that the said officer made enquiry but the District Magistrate did not feel satisfied with the same and, thereafter, he directed re-enquiry by the same officer.
After a further enquiry, the District Officer for Removal of Grievances found that no case was made out against the petitioner and to this effect he submitted a report to the District Magistrate, Bhatinda.
Once again the District Magistrate issued order dated 3111985 that fresh enquiry be held.
This time, he entrusted the enquiry to the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Bhatinda.
The petitioner made representation Annexure P-6 against the conduct of fresh enquiry but could not get relief from the departmental authorities and that is why he has instituted this petition with a prayer to quash order Annexure P-5 and to restrain the respondents from making further enquiry into the matter.
3.
In his written statement, the respondent No. 2 (District Magistrate, Bhatinda) has pleaded that he had entrusted the enquiry to the District Officer Removal of Grievances (Executive Magistrate) but he did not conduct enquiry on the material point relating to the jurisdiction and, therefore, a direction was given to him to hold further enquiry.
It has been admitted by respondent No. 2 that enquiry officer (Executive Magistrate) found that none of the charges levelled against the petitioner has been proved but it was found that the enquiry had not been made properly and, therefore, fresh enquiry was entrusted to the Sub Divisional Magistrate.
Respondent No. 2 has also pleaded that the enquiry report submitted by the Executive Magistrate was at variance with the preliminary enquiry held by the Superintendent of Police (Headquarters) and he (respondent No. 2) gave more weightage to the preliminary enquiry held by the Superintendent of Police (Headquarters).
It has further been alleged that the Sub Divisional Magistrate conducted an independent enquiry but the petitioner did not co-operate with same.
4.
Respondent No. 3 has filed a separate reply.
It contains nothing more than mere admission of various factual statements made in the writ petition.
Civil Writ Petition No. 6033 of 1985.
5.
This petition is directed against the order Annexure P-3 dated 3111985 issued by the District Magistrate, Bhatinda ordering an enquiry against the petitioner under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules.
6.
On a complaint made by one Baldev Krishan, who is said to be involved in a dispute relating to Daya Nand Model School, alleging that the petitioner had harassed him, an enquiry was got conducted through Deputy Superintendent of Police, Talwandi Sabo.
The said Enquiry Officer recorded a finding that the complaint was not bona fide and Baldev Krishan was himself responsible for collecting large amounts from various persons by applying wrong means.
Thereafter, District Magistrate ordered an enquiry in the matter by the Sub Divisional Magistrate who submitted report dated 12.8.1984 and recorded a finding that the petitioner was guilty.
Thereafter the District Magistrate passed the impugned order and ordered enquiry against the petitioner under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The petitioner has questioned this enquiry on the ground that the District Magistrate has not even considered the enquiry held by the Deputy Superintendent of Police and, therefore, there was no justification for conducting a fresh enquiry.
7.
In his reply, respondent No. 2 has admitted that an enquiry was got conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Talwandi Sabo, who found that possession of the building was disputed by both the Arya Samaj Groups and, therefore, proceedings were initiated against both the parties under Section 145 of the Code of Criminal procedure.
It has then been stated that in application submitted by Baldev Krishan to the Deputy Commissioner, Bhatinda, preliminary enquiry was got made by Sub Divisional Magistrate and regular enquiry was entrusted to the Executive Magistrate (District Officer for Removal of Grievances), Bhatinda and as the petitioner did not appear before the enquiry, ex parte proceedings were held against him.
8.
When the cases came up for arguments on 6111985, the Court wanted to know whether the petitioner was still in service what was his present status.
Learned Assistant Advocate General prayed for time to seek instructions from the respondents.
When the case was again taken up on 21111995, learned Assistant Advocate General sought time to seek instructions from the departmental authorities.
Today, Shri Chhinna, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, stated that he has not received any instructions from the departmental authorities.
In view of this, I have heard arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General.
9.
The main argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that once an enquiry was got conducted through a designated officer, respondent No. 2 did not have jurisdiction to order fresh enquiry particularly when no reason has been assigned by respondent No. 2 for not accepting enquiry reports submitted by the Executive Magistrate in the first case and by the Deputy Superintendent of Police in the second case.
Shri Battas argued that the inquiry reports submitted by the Executive Magistrate and the Deputy Superintendent of Police respectively should be treated as binding.
Shri Chhinna argued that there would be no bar to the holding of fresh enquiry under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules and the decision taken by respondent No. 2, which is primarily founded on his subjective satisfaction, cannot be called into question before a Court of law.
10.
In principle, I agree with Shri Chhinna that respondent No. 2 did have jurisdiction to order a fresh enquiry in the matter, but, that he could have done only if there existed any good ground for ignoring previous reports.
If after going through the report of the Executive Magistrate and the Deputy Superintendent of Police, respondent No. 2 felt satisfied that the enquiry officer did not take into consideration any material evidence or had misdirected himself while conducting enquiry, it would have been perfectly justified for respondent No. 2 to order fresh enquiry into the matter without assigning any reason.
A bald statement that reports submitted by the Executive Magistrate in the first case and the Deputy Superintendent of Police in the second case were not acceptable to respondent No. 2 is not sufficient to justify an order for fresh enquiry.
Even while discharging administrative power under Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, respondent No. 2 was under an obligation to act fairly and he could not have ordered fresh enquiry merely because he did not like the enquiry reports submitted by the Executive Magistrate and the Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Respondent No. 2 could not ignore the enquiry reports merely on the basis of his whims.
He was bound to act objectively and that, in my opinion, is completely lacking in these two cases.
11.
Even during the course of hearing, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General could not point out that any particular material evidence which was ignored by the Executive Magistrate or the Deputy Superintendent of Police justifying fresh enquiry into the conduct of the petitioner.
It must, therefore, be held that respondent No 2 acted arbitrarily in passing orders for fresh enquiry against the petitioner.
12.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are allowed and the two orders passed on 3111985 which are under challenge in these two petitions, are quashed.
Petitions allowed.