VK Bali, J (Oral) - Sub Inspector Dev Singh through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash order Annexure P-3 dated 14th of July, 1993 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Haryana respondent No. 3 herein, vide which he was reverted from the post of Sub Inspector to that of Assistant Sub Inspector.
Before, however, grounds in support of the relief as mentioned above as projected in the writ petition and canvassed through Mr. IS Balhara, learned Counsel for the petitioner are noticed, it shall be useful to trace a brief history of the facts culminating into the impugned order.
2.
The petitioner joined as Constable with the Haryana Police on 28th of January, 1971.
Consequent upon his passing of lower school course in March 1975, he was brought on list 'C' on 12th of April, 1973.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 28th of April, 1975 on which post he was confirmed on 27th of June, 1979.
He was promoted to the next higher rank of Assistant Sub Inspector on 8th of March, 1980.
As per the procedure, he was to be reverted to the post of Head Constable when he was deputed to do the intermediate school course.
He did that course from 1st of October, 1981 to 30th March, 1992, consequent upon which he was again promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector and was placed in list 'D' with effect from 25th of February, 1983.
He was then promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on 14th of April, 1983, on which post he was confirmed on 31st of January, 1986.
After doing his upper training course in October, 1990, he was placed in list 'E' with effect from 30th of July, 1990.
Then he was promoted as Sub Inspector on 2nd of August, 1991.
Conceedly, he was put on probation for a period of two years on the post aforesaid i.e. of Sub Inspector.
When this period of probation was to expire on 2nd of August, 1993, the impugned order reverting him from the post of Sub Inspector to that of Assistant Sub Inspector came to be passed on 14th of July, 1993.
3.
It is so pleaded and argued on behalf of the petitioner that the said order cannot sustain firstly on the ground that before reverting him no show-cause notice was given and secondly that the same came to be passed on account of a complaint made by the brother of the petitioner who personally went to Deputy Inspector General of Police and the third and the last ground pressed into service is that the procedure as envisaged under Rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules was not followed.
The cause of the petitioner had been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4 through Shri RS Dalal, IPS,.
Deputy Inspector General of Police, even though it has been admitted that some persons appeared and submitted a complaint levelling serious allegations against the petitioner which complaint was sent to Superintendent of Police, Ambala for enquiry and report but as a matter of fact the reversion of the petitioner was ordered on the basis of performance of the petitioner.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police passed the order of reversion on 14th of July, 1993 as provided under rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable to Haryana.
He was reverted within period of probation i.e. within two years.
He was awarded punishment of censure as a result of departmental enquiry by the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal.
He earned adverse remarks for the period from 4th of May, 1992 to 31st of March, 1993, while he was posted in CIA Staff, Kaithal and CRO in the office of the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal.
His assessment of work was found to be, "He is addicted to drinking.
A third rate Sub inspector.
Integrity is doubtful."
These adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner on 14th July, 1993.
The petitioner has filed replication.
In paragraph 10 thereof, he has averred that the order of reversion has not been passed on the work and conduct of the petitioner but with a view to punish him.
The A.C.R.
of the petitioner has been adversely commented upon as an after-thought and the reversion order has been passed before conveying the adverse remarks.
It is also pleaded that the A.C.R.
was recorded against the instructions of the Government and no opportunity was granted to the petitioner for making a meaningful representation against the said entry.
Reply to the replication has been filed by respondents No. 1 to 4 wherein the pleadings in the written statement have been, by and large, reiterated.
4.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and going through the record of this case, this Court is of the considered view that there is no substance in of the contentions raised by Mr. Balhara.
Concededly, the petitioner was on probation for a period of two years and order of reversion was passed before he could successfully complete the said period.
The order of reversion was passed on the basis of adverse remarks recorded in the Confidential Report of the petitioner for the period from 4th of May 1992 to 31st of March, 1993 while he was posted in CIA Staff, Kaithal and CRO in the officers of the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal.
The petitioner was also awarded punishment of censure as a result of departmental enquiries vide Superintendent of Kaithal's order dated 22nd of April, 1992.
Copy of the aforesaid order has been annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-1, perusal whereof shows that a departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner on the charges levelled against him which appear to be serious.
It was alleged that the petitioner had received Rs. 2,550/- from Avtar Singh for favouring him as also that he had received Rs. 1,000/- through Ajit Singh and Rs. 1,300/- through Nanak Singh and Rs. 250/- from Avtar Singh as illegal gratification.
It is also alleged that he kept Jagtar Singh and Avtar Singh in illegal confinement.
The operative part of the order reads thus:-  "Taking into consideration the circumstances and facts of the case and length of the service of the defaulter, a lenient view will meet the ends of justice while punishing the defaulter.
I, therefore, award the punishment or censure to meet the ends of justice."
This order concededly has not been challenged and has attained finality.
From the facts as have been fully detailed above, the Court is of the considered view that if during the period of probation, the petitioner was to be reverted, no opportunity of hearing was required to be given.
In so far as the contention of Mr. Balhara that this order was passed on the strength of the complaint, referred to above is concerned, suffice it to say that written statement more than adequately makes it clear that the same was not the reason and in fact and in reality it is the record of the petitioner which was taken into consideration.
Even if it be accepted as is the contention of Mr. Balhara that the adverse remarks conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated 14th of July, 1993 i.e. on the same date when he was reverted could not be taken into consideration as against the said remarks the petitioner admittedly had filed representation which is pending, even then he could be reverted on the basis of the order Annexure R-1 which came to be passed when the petitioner was still on probation.
The last contention of Mr. Balhara that proper procedure as envisaged under Rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules was not followed also would hold no ground as the aforesaid procedure is to be followed, after the period of probation is over and not during the currency thereof.
A bare look of Rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules would make it abundantly clear that the procedure of getting a report is required only after an employee has completed period of probation.
The said rule reads thus:-  "1318.
Probationary period of promotion.
All Police Officers promoted in rank shall be on probation for two years provided that the appointing authority may, by a special order in each case, permit period of officiating service to count towards the period of probation.
On the conclusion of the probationary period a report shall be rendered to the authority empowered to confirm the promotion who shall either confirm the officer or revert him.
In no case shall the period of probation be extended beyond two years and the confirming authority must arrive at a definite decision with a reasonable time soon after the expiry of that period whether the officer should be confirmed or reverted.
While on probation officers may be reverted without departmental proceedings.
Such reversion shall not be considered reduction for the purpose of Rule 164.
This rule shall not apply to Constables and Sub Inspectors promoted to the selection grade, whose case is governed by rules 135 and 13.4".
Before I part with the judgment I would like to mention that even though the petitioner has been reverted, adverse remarks recorded in his confidential report conveyed to him on 14th of July, 1993 would not be taken into consideration for considering the petitioner for promotion from the rank that he was reverted after the effect of the earlier order of censure outlives its tenure till such time the representation of the petitioner filed against his adverse remarks is actually decided.
With the observations aforementioned, this petition fails and consequently is dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.