Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who is working as a Fitter in the Punjab Roadways, Moga, prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing thre respondents to consider his claim for promotion to the post of Mechanic.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Helper in the year 1971.
On April 3, 1979, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Fitter.
More than 12 years later, a post of Mechanic fell vacant on account of the death of Mr. Ajit Singh.
On October 21, 1991, the petitioner submitted a representation for the consideration of his claim.
Since the departmental authorities took no action on his representation, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition.
Notice of motion was directed to be issued to the respondents.
Reply to the writ petition was filed.
However, in pursuance to an interim direction given by the Court, the respondents decided the representation filed by the petitioner.
Vide order dated December 17, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4/A with the writ petition, the representation was rejected.
Consequently, the petitioner amended the writ petition so as to challenge even the order rejecting his representation.
The amendment was allowed.
However, no reply to the amended writ petition has been filed.
3.
The precise claim of the petitioner is that in accordance with the rules governing the service he is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Mechanic.
It is alleged that the vacancy having occurred in October 1991, the petitioner's claim has to be considered in accordance with the rules which were prevailing on that date.
Accordingly, it is prayed that the order rejecting his representation be quashed and the respondents be directed to consider his claim.
4.
In the written statement which had been filed in reply to the unamended petition, the plea taken by the respondents is that the claim of Fitter to the post of Mechanic has to be considered in order of seniority maintained at the State level.
The respondents maintain that the petitioner even though senior in the Punjab Roadways Depot at Moga is not entitled to be considered for promotion as there are persons senior to him in the seniority list at the State level.
On this basis, it is claimed that the action of the respondents in not promoting the petitioner and the order rejecting his representation are legal and valid.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Yogesh Putney, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Roadways (Workshop) State Service Class III Rules, 1977, the petitioner has a right to be considered for promotion on the basis of his seniority in the Depot at Moga.
He further submits that the claim for promotion has not to be considered at the State level.
On the other hand, Mr. Ajay Tiwari, learned Deputy Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the respondents has submitted that according to the rules, the posts of Mechanics are sanctioned at the State level.
Furthermore, vide notification dated November 3, 1989, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement, the various posts have been redesignated.
The post of a Fitter is now designated as that of Technician Grade IV while that of Mechanic is now described as Technician Grade III.
He submits that since the designations and pay scales have been completely revised, the State Govt. is not promoting the personnel on the basis of their seniority in the Workshops but according to their seniority at the State level.
On this basis, the learned counsel submits that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
6.
Admittedly, rules have been framed by the State Govt. under Article 309 of the Constitution.
These rules were notified in the Punjab Govt. Gazette of June 2, 1977.
These rules apply to the Workshop staff holding posts as specified in Appendix 'A' thereto.
Rule 7 provides that "all appointments to the service shall be made by the authority as specified in column 2 of Appendix 'C' to these rules."
Rule 9 which deals with recruitment lays down the method of appointment to different posts.
In respect of Mechanics, it has been provided that 50% shall be filled up by direct recruitment while the maining 50% shall be filled up either from amongst the fitters and other technical staff of the service or by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of the Government or a State, etc.
In Appendix 'A' to these rules, the number of permanent and temporary posts sanctioned for each cadre as also the pay scales have been mentioned.
Appendix 'B' provides the qualifications for each of the posts, which a person has to fulfil for appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion.
Appendix 'C' mentions the appointing and the punishing authorities in respect of different posts and punishments.
For the posts of Sub Station Incharge, Head Mechanics, Head Electrician, Head Tyreman, the power of appointment vests in the Director, State Transport, Punjab.
For all other posts starting from Mechanic to that of Assistant Electrician, the authority to appoint has been vested in the General Manager.
Similarly, even the power to punish has been vested in the Director, State Transport and the General Manager respectively.
It is also the admitted position that the General Manager is incharge of a Depot.
7.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Do the rules contemplate that the post of Mechanic which has since been redesignated as that of Technician Grade III has to be filled up on the basis of the seniority at the State level or is it to be filled up on the basis of the seniority of the persons at the Depot level ?
8.
Admittedly, the power of appointment, both by direct recruitment as well as by promotion etc., vests in the General Manager.
It is also the admitted position that each Depot of the Punjab Roadways is under the charge of the General Manager.
Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that if a post falls vacant is a particular Depot, the power to appoint has to be exercised by the General Manager working in that Depot.
In the very nature of things, the General Manager shall be able to consider the claims of only such persons as are working under his supervision.
On a harmonious reading of the rules, it appears that the post of Service Station Incharge, Head Machanic, Head Electrician and Head Tyreman have to be filled up at the State level as the power to appoint has been vested in the Director, State Transport, Punjab.
He exercises power at the State level.
However, in respect of other categories of posts, the power having been vested in the General Manager alone, it cannot be said that the claims of eligible persons have to be considered on the basis of their seniority at the State level.
9.
In this behalf, it also deserves mention that the petitioner has produced copies of various orders by which appointments to posts of Mechanics have been made in different Depots.
Copies of some of these orders are at Annexures P-5 to P-10.
A perusal of these orders shows that different General Managers had ordered promotion of persons working within their jurisdiction.
To illustrate, General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Hoshiarpur had ordered the promotion of Harbhajan Singh who was working as Fitter to the post of Mechanic.
Similarly, General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jullundur had ordered the promotion of different persons vide order dated May 27, 1991.
Almost identical is the position in respect of various other Depots.
If the authorities in the department have themselves understood and interpreted the rules to mean that appointment to the post of Mechanic has to be made by the General Manager from amongst the Fitters etc. working within his jurisdiction, the respondents could not adopt a different yard stick in the case of the petitioner.
10.
In view of the above, while answering the question posed above, it is held that the post of Mechanic has to be filled on the basis of the seniority of the employees working under the General Manager who is the incharge of the Depot where the vacancy has arisen and not on the basis of the seniority at the State level.
11.
Mr. Tiwari points out that the provisions of the 1977 rules have to be interpreted in the light of the notification dated November 3, 1989.
According to the learned counsel, the designations etc. of all the posts having been changed, the State Govt. was entitled to take the view that the promotions shall be made on the basis of seniority at the State level.
This contention cannot be accepted.
This notification was issued by the State Govt. in pursuance to the provisions of rule 3(H) of the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988.
By this notification, the pay scales and the designations of various posts in different departments including the Transport Department was modified.
Neither the redesignation of the posts nor the change of pay scales can result in obliterating the provisions of the 1977 rules which lay down the method of appointment and the conditions of service.
It may be that a Mechanic is now to be described as Technician Grade-III while a Fitter may be known as Technician Grade-IV.
However, the channel of promotion and power to promote have to be governed by the provisions of 1977 rules.
This notification, therefore, is of no consequence in so far as the controversy in this case is concerned.
12.
In view of the above, the order dated December 17, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4/A with the writ petition, by which the petitioner's representation for promotion to the post of Mechanic was rejected, is quashed.
It is held that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Mechanic on the basis of his seniority in the Depot.
Respondent No. 4 has to consider the petitioner's claim in accordance with the provisions of the 1977 rules.
No other point was been urged.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.
It is directed that respondent No. 4 shall consider the petitioner to the post of Mechanic within 3 months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The claim shall be considered in accordance with the rules.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.