Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The three petitioners pray for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to recruit them as constables in the Haryana Police.
They allege that in spite of their selection the verification of antecedents and having been found to be medically fit, the orders of appointment have not been given to them.
2.
A written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents by the Superintendent of Police, Karnal.
It was averred that "the petitioners were never subjected to any such test not were they ever selected for recruitment".
Still more, it was stated... that "in the present case no vacancy was advertised...
The medical examination of the petitioners was got done in advance of the selection."
3.
This matter had come up for hearing on May 17, 1995.
In view of the above mentioned averments in the written statement, the respondents were "directed to produce the record on the basis of which the written statement has been filed in this case".
The case was adjourned to July 14, 1995.
On that date, Ms. Ritu Bahari, counsel for the respondents had produced a file.
On perusal of the file, it was found that letter No. 14568 dated February 26, 1990 had been issued by the Superintendent of Police, Karnal to the Civil Surgeon, Civil Hospital, Karnal in which it was observed that "Sh. Vishnu Dutt s/o Shri Rameshwar Dayal, Caste Brahmin, Village Kurana, PO Urlana, District Panipat has been recruited as a Constable in the Police Department."
Similar letters had also been issued in respect of the other two petitioners.
It is also the admitted position that the Civil Surgeon had conducted the medical examination and the petitioners were found to be fit.
4.
In view of the above position, Mr. Anil Dawra who had initially filed the affidavit on behalf of the respondents was directed to appear in court.
He did appear on July 24, 1995.
He was heard.
It was stated by him that he had filed the affidavit on the basis of the record available to him.
He was permitted to file a affidavit.
An affidavit dated August 3, 1995 was filed by him in this Court.
After referring to the various provisions of the rules, it was averred by the officer that "there was no merit list available on the record at the time of filing of the written statement by the deponent.
Except the matter stated above regarding medical examination and character verification there was no other record evidencing recruitment or enrolment of the petitioners by the then SP Karnal.
It was under these circumstances the deponent, on the basis of the record and the understanding of Rules 1212 to 1217 and as legally advised, averred in the written statement that no enrolment has been done."
He further stated that " more light can be thrown by the officer who made enrolment at the relevant time".
Vide order dated July 24, 1991, even Mr. BS Sandhu who was working as Superintendent of Police, Karnal, at the relevant time, was also directed to file an affidavit.
He has filed the affidavit on August 21, 1995.
In the opening paragraph of this affidavit, he has stated that "the record/medical register relating to the recruitment for the year 1990 was reported missing and in this connection, an enquiry was entrusted to the District Inspector, Karnal, on 2021995.
Thereafter the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Hq.)
Karnal has been ordered to hold this enquiry which is till under progress and the report is awaited."
He has submitted that in the absence of the record, he is not in a position to furnish the detailed affidavit.
The officer has admitted that 9 selected candidates were appointed as constables in January 1990.
He has further averred that a teleprinter message dated march 8, 1990 had been received from the Director General of Police, Haryana.
According to this message, "the Government of Haryana had imposed a ban on the recruitment to the various State Services vide their letter No. 42/90-5GSI dated 19.02.90".
The officers in the State were directed to ensure that "no recruitment to any State Service is made till further orders".
In pursuance to this message, no recruitment had been made to the post of constables.
5.
It is in the background of the above pleadings that the case of the petitioners has to be considered.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties and on examination of the file produced by Ms. Ritu Bahri, it is apparent that the petitioners had been enrolled as constables.
It was thereafter that they were sent for medical examination and their antecedents were ordered to be verified.
In this situation and more particularly in view of the fact that the original record had not been produced, the plea raised on behalf of the respondents that no selection had taken place, cannot be sustained.
It is also belied by the fact that actually 9 persons viz.
Recruit Balbir Singh etc. as mentioned in the affidavit of BS Sandhu, had been appointed as constables in January 1990.
It is the petitioners' claim in the writ petition that they had appeared in the test etc. in January 1990.
Their contention appears to be corroborated by the fact that 9 persons had been actually appointed on January 16, 1990.
7.
Faced with this situation, Ms. Ritu Bahri, counsel for the respondents has submitted that even if it is assumed that the petitioners had been duly selected, they had no right to be appointed especially in view of the fact that a ban on further recruitment had been imposed by the State Government.
She, however, very fairly concedes that some time later, the ban was lifted and more than 600 constables were recruited.
That being so, the petitioners who had already been selected, had a right to be considered for appointment.
In any event, no order has been produced to show that the selection of the petitioners was ever annulled by any authority.
In this situation, the mere imposition of a ban for a short time cannot result in the automatic cancellation of the petitioners' selection.
Even otherwise, the respondents have not been able to produce any record or to assign any reason for refusing appointment to the petitioners especially after they had been duly selected.
8.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it cannot be said that the claim made the petitioners is unjust or that they have no right to be considered for appointment.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that the plea taken by the respondents has not been supported by production of relevant record.
If at all, it is belied by the record produced by them.
9.
In view of this position, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioners for appointment as constables and unless it is found that they have become disqualified on account of any lapse on their part after their selection in 1990, they shall be appointed.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioners are held entitled to their costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.