S.H.A.
Raza and Surya Prasad, JJ.
- The fate of these aforesaid writ petitions hinges on the reply to two questions.
Firstly as to whether the Vice-Chancellor would exercise two votes, one for a member of the Executive Council and the other as a Chairman of the meeting in the matter of resolution pertaining to the selection of two Professors of the English Department of Allahabad University, which was recommended by the Executive Council.
Secondly that as to whether Professor Dr. Raj Nath was entitled to submit his comments or reply before the Chancellor against the representations preferred by Dr. Alok Rai and Dr. RK Srivastava against the alleged decision of the Executive Council accepting the recommendations of the selection committee, and the denial of the opportunity to submit his comments or reply, will vitiate the order passed by the Chancellor.
2.
It is a settled position that if the regulations do not provide any provision for the Chairman to vote on a substantive motion, in the meeting of any company, association or the club, he cannot exercise his vote in the capacity of a member as well as the casting vote being the Chairman of the meeting.
In that respect the order of the Chancellor does not suffer from any infirmity.
3.
Having considered this aspect of the matter as well as the conduct of the Chairman, namely the Vice-Chancellor the Chancellor allowed the representations preferred by Dr. Alok Rai and Dr. RK Srivastava with the following order :-  "The Executive Council is directed to make a reference to the Chancellor for his final decision under Section 31(8)(a) of UP State University Act, 1973 stating the reasons of disagreement with the recommendations made by the Selection Committee within one month.
This reference shall be made in pursuance of the resolution moved by Sri Krishna Chandra and deemed to have been passed by the Executive Council in the eye of the law.
It is further hereby made clear that the earlier impugned resolution passed by the Executive Council regarding the appointments on the post of Professors in English is null and void and consequently set aside.
Further appropriate action may be taken accordingly."
4.
Probably this direction was issued by the Chancellor as he was of the view that the motion for approving the recommendations of the Selection Committee was defeated for the reason that the Vice-Chancellor, being the Chairman could not have exercised two votes, one in the capacity of the member of the Executive Council and the second as the Chairman of the Meeting.
Hence he directed the Executed Council to make a reference to the Chancellor for his decision under Section 31(8)(a) of the State University Act, 1973.
This was done particularly for the reason that under Section 31(8)(a) of the UP State University Act, 1973, the Executive Council of the State University is not vested with a power to reject the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
If the Executive Council disagreed with the recommendations made by the Selection Committee, it had no option except to refer the matter to the Chancellor stating, inter alia, the reasons for making such disagreement, the Chancellor felt that the motion was not carried out, the only logical conclusion which he had drawn was that the recommendations were disapproved, so that the matter ought to have been referred to the Chancellor.
5.
In that respect the order of the Chancellor does not suffer from any infirmity, but we have to examine the circumstances, which prevailed at the time when the matter came up before the Executive Council.
As soon as the attention of the Executive Council was drawn by a member that Professor Dr. KK Sharma, in whose favour the Selection Committee gave recommendations, was guilty of plagiarism, passion and emotions and members were swayed with it.
From the minutes of the Executive Council as well as the counter affidavit which has been filed by Naveen Chandra on behalf of the Chancellor, indicates that there was not an iota of evidence against the appointment of Professor Dr. Raj Nath, the entire emphasis was against the selection of Professor Dr. KK Sharma.
At this situation we are not concerned as to whether the allegations against Professor Dr. KK Sharma which were raised in the meeting of the Executive Council had any basis or not or whether the allegations against him were correct or not because we have not been called upon to decide this question.
We only confine ourselves as to whether the order passed by the Chancellor was correct or not in allowing two representations which were before him.
The Executive Council did not even go through the merits or demerits of the selection of Professor Dr. Raj Nath.
From the minutes of the meeting it transpires that none raised any objection against the selection of Professor Dr. Raj Nath.
6.
It is a matter of common knowledge that the Selection Committee consider the cases of all the candidates individually, then submits a panel of names for selection to the Executive Council for approval, in order of merit.
Admittedly there were two posts of Professor and the Selection Committee made two separate recommendations to the Executive Council.
It was incumbent upon the Executive Council to have considered the case of Professor for purpose of approval separately, but it was not done.
Since the charge of plagiarism was levelled against Professor Dr. KK Sharma, passions swayed the meeting.
Thereafter the Vice-Chancellor who was presiding over the meeting, took a unique step when he realised that the motion of Sri Krishan Chandra for referring the matter to the Chancellor, would be carried out, he equalised the votes by voting as a member and thereafter exercised his casting vote thus the motion was alleged to have been defeated.
The entire exercise reflects that the Executive Council has not considered the recommendations of the Selection Committee pertaining to the selection of Professor Dr. Raj Nath.
There is nothing on the record that the Executive Council rejected or approved the recommendations of the Selection Committee pertaining to Dr. Raj Nath.
The principle of severity meaning thereby that there were two separate recommendations, were ignored by the Executive Council.
There ought to have been two separate resolutions, one pertaining to the approval of Dr. KK Sharma or reference to the Chancellor and the second ought to have been either the acceptance of the recommendations of the Selection Committee, pertaining to the selection of Professor Raj Nath or referring the matter to the Chancellor but it was not done and Professor Dr. Raj Nath became a victim for the reasons indicated hereinabove.
7.
When the matter came up before the Chancellor on the recommendations made by the two candidates namely Dr. Alok Rai and Dr. RK Srivastava, Dr. Raj Nath was not given an opportunity to submit his comments against the representations preferred by the aforesaid two persons.
Although Professor Dr. KK Sharma was given an opportunity to submit his comments against one representation filed by Dr. Alok Rai, but no such opportunity was given to Professor Dr. Raj Nath.
8.
This sought to be explained by Sri Naveen Chandra who filed an affidavit on behalf of the Chancellor, by indicating that the selection of Dr. Raj Nath was not challenged on merits, hence in the representation of Dr. Alok Rai no notice was sent to Dr. Raj Nath by the Chancellor.
In paragraph 11 of the counter affidavit it was averred that there was no necessity of hearing the petitioner (Dr. Raj Nath) for the reason that the order passed by the Chancellor had turned on the illegalities and improprieties resorted to by the Vice-Chancellor in the meeting of 8111984, so as to defeat the resolution which actually had been passed.
Petitioner had no role in the matter, as such he was not at all required to do anything.
Opportunity of hearing to him was thus of no consequence.
The petitioner was not entitled for hearing inasmuch as the resolution, on the basis whereof he was appointed, was not at all passed by the Executive Council.
His appointment was resultant of impropriety and illegality committed by the Vice-Chancellor in the said meeting.
9.
What was ignored by the learned Chancellor in the controversy in dispute was that the representations were filed against the appointment of Professor Dr. Raj Nath as well on the post of Professor, in the English Department of Allahabad University.
He was most affected party.
The learned Chancellor allowed the reference as a result of which civil consequence flowed against him.
It was he, who was adversely affected as his substantive right was jeopardised.
Atleast he ought to have been given an opportunity to show cause against the representation, but that was not done.
in that respect the order suffers from unfairness, injustices, inequity as well as against the principles of natural justice, which are inherent in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
10.
As far as the writ petition, which has been filed by Professor Dr. KK Sharma is concerned, it has lost its relevancy particularly for the reasons, that the order of learned Chancellor was stayed by a Division Bench of this court, he discharged his duties as Professor for some time but on 6th February, 1984 he sought voluntary retirement, which was accepted by the Executive Council.
11.
Professor Raj Nath, under a scheme initiated by the University Grants Commission, was appointed as Professor and has been discharging his duties as such in both the capacities as Professor in the regular cadre as well as under the UGC scheme in view of the interim order passed by this court as well as the Professor under the said scheme.
12.
Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances we quash the order passed by the Chancellor pertaining to Professor Raj Nath only, but the obvious result will be that the Chancellor will consider afresh the representations in the light of the observations made above, preferred against the decision of the Executive Council after giving an opportunity to Professor Raj Nath to submit his comments against the said decision.
We expect that the learned Chancellor would dispose of the representations within a period of three months from the date of the production of the certified copy of this order.
13.
The writ petition of Dr. KK Sharma has become infructuous as he has been retired.
It is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed