VK Bali, J - Nathu Singh and others (38 in number) through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seek a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to grant the same scale of pay and allowances to them as are being given to the workers working in other offices of the transport department.
2.
The admitted facts of the case are that petitioners were appointed on daily wage basis against the posts mentioned against their names in the title of the petition between the period from January 1979 to August 1988 on different dates.
They were initially given appointments for a particular period but their services have been extended from time to time and they still continue in service as on today.
They have been given repeatedly fresh appointments from time to time.
From the date of their initial appointments, they were being paid on the basis of daily rates as determined by the Deputy Commissioner from time to time.
At the time when the petition was filed they were drawing a consolidated salary of Rs. 600/- per month.
The deductions were also made if they proceeded on leave.
The workmen employed on regular basis in the corresponding cadres were drawing their wages far exceeding the wages of the petitioners.
It is also not disputed that the counter-part of the petitioners appointed on regular basis are carrying exactly the same duties as are being carried out by the petitioners.
3.
By a string of judicial pronouncements, the principle of equal pay for equal work has been authoritatively settled.
This principle came to be recognised as almost a fundamental right by the Supreme Court in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879.
It was reiterated in Bhagwan Dass and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 2049 and in YK Mehta and others v. Union of India and another, AIR 1988 SC 1970.
I sitting alongwith AL Bahri, J in Division Bench in Krishan Lal Sehgal, Actor and others v. State of Haryana and another, 1993 ILR 237 : 1992(1) SCT 534 (P&H)(DB) followed the law rendered by the Supreme Court in the decisions referred to above.
Mr. NS Bhinder, DA Haryana appearing for the State of Haryana very fairly and rightly concedes to the case of the petitioner.
4.
This petition is, thus, allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to pay to the petitioners the pay scale and other allowances as are being given and are admissible to the regular workmen working on the same posts as the petitioners are working.
The arrears shall, however, be limited to a period of three years and two months from the date of filing of petition.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Let the directions contained in this petition be carried out within three months from today.