GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of a mandamus to admit the petitioner to B Pharmacy II Year Course in the year 1994-95 and for grant of other reliefs to the petitioner.
2.
This petitioner belongs to State of Haryana.
He has passed B.Sc.
(Medical) from Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, by securing 528% marks.
He also passed qualifying examination from the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana, in the year by securing 6463% marks.
In response to an advertisement issued by the Training and Technical Education Directorate, National Capital Region, Delhi Government, inviting applications for admission to 2-years Diploma course in Pharmacy, 4-years B Pharma, 3-years B Pharma and 2-years M Pharma, the petitioner submitted his application for admission through the Directorate of Technical Education, Haryana.
His applications was forwarded by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Technical Education Department to the Secretary, Government (Ministry of Education) vide his letter No. 20/25/94-4TE dated 2771994.
In that letter, the Commissioner and Secretary, Technical Education, had indicated that two seats for admission in B Pharmacy (Ist year Course) in the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, have been reserved for those states who have no course in B Pharmacy and, therefore, the Government of Haryana was forwarding the applications of five candidates, including the petitioner.
In this letter, name of the petitioner was erroneously typed as Miss Sorav Aggarwal daughter of Om Parkash Aggarwal and, therefore, vide letter dated 581994 (Annexure P-5), the Government corrected the mistake and wrote to the Secretary, Government of India, Human Resource Development (Ministry of Education), New Delhi, that name mentioned at Serial No. 3 he read as Sorabh Aggarwal son of Shri Om Parkash Aggarwal instead of Miss Sorav Aggarwal, and he be considered for admission in B Pharmacy II year.
Annexure P-6 is a document showing the receipt of application submitted by the petitioner by the Government of India.
Vide letter (Annexure P-7) dated 2281994, Deputy Educational Adviser (Technical) informed the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Technical Education Department that no seat has been allocated in the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, but five seats have been allocated in B Pharmacy in the Department of Pharmanental Science, Dr. HS Gaur Viswavidyalaya, Sagar, and nomination of the students was to be made directly against these seats either on the basis of merit or on the basis of written examination.
Immediately thereafter, Assistant Director, Technical Education, Directorate of Training and Technical Education, Government of Delhi, wrote letter (Annexure P-8) to the Deputy Educational Adviser (Technical), Ministry of Human Resource and Development, Department of Education, New Delhi, that five candidates of Haryana have been nominated for admission in B Pharma I year and II year but those candidates had not been allocated to Delhi.
It was requested that clarification be given - whether the students are to be admitted on the basis of nomination by the State Government or the applications were to be routed through the Ministry.
The petitioner says that in spite of this communication, he has not been given admission despite the availability of the seat in the II year of B Pharmacy.
In his re-joinder, the petitioner has given details of the seats available in the Diploma course in Pharmacy, B Pharma I year and B Pharma II year.
Petitioner has pleaded that admission to 2 years and 3 years B Pharma is altogether different than the admission to I year of 4 years B Pharma and in respect of 8 States and Union Territories, namely, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Arunchal Pradesh, Andaman Nicobar, Daman, Diu and Laksdweep one seat is to be allocated in II year of B Pharma because these States and Union Territories do not have any course in Bachelor of Pharmacy.
The petitioner says that respondent No. 1 has wrongly deprived him of admission to II year of B Pharmacy even though his name was recommended by the Government of Haryana and name of no other candidate had been recommended.
3.
In the additional affidavit filed by him, the petitioner has stated that one Shri Amit Singhal son Shri R.D.
Singhal, who passed Diploma in Pharmacy in the year 1991 was given admission in degree-course on the basis of his qualifications and that he had submitted the application through proper channel and despite the receipt of application by the Ministry of Human Resource, the respondents had not give him admission and in this manner he had been discriminated.
4.
In its written statement, respondent No. 1 has stated that the Ministry of Human Resource Development has not allocated any seat for the State of Haryana in the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, in the year 1994-95.
According to the respondent, allocation of seats depends on the demand received from the States/Union Territories and other nominating agencies and availability of the seats offered by various institutions, States, Union Territories, Universities in the country.
Respondent No. 1 has pleaded that in the absence of allocation of seats, the petitioner could not be given admission in the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, and, therefore, the petitioner can have no claim for admission to the II year of B Pharmacy course.
5.
In reply to the additional affidavit dated 981995, filed by the petitioner, respondent No. 1 has filed an affidavit of Shri JP Aggarwal, Assistant Educational Advisor (Technical), Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education).
In this affidavit, Shri Aggarwal has stated that the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) reserves seats at degree and diploma level in Engineering/Technical/Pharmacy/Architecture courses for those States and Union Territories which either do not have any Engineering College or Polytechnic or lack facilities in specific fields of Technical Education.
The nominations against these reserved seats are made directly by the concerned State Government or Union Territory Administration to the institutes where seats have been allocated.
No nomination is made by the Ministry.
The reservation of seats to the various States and Union Territories are usually reviewed/revised and reallocation is done after two years or so.
The re- allocation of the seats for 1994-95 has been made by the Ministry vide letter dated 1.6.1994.
For the State of Haryana, five seats were allocated by the Ministry in first Degree course of B Pharmacy at Sagar (M.P.) and no seat was allocated at College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, for the year 1994- 95, either in the first year or in the second year and in the absence of allocation of seats to the State of Haryana at the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, for the year 1994-95, the State of Haryana had no authority to nominate a candidate to the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi.
6.
By placing reliance on the Prospectus issued by the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, and the advertisement issued by the Director and Secretary, Training and Technical Education, National Capital Region, Delhi, Shri Saini argued that Amit Singhal was given admission in the past and in the year 1994-95 also four seats were reserved for Delhi students and one for all other States and Union Territories in the second year and when the petitioner's name had been forwarded pursuant to the advertisement, there can be no justification for denial of admission to the petitioner.
Shri Saini placed reliance on Indian Air Lines Tech.
Assistants v. Chairman, 1995(1) SCT 241, and argued that the petitioner could not have been denied admission despite the availability of the seat.
Shri Sharma representing respondent No. 1 argued that the Government of India has simply formulated a policy for giving allocation of seats to the students of those States and Union Territories which do not have Engineering College/Polytechnic etc. and in the absence of any seat having been allocated in the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, the petitioner cannot get admission in the second year.
Shri Sharma invited Court's attention to the allocation of the seats in the first degree course in the College of Pharmacy, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi, for the year 1994-95 and submitted that only two seats were available in the first year for the candidates of the States and Union Territories of which one was allocated to Andaman & Nicobar and the second to the Central Tibetan School's Administration.
Shri Sharma stated that no seat for second year was allocated for the States and Union Territories in the year 1994-95 and, therefore, the petitioner has no right to seek admission in the year 1994-95 in the second year of Pharmacy.
7.
After having given my thoughtful consideration to the entire record and the arguments of the learned counsel, I find that for the reasons best known to it, the respondent No. 1 has not chosen to place before the Court the record showing the allocation of seats in second year of B Pharmacy to any State or Union Territory.
The allegation of the petitioner that Amit Singhal a student from Ambala was given admission in the second year of B Pharmacy, has not been contested by the respondent No. 1 which shows that seat in the second year of B Pharmacy is allocated by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education).
Why allocation of seats of second year has not been done during the year 1994-95 has not been explained.
The correspondence made between the Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Haryana, Department of Technical Education, and the Ministry of Human Resource Development shows that at the one stage the applications forwarded by the State of Haryana were entertained by the Government of India.
But subsequently the Government of India directed the nomination of the candidates for the college in Madhya Pradesh.
I may have issued a mandamus to the respondents to disclose the availability of the seats for 2-year B Pharmacy for the Session 1994-95, but keeping in view the fact that the Session of 1994-95 has already ended and no effective order can now be passed for giving admission to the petitioner during the Session 1994-95, the only appropriate course is to direct the Government of India to make public the seats in first year and second year B Pharmacy available in various Colleges, Universities and Institutes against which admissions can be given to the candidates of the States and Union Territories where such courses are not being conducted and then the candidature of the petitioner be considered for admission against the second year of B Pharmacy as per his merit and he be given admission if he is otherwise found entitled to the same.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondent No. 1 to publish list of the seats in first year and second year of B Pharmacy available in various Colleges, Universities and Institutes for admission to the candidates of the States and Union Territories where such courses are not being conducted and then the candidature of the petitioner be considered for admission against second year of B Pharmacy as per his merit and he be given admission if he is otherwise found entitled to the same.
This action should be taken by respondent No. 1 within a period of one month of the submission of the certified copy of this Order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.