Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working as a Lecturer at the SL Bawa DAV College, Batala.
He challenges the order dated January 17, 1992, passed by the University by which the decision taken by the Syndicate in its meeting held on November 15, 1991 was conveyed to him.
The Syndicate had decided that in view of the report of the enquiry committee indicting the petitioner for helping the students during the course of the University examination held in April/May, 1990, his "remuneration is forfeited and under Ordinance 17 (University Calendar 1991 Volume II, Part B, page 607), his approval as lecturer is withdrawn."
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-15 with the writ petition.
A few facts as appearing from the pleading of the parties and documents may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service as a lecturer in Political Science at the respondent-College in the year 1970.
In 1990, the petitioner was appointed as Deputy Superintendent (Outside) for the University examination to be held in April/May It was his duty to ensure that no 'outside' help was rendered to any candidate during the examination.
On April 21, 1990, certain members of the supervisory staff complained to the Centre Superintendent that the petitioner has "tried to dictate the objective questions to the students in the subject of political Science (BA I)".
These complaints were forwarded by the Centre Superintendent to the Principal of the respondent-College.
The Principal looked into the matter at this own level.
He talked to the members of the staff personally to ascertain the facts.
He even spoke to the Examination Clerk and the Peons etc. who were on duty.
On July 28, 1990 he sent a note to the petitioner conveying the allegations and requested him to "send his explanation before the matter is reported to the higher authorities".
The petitioner chose not to respond.
Finally, vide letter dated September 19, 1990, the Principal sent the case to the Controller of Examinations, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
On receipt of this letter, the Assistant Registrar (Conduct) sent a communication dated October 31, 1990 to the petitioner pointing out that while working as Deputy Superintendent (Outside) he had "managed to enter one of the rooms of the Centre and dictated on Objective Type question to the students of BA Part -I who were appearing on that day in their Political Science paper.
Such a behaviour on the part of a teacher, much less (than) a member of the Supervisory Staff whose primary duty is to ward off use of unfair means by the candidates - is highly deplorable."
The petitioner was called upon to explain his position.
He was also asked to see the officer on November 12, 1990.
It appears that the petitioners did not send any written reply.
He suggests that he had appeared before the Assistant Registrar.
Be that as it may, the Vice Chancellor appointed a committee consisting of Mr. LS Aujla, IAS (Retd.)
and Mr. Darshan Singh, Controller of Examinations to enquire into the matter.
The petitioner was given notice to appear before the committee on January 28, 1991.
He did not appear.
Another notice was sent to him to appear on February 11, 1991.
The petitioner conveyed that "he was on medical leave from 621991 to 1621991".
The committee accepted this position and directed the petitioner to appear on March 4, 1991.
Again the petitioner did not appear.
It was only on March 16, 1991, that the petitioner appeared.
On that day, he requested for 10 days' time to enable him to prepare for the cross- examination of Principal Madan Lal who had appeared as a witness before the committee.
The petitioner also asked for certain documents.
Having got this time the petitioner utilised the opportunity to represent that he did not expect justice from Mr. Darshan Singh, the Controller of Examinations.
He requested that some body else may be appointed as a member of the committee.
Vide order dated May 15, 1991, the Vice Chancellor accepted his request.
Dr. Kashmir Singh, Reader in the Department of Laws, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar was appointed as the second member of the enquiry committee.
3.
The committee recorded the statements of certain persons including M/s. RP Gupta, JS Mann, Anil Gupta and the Centre Superintendent Mr. Kuljinder Singh.
The petitioner was given an opportunity to cross-examine all the witnesses.
Copies of some of the statements have been produced by the petitioner with the writ petition.
The committee submitted its report dated September 17, 1991.
A copy of this report has been produced as Annexure R-2 with the written statement filed by Mr. MS Johal, Registrar, Guru Nanak Dev University.
After noticing the sequence of events and the statements made by the witnesses as also the written statement in defence filed by the petitioner, the committee found that the petitioner "instead of checking outside interference himself dictated the answers of objective questions to the students.
It is an unbecoming act on the part of a teacher whose duty is to prevent such malpractices.
This act of Prof. MP Kaura was reprehensible.
We, therefore, hold him guilty".
The committee also pointed out that there was a lapse on the part the Principal Madan Lal who did not take prompt action on the complaint of the Centre Superintendent.
As a result, Prof. MP Kaura (the petitioner) was "not removed from his duties as Deputy Superintendent (Outside) as recommended by the Superintendent.
The students who were helped by Prof. Kaura escaped action which could be taken under the unfair means if the matter had been reported to the University authorities immediately after the occurrence."
4.
On receipt of the report, it appears that the matter was placed before the Syndicate in the meeting held in November 15, 1991.
It was at this meeting that the Syndicate took the impugned decision by which the petitioner's remuneration for the duty preformed by him during the course of examination was forfeited and the approval to the petitioner's appointment as Lecturer was withdrawn in terms of Ordinance 17 of University Calendar, 1991 Vol II page 607.
5.
These are the facts.
The petitioner challenges the action of the respondent-University primarily on the ground that a copy of the enquiry report having not been furnished to him, the final action as taken by the Syndicate is violative of the principles of natural justice.
He also alleges that there is no evidence to prove the charges.
6.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents by filing separate written statements.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
7.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Ahluwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that there was denial of reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
The enquiry report having not been given to him, the impugned order passed by the Syndicate cannot be sustained.
Learned counsel has further submitted that no action having been taken against the students,the charge against the petitioner cannot be sustained.
He also submits that the allegations levelled against the petitioner are falsified by the two documents, copies of which have been produced as Annexure P-16 and P- 17 with the replication.
8.
On the other hand Mr. Riar, learned counsel for the respondent-University has submitted that the impugned order has been passed by the University after holding a detailed enquiry and after giving the petitioner full opportunity to prove his innocence.
Learned counsel submits that an impartial enquiry committee having found that the petitioner was guilty there was no violation of the principles of Natural Justice.
The learned counsel has further submitted that the entire evidence and the repot having been produced by the parties with their respective pleadings, the charge stands proved and in the circumstances of this case, no prejudice, whatsoever, can be said to have been caused to the petitioner by the mere non-supply of a copy of the report.
The submissions made on behalf of the respondent-University have been reiterated by Mr. Hemant Kumar who has appeared on behalf of the respondent-college.
9.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (1) Is the impugned order vitiated on account of the fact that a copy of the enquiry report had not been furnished to the petitioner ?
and (2) Is there no evidence on record to prove the charges against the petitioner ?
10.
Reg.
(1) :  Admittedly, the petitioner was given in opportunity to state his position in writing by the Principal through his letter dated July 28, 1990.
The petitioner had chosen to keep mum.
Thereafter, the University had sent a communication dated October 31, 1990.
The petitioner was asked to "explain" his own point of view.
He did not send any reply.
Thereafter, the committee was appointed.
On at least three occasions, the petitioner absented himself.
It appears that the absence was deliberate.
It was calculated to delay the proceedings.
The petitioner's conduct does not appear to be straight forward.
Even when he appeared on March 16, 1991, the petitioner asked for copies of certain documents, and time to prepare.
When his request was accepted, the petitioner chose to raise his finger against a member of the committee.
The Vice Chancellor accepted the request and appointed Dr. Kashmir Singh, Reader, Department of Laws as the second member of the committee.
Thereafter, during the course of proceedings before the committee, the petitioner cross-examined the witnesses.
Copies of the statements made by various witnesses were supplied to the petitioner.
Some of these have been produced by him along with this petition.
The matter was then placed before the Syndicate.
The petitioner was also given an opportunity to lead evidence in defence.
He did not produce any.
However, he filed a written statement of defence.
This was duly considered by the committee.
On a perusal of the entire evidence as also the statements of defence witnesses filed by the petitioner, the committee came to the positive conclusion that he was guilty.
This report was placed before the Syndicate.
11.
The University has framed Ordinances in relation to "prevention, punishment and procedure concerning cases of misconduct and use of unfair means" during the examinations.
So far as the students are concerned, the provision is contained Ordinances 1 to 16.
In Ordinance 17, it has been provided as under :-  "17.
If a person, including a member of the supervisory staff or menial, helps the candidates to copy from certain material or from the answers-book of another candidate or helps him in any other manner, he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination for a period of not less than two years and shall not be given any remunerative work of the University for a period to be determined by the Vice-Chancellor.
In case such a person is a member of the teaching staff of a College affiliated to the University, or is working as a Librarian, or a Director of Physical Education etc. his approval as Lecturer, Instructor or Librarian or Director of Physical Education, as the case may be, shall be withdrawn."
A perusal of the above provision shows that when a member of the teaching staff of a college affiliated to a University helps a candidate during the course of an examination, "his approval as Lecturer" has to be "withdrawn."
The Ordinance does not prescribe any procedure that has to be followed before the passing of an order.
However, it will be proper to assume that the concerned teacher is entitled to a reasonable opportunity to prove his innocence.
In the circumstances of this case, it is clear that the petitioner was afforded more than a reasonable opportunity.
12.
Mr. Ahulwalia submits that the petitioner was entitled to even show that the conclusions recorded by the committee were wrong.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner was entitled to be given a copy of the report.
He should have been afforded an opportunity to represent against the findings.
13.
Normally, it would be fair to supply a copy of the enquiry report to the teacher and to obtain his explanation before any order to his prejudice is passed.
This would be in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
However, in the present case, and after hearing counsel for the petitioner at length, I find that no prejudice whatsoever, has been caused to him.
A perusal of the records shows that the written statement on behalf of the respondent- University had been filed in April, 1992.
Copy of the enquiry report had been appended thereto.
In spite of having got the copy of the report, the petitioner did not make any representation to the University.
Even if it is assumed that the matter being subjudice, the petitioner was entitled to presume that the University would taken no action, the fact remains that he filed a replication.
Even in the replication, the petitioner has not suggested that any of the conclusions recorded by the committee or the observations made in the report, are contrary to the material on record.
He has not challenged any part of the report.
Still further, even at the stage of arguments, it has not been shown by the learned counsel that any of the observations or the conclusions recorded by the committee are contrary to the evidence on record.
In this situation, it appears that if the University was asked to re-decide the matter after furnishing a copy of the enquiry report to the petitioner, it would be only performance of a ritual which would serve no purpose.
In the circumstances of this case, the failure to supply a copy of the report to the petitioner has not prejudiced his interests in any manner.
14.
Consequently, the first question as posed above is answered in the negative.
It is held that the impugned order is not vitiated in the circumstances of this case.
15.
Reg.
(2) :-  It was then contended that there is no evidence to prove the allegation.
Admittedly, members of the supervisory staff were examined not only by the Principal before submitting his report dated September 19, 1990 but thereafter by the enquiry committee.
Copies of the Statements have been produced.
Each one of the witnesses has categorically stated that the petitioner had "ditated an objective type question to the students ----".
The witnesses have been cross-examined by the petitioner.
Various types of vague suggestions were made.
However, nothing which may cast a cloud on the veracity of the witnesses was brought out.
There is more than sufficient evidence on record to support the charges levelled against the petitioner.
16.
Mr. Ahluwalia submits that factually the petitioner had made a complaint on April 21, 1990, against the Centre Superintendent and certain other persons.
A copy of the complaint is Annexure P-16.
This complaint was acknowledged by the Principal vide his letter dated April 23, 1990, a copy of which is at Annexure P-17.
In view of these two documents learned counsel submits that the charge levelled against the petitioner is falsified.
The contention is wholly lacking in merit.
The petitioner's letter dated April 21, 1990 has been noticed by the enquiry committee.
It has been found that the petitioner had written this letter so as to create a defence.
Even otherwise, on a perusal of the record, it appears clear that the petitioner was trying to be too clever.
17.
I have examined the entire evidence in detail in spite of the fact that it is not, normally, the function of the writ court to do so.
This Court does not consider a case like the present one as if it were an appeal.
However, in view of the fact that the career of a teacher is involved, the case has been examined at length.
On a consideration of the matter, I am satisfied that no cause for interference at all in the exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is made out.
In view of the above, even the second question is answered in the negative.
No other point has been urged.
18.
Before partying with the judgment it may be mentioned that the evil of unfair means during the course of examinations is on the increase.
Students who pass examinations by employing unfair means cannot go very far.
They cannot grow to be responsible citizens.
This evil needs to be checked.
The advisability of declaring the use of unfair means during the course of examinations as a cognizable offence deserves to be considered.
This evil becomes even more serious when the teachers or the parents become active participations.
The present case is an illustration of the fact that even teachers like the petitioner have contributed to the spread of this evil.
It is time that such teachers are awarded a deterrent punishment so that others get a warning before any temptation makes them deviate from the right course.
Learned counsel for the petitioner was at pains to submit that he has been victimised as he was a member of the Union.
It has not been shown that the petitioner was actually a member of the Union in April 1990.
Assuming that he was, his conduct was still clearly unworthy of a teacher.
The evidence on record clearly proves it.
It is hoped that he has learnt a lesson in spite of the fact that the punishment awarded to him was too meagre.
19.
As for this petition, no ground, whatsoever, for interference is made out.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
It is a fit case for the award of costs.
I, however, refrain from doing so only in view of the fact that it may amount to a punishment to the petitioner's family more than to the petitioner himself.
Consequently, token costs of Rs. 200/- only are awarded against the petitioner.