THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner filed this petition for issuance of mandamus directing the respondents to make the payment of Employees' Group Insurance.
2.
The husband of the petitioner Roshan Lal Sharma joined the service of Punjab Government as Signaller (Signal Operator) in Irrigation Department.
He was confirmed on the post of Signaller on 821958.
In the year 1977 he was transferred to the office of the Chief Engineer, Department of Irrigation Works (Punjab) at Chandigarh and he died while in service on 1551992.
The State of Punjab introduced a scheme known as Employees' Group Insurance Scheme to give benefit to the heirs of the deceased Govt. employees whose risk of life was covered by Insurance Scheme on payment of premium.
According to the petitioner, her husband was a member of the scheme and, therefore, she is entitled to the amount payable under the said scheme on the death of her husband on 1551992 but the respondents paid her the amount of Provident Fund, Gratuity, and ex-gratia but they did not pay the amount due under the Group Insurance Scheme payable on the death of her husband Roshan Lal Sharma.
She made a representation to the second respondent to release the said amount but she did not get any reply.
Therefore, she was compelled to file this writ petition seeking a direction to the respondent to pay the amount under Employees' Group Insurance Scheme on the death of her husband Roshan Lal Sharma.
3.
The respondents filed a written statement admitting that the husband of the petitioner was an employee of State of Punjab in Irrigation Department and that he died in May, 1992 but according to them, the scheme which was notified on 1681982 gave an option to the employees to opt out of scheme and the said option was to be exercised in Form-3 by 10th of September, 1982 and the scheme was enforced from the month of October, 1982.
According to the respondents, the husband of the petitioner did not opt to be covered by the scheme and, therefore, no premium was deducted from his emoluments and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any amount under the Employees' Group Insurance Scheme payable on the death of her husband.
Thus, according to the respondents as husband of the petitioner was not enrolled as a member of Group Insurance Scheme and as no deduction of premium was made out of his emoluments or pay of her husband, the petitioner is not entitled to any amount payable under the scheme.
It is further stated in the written statement that it was obligatory for the deceased to make necessary deduction from his pay and, therefore, the petitioner cannot claim the same as a matter of right.
4.
In order to appreciate the rival contentions it is useful to extract the relevant paragraph of the scheme namely paras No. 3 and 4 of the employees Group Insurance Scheme.
They read as follows :-  "3.
Application : The 'scheme' will apply to the members of service viz, all Punjab Government Employee excluding persons on deputation from other State Governments/Organisations, Public Sector Undertakings or other Autonomous organisations, locally recruited staff, casual labourers, part-time and ad hoc employee etc. etc.
The 'scheme' will also not apply to person recruited under the Punjab Government after attaining the age of 50 years.
4.
Membership : 4(1).
The 'scheme' will be compulsory for all those employees who enter Punjab Government service after 'scheme' is notified i.e. all those 'employees' entering Punjab Government service after the 15th August, 1982 will compulsorily be covered under the 'scheme' from the date it comes into force.
4(2).
Those 'employees' who are already in Punjab Government service on the date the 'scheme' is notified will have an option to opt out of the 'scheme'.
This option should be exercised in Form No. 3 by 30th September, 1982.
Those employees who do not opt out of the scheme by that date will be deemed to have become members of the 'scheme' from the date the 'scheme' comes into force.
The option exercised (or not exercised) will be treated as final and no further choice will be available.
4(3).
After the 'scheme' has come into force, a member of the Service appointed to the Service in a month other than October, shall be enrolled a member of the scheme on the next anniversary of the scheme.
4(4).
Every member of the Service enrolled as a member of the 'scheme' shall be informed by his appointing authority the date of his enrolment and the subscription to be deducted from his salary in Form I under intimation to Government of Punjab, Department of Finance."
(underlining is mine) It is thus clear from the reading of para No. 4(2) of the Scheme, the employees who are already in Govt. service on the date of the scheme were given an option to opt out of the scheme and that option to opt out of scheme was to be exercised by them in Form No. 3 by 30th of September 1982.
This option to opt out of scheme has to be specifically exercised in writing and those employees who do not opt out of scheme by that day i.e. 30.9.1982 will be deemed to have become members of the scheme from the date of scheme comed into force.
Therefore, when there was nothing in writing given by the employee opting out of the scheme, the said employee shall be deemed to be covered by the Scheme.
Though in the written statement, respondents No. 1 and 2 stated that the husband of the petitioner opted out of the scheme, the learned Assistant Advocate General has stated clearly before this court that the employee has not given anything in writing in Form No. 3 opting out of scheme.
When there is nothing in writing given by the employee opting out of the scheme then he must be deemed to have opted to be covered by the scheme, then automatically he becomes a member of the scheme.
When an employee becomes a member of the scheme it is for the Drawing and Disturbing Officer to deduct the premium payable under the scheme.
If there is any lapse on the part of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer from making the deduction of premium from the salary of the employee he is to be found fault with but the employee cannot be penalised because under the provisions of the scheme the employee has become a member of the scheme if he has not opted out of the scheme.
Therefore, the husband of the petitioner should be treated as a member of the scheme and, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the amount payable under the scheme on his death.
If the premium was not deducted by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer by mistake or inadvertence or negligence, the same cannot be attributed to the employee and the legal heirs of the employee cannot be penalised by denying them the benefit of the provisions of the scheme and such amount which is liable to be deducted from the salary of the employee can be recovered from the amount payable to the legal heirs on the death of the deceased employee.
Therefore, it is open to respondents to deduct the amount of premium with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the amount payable under the scheme to the petitioner.
Similar view has been taken by this Court in Ajay Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1989(5) S.L.R.
313  Accordingly, I allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to pay the amount to the petitioner payable under the Group Insurance Scheme on the death of the husband of the petitioner after deducting the necessary premium recoverable from his salary during his life time while in service with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date when the amount of premium became deductible from his salary.
The respondents are directed to comply with the directions of this order within three months from today.