Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a member of the Scheduled Castes, prays for the issue of the writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his claim for promotion of the post of Junior Accountant or Executive Officer with effect from the date when a vacancy falling to the share of the members of his class occurred in accordance with the rules.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Peon in the Respondent-Bank on July 9, 1975.
On May 6, 1991, he was appointed as a Record Keeper with effect from April 1, 1990.
The petitioner, however, claimed that he was entitled to be promoted to the post of Clerk.
Consequently, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 13349 of 1991 praying that he be appointed as a clerk instead of being promoted as a Record Keeper.
This writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench vide order dated March 18, 1992.
In pursuance to the directions of the Bench, the petitioner was promoted as a clerk with effect from April 1, 1990.
3.
The conditions of service governing the employees of the Bank are laid down in the Common Cadre Rules, 1975.
These rules inter alia provide that the posts of Junior Accountant/Executive Officer shall be filled up by direct recruitment and promotion in the ratio of 25:75.
It is further provided under Rule 98 that the posts shall be reserved in accordance with the instructions issued by the State Goverment from time to time.
The petitioner alleges that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated February 9, 1979, 20% posts are reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes.
There are a total of 53 posts in the cadre of Junior Accountants/Executive Officers.
Atleast 10 of these fall to the share of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.
However, after the promulgation of the rules, the Bank has not followed the reservation policy.
Even the roster prescribed by the Government has been totally ignored.
As a result, only our members of the scheduled castes have been promoted on the basis of their seniority.
No promotions have been made against the quota reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes.
The petitioner's claim has not been considered in spite of the fact that he is fully qualified.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents is illegal.
He, consequently, prays for the issue of a direction to the respondents to consider his claim and to promote his with effect from the date a post filling to the share of direct recruits had become available.
The petitioner also prays that the appointment of respondents No. 3 and 4 be quashed.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position has not been controverted.
It has, however, been stated that the decision of the Administrative Committee regarding the promotion of various officials, has been referred back by the Board of Directors vide order dated December 9, 1994 for re-examination.
Since the matter is pending before the Administrative Committee, the writ petition is premature.
It has been further stated that the petitioner has not worked as a clerk for a period of three years and as such, it cannot be said that he has the requisite experience for promotion.
5.
During the course of preliminary hearing, the Motion Bench vide its order dated February 20, 1995 had directed respondent No. 1 to file a specific affidavit "as to from which date it started operating roster for the purpose of reservation of Scheduled Castes for the post of Junior Accountant/Executive Officer."
The respondent was also directed to indicate as to how many points on the roster were filled up from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes.
The case was adjourned to April 5, 1995 thereafter to April 19, 1995.
In spite of the grant of adequate opportunity, the respondent did not file the affidavit.
The position remains the same even today.
Neither the record was produced at the hearing nor was any affidavit filed.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
The short submission made by Mr. Bhoop Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner is that in accordance with the rules, it is incumbent on the Bank to reserve posts for members of Scheduled Castes and to consider the claims of the eligible persons.
It has been further contended that the action of the respondents in not following the roster and considering the claims of members of the Scheduled Castes for promotion, is illegal.
On the other hand, Mr. Gobinder Singh Sandhu, learned counsel for respondents No. 1 and 2 submitted that the writ petition is premature.
7.
It is the admitted position that the respondents have to make reservation for members of Scheduled castes etc. in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
It is also not disputed that 20% posts in the cadre of Junior Accountants/Executive Officers have to be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
As a result, atleast 10 posts have to be filled up from amongst the members of that class.
It has not been shown that the respondents have made the requisite reservation and followed the roster prescribed by the State Government.
Still further, no reason has been indicated by the respondents for their failure to follow the rules regarding reservation of posts.
In this situation, it is clear that the petitioner's grievance is just and fair.
It deserves to be upheld.
8.
According to the petitioner, a Matriculate with three years' experience as clerk is eligible for promotion to the post of Junior Accountant/Executive Officer.
It is also the admitted position that in pursuance to the directions given by this Court, the petitioner was promoted as a clerk w.e.f.
April 1, 1990.
He, thus, completed the requisite experience of three years on March 31, 1993 and became eligible for promotion w.e.f.
April 1, 1993.
He admittedly fulfils the academic qualifications.
He was, thus, entitled to be considered for promotion with effect from April 1, 1993 subject to the availability of a vacancy for the members of Scheduled Castes.
The respondents having failed to do so, the petitioner's prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus deserves to be granted.
9.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been urged that the petition is premature.
The basis for this submission is that the order dated August 17, 1994 passed by the Administrative Committee has been referred back by the Board of Directors vide order dated December 9, 1994.
It has not been shown as to what decision has been taken by the Administrative Committee thereafter.
In spite of being asked, Mr. Sandhu has not been able to produce any order that may have been passed by the Administrative Committee.
It appears that in fact, no order has been passed.
In this situation, the plea that the writ petition is premature, cannot be sustained.
10.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner in accordance with the rules and the instructions issued by the Government for reservation of posts.
The petitioner shall be entitled to be considered with effect from the date he became eligible.
This would, of course, be subject to the availability of a vacancy for the members of Scheduled Castes on that date.
The respondents shall do the needful within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, he will be entitled to the consequential reliefs.
The petitioner is also entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.