GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of a writ to quash the admissions of respondent Nos. 3 to 6 in MBBS/BDS courses and for issue of a direction to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to admit the petitioner in MBBS course.
2.
The petitioner had applied for admission to MBBS/BDS course in the category of dependents of persons boarded out of military service due to disability.
The petitioner secured 483 marks in the written examination conducted by the respondent-University.
In the list of candidates, who had applied against the reserved category for which the petitioner was also an applicant, name of the petitioner was placed at serial No. 5.
Smt. Krishna Malik, who was placed at serial No. 2 in the list of dependents of ex- servicemen, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 490 of 1995, which was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court on 2031995 and a direction was given to the University to admit her to the MBBS course.
The petitioner says that the persons who have lesser marks than him have been given admission but his candidature has been altogether ignored without any reason or rhyme.
The petitioner says that the grant of admission to a candidate lower in merit than him amounts to violation of his right of equality.
3.
The respondent-University has opposed the writ petition on the ground that the interviewing Board did not consider the petitioner as falling in the category of dependents of Ex-servicemen.
According to the University, father of the petitioner, Shri Karam Singh, was a recruit in Unit 6 of the Technical Training Regiment from 8121965 to 15.6.1967 and he was boarded out due to low medical category 2D and was shown to be suffering from Chrecurrent Folliculitis.
The University has further pleaded that the petitioner did not produce any certificate to show that this father falls in the category of Ex- serviceman as notified by the Government of India vide notification dated 15121979 and the definition given in the said notification is applicable to personnel who had retired prior to 171987.
The University further says that in the year 1993-94, the petitioner had applied for admission to MBBS/BDS course and when the Vice Chancellor called upon the parents of the petitioner to prove their claim, they could not satisfy the Vice-Chancellor about the entitlement of the petitioner to be treated for the seats reserved for DDL category.
The University has further pleaded that only three seats are reserved for DDL category for admission to MBBS course and remaining two seats (one free and one payment seat) are reserved for children of Ex-servicemen for admission to BDS course at DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar.
The University has also pleaded that the last mentioned two seats have been filled by admitting Ms. Sudesh Moudgil (free seat) and Keshav Chandra (payment seat).
Regarding Ms. Priyanka Jain, it has been stated that she did not join and, therefore, the seat was given to Keshav Chandra.
A separate written statement has been filed by respondent No. 3 and therein similar pleas have been raised.
Respondent No. 4 has pleaded that she is more meritorious than the petitioner and, therefore, he cannot be given admission.
4.
In replication, the petitioner has asserted that the definition of "Ex- servicemen" as contained in the notification dated 15121979 is not applicable to his case.
Petitioner has further pleaded that his father joined military service on 8121965 during emergency and was discharged w.e.f.
15.6.1967 on the recommendation of the medical board and his case is covered by the provisions of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The petitioner has also pleaded that the definition contained in Rules of 1979 cannot affect the status of petitioner's father as of ex- serviceman.
Reliance has also been placed by the petitioner on the Circular dated 23.5.1985 (Annexure P-13) issued by the Government of Haryana.
Certificate issued by the GDA (Pension), Allahabad (Annexure P-2) has also been referred to in support of the claim of the petitioner that he belongs to the category of wards of ex-serviceman.
5.
Perusal of the Prospectus issued by the respondent-University for admission to MBBS/BDS courses in the medical colleges situated in the State of Haryana shows that on being authorised by the State Government, the University conducted examination for admission to the said courses.
Chapter II of this Prospectus contains a scheme of examination and Chapter IV deals with the number of seats, reservation of seats and its distribution as well as duration of the courses.
In different colleges/institutions different reservations have been made for the various categories of persons.
Reservation for ex- servicemen has been made with six priorities.
The first priority consists of wards of those who were killed in action.
Second priority consists of the wards of those disabled in action and boarded out from service.
Third priority is for the wards of those who died while in service and the death was attributable to the service.
Fourth priority is for those disabled in service and boarded out with disability attributable to service.
The candidates claiming benefit of reservation amongst the children of ex-servicemen are required to produce a certificate in the form contained in Appendix 'J' and this certificate is required to be issued by the Zila Sainik Board.
6.
The only point which requires determination by this Court is - Whether the petitioner falls in priority No. 4 amongst the children of ex-servicemen so as to be considered for admission against the reserved seats ?
Perusal of Annexure P-2 shows that the Chief CDA (Pension) Allahabad, has treated the disease of the father of the petitioner as attributable to military service and he was awarded disability pension.
The disability pension was continued upto July, 1974.
Later on, it was discontinued due to the fact that the disability of the father of the petitioner was considered to be less than 20 per cent.
Certificate issued in the proforma prescribed in Appendix "J" shows that the Zila Sainik Board, Faridabad, has certified that father of the petitioner was boarded out from military service due to medical reasons.
7.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that petitioner's father was boarded out of military service due to disability attributable to military service and, therefore, the petitioner has a right to be considered for admission against the reserved seats.
Learned counsel submitted that the Prospectus issued by the University does not make any distinction between the ex-servicemen on the ground that one was in the regular military service and the other was serving as a recruit.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent-University submitted that father of the petitioner was never made a regular military personnel and, therefore, he cannot be treated as entitled to be admitted against the reserved seats.
He heavily relied on the notification issued by the Government of India on 15121979 and subsequent clarifications.
8.
A look at the Prospectus shows that it does not in express words make distinction of regular or irregular service in the military for the purpose of giving benefit of reservation to the wards of the ex-servicemen.
The term "ex-serviceman" has not been defined in the Prospectus.
Therefore, learned counsel for the petitioner is right in contending that the benefit of reservation cannot be denied to the petitioner merely on the ground that his father had served as military personnel during emergency as a recruit and not as a regular Army man.
This is also fortified by the fact that CDA (Pension) Allahabad, has treated the father of the petitioner as an 'Ex- serviceman' and has sanctioned pension to him because his disease was treated as attributable to military service.
The Rules on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondent-University have been framed by the President of India under Proviso to Article 209 of the Constitution of India for recruitment of Ex-servicemen in the Central service and posts.
The definition of 'Ex-serviceman' given in Rule 2(c) of 1979 Rules is confined in its applicability to the cases where persons claim recruitment as an 'Ex- serviceman'.
That definition cannot with any semblance of justification be imported for the purpose of admission to the courses on the basis of the Prospectus issued by the respondent-University.
Therefore, I do not find any justification in the action of the University in not giving benefit of reservation to the petitioner.
The University has by applying a wholly erroneous definition of the term 'Ex-serviceman' deprived the petitioner of his right to be considered for admission to the MBBS/BDS course as per his merit.
9.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to admit the petitioner to MBBS/BDS course as per his merit amongst the candidates falling in DDL category.
If for adjustment of the petitioner it becomes necessary to displace less meritorious candidate, the respondent-University should pass necessary order for this purpose.
Requisite action be taken for compliance of this order within a period of one month of the submission of certified copy of this order by the respondent No. 1.
Copy of this order be given 'dasti' on payment.
Petition allowed.