Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners who had retired from the service of the Punjab Agricultural University during the period from June 30, 1977 to December 31, 1985 and were given the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund Scheme, question the validity of the Statute promulgated by the University on November 20, 1991.
By this provision, the benefit of pension has been confined only to the persons who had retired on or after January 1, 1986.
The only ground raised by the petitioners is that all the retired employees constitute a homogeneous class and a differential treatment based on the date of retirement is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Their representations having been rejected by the University, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
The respondent contests the petitioners' claim.
It has been, inter alia, pointed out that initially all the employees of the University were entitled to the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund.
On a demand by the employees, the matter was considered in the meeting of the Informal Co- ordination Forum of the Vice-Chancellor on September 11, 1989.
After some discussion, it was decided that in case the University "could create a Corpus from their Provident Fund Deposits, which together with the normal contribution of the Government, towards Contributory Provident Fund and interest from the Banks on the Corpus Funds, could meet the requirements of pension payment, then the University may go ahead with the Pension Scheme.
However, before any further action, there should be a meeting between the Vice Chancellors, the Finance and Education Secretary and the Financial Commissioner (Development) to make sure that enough funds would be available with each University."
The matter was again discussed in the meeting of the Vice Chancellors held in New Delhi on January 17, 1991.
It was recommended that the Pension Scheme should become operative for the University employees from 111996.
Thereafter the Board of Management of the University approved the Pension Scheme on May 31, 1991 with effect from January 1, 1986.
All the Statutes regarding the Pension Scheme were approved by the Board in the meeting held on November 4, 1991.
While fixing the cut-off date, the fact that the Central Government had enforced the Pension Scheme and the State Government had revised the pay scales and pensionary benefits, with effect from January 1, 1986 was kept in view.
On these grounds, it is averred that the action of the University is legal, valid and calls for no interference.
3.
Mr. GS Punia, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that there is no difference between the persons who had retired before and after January 1, 1986.
Some of the petitioners who had retired on December 31, 1985, had been denied the benefit of pension, while those who had retired after that date have been given the benefit of pension.
According to the learned counsel, the provisions of the Statute 1.2 are wholly discriminatory and violative of Article 14.
He has further contended that the date fixed by the Statute had no rational relationship with the object of ameliorating the conditions of retired employees.
Reference had been made to the averments in para No. 3 of the replication to show that the matter was kept pending without any reason and as a result, the interests of the petitioners have been arbitrarily jeopardised.
The claim made by the learned counsel for the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
Admittedly, the Statutes of the University initially provided for the grant of Contributory Provident Fund to the employees.
The petitioners who had retired prior to January 1, 1986 have withdrawn the amounts of money due to them on account of Provident Fund etc.
It is also true that the employees who had retired after January 1, 1986 but prior to the promulgation of the Statutes for the grant of pension in the year 1991, have also withdrawn the amount of Provident Fund due to them.
Yet, the fact remains that grant of pension has financial implications.
If the University, on consideration of the matter, finds that it has the resources to extend the benefit of pension to persons who had retired after January 1, 1986, its action without anything more, cannot be said to be either arbitrary or unfair.
It is a question of policy.
The decision has been taken by the competent authority.
It does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
5.
Mr. Punia submitted that all the retired employees constitute one class and there is no basis for a differential treatment.
It is true that in DS Nakara's case, 1983 (2) SCR.
165, it was held that differential treatment with regard to persons forming a homogeneous class in the matter of implementation of the liberalised Pension Scheme was not permissible.
However, this decision has been clearly explained by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the subsequent decisions.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the pronouncements in Krishna Kumar v. Union of India and others, 1990(2) Recent Services Judgments 434 and State of West Bengal etc. etc v. Ratan Behari Dey and others, 1994(1) SCT 96(SC) : JT 1993(4) SC 501.
In view of these pronouncements, it is clear that there is a difference between the persons who have retired prior to January 1, 1986 and others who have retired thereafter.
Accordingly, the contention raised by the learned counsel is rejected.
6.
Equally untenable in the suggestion that the University has taken a date out of the hat.
It has been clearly explained in the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent that the State as well as Central Government had liberalised the Pension Scheme with effect from January 1, 1986.
The University had decided to accord parity of treatment to its employees with the employees of the State Government in the matter of pay scales and allowances etc.
If the University has now chosen the same date, as had been chosen by the State and the Central Governments for the revision of pay scales and introduction of liberalised Pension Scheme, its action cannot be dubbed as arbitirary or unfair.
7.
It is well to remember that introduction of Pension Scheme etc. is a question of policy.
Financial implications are a dominant factor.
If after consideration of the matter, the University has chosen a date, it cannot be said to have acted arbitrarily.
No other point was urged.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this Civil Writ petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.