Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who had joined the Punjab Agricultural Service Class II as an Assistant Agricultural Engineer, retired from service on January 31, 1993.
He was stopped at the efficiency bar on February 24, 1969 as he had failed to pass the departmental test.
Subsequently, he was held up at the efficiency bar on the basis of his record of service.
Ultimately vide order dated February 27, 1989, the petitioner was permitted to cross the efficiency bar in the pay scale of Rs. 350-25-500-EB-30-850-35-900 with effect from November 23, 1986.
The petitioner claims that the action of the respondents in not permitting him to cross the efficiency bar w.e.f.
the due date was wholly without jurisdiction and violative of the principles of natural justice.
He further submits that the pay scale of Rs. 350-900 had been revised and raised to Rs. 800-1600 w.e.f.
April 1, 1979; Rs. 2000-3200 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 and Rs. 2000-3500 w.e.f.
May 1, 1990.
The benefit of the revision of pay scales has not been given to him.
He further submits that in any event, the petitioner having been permitted to cross the efficiency bar, all increments that had fallen due w.e.f.
February 24, 1969 to November 23, 1986 had to be released and that the action of the respondents in giving him the benefit of merely one increment is wholly illegal.
Mr. Ashish Aggarwal, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed strong reliance on the decision of a learned single Judge of this Court in Dr. RN Arora v. State of Haryana and others, 1990(1) SLR 703 in support of his submissions.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Ms. Ritu Bahri, learned counsel for the respondents.
2.
One of the questions which arises for consideration is - Was the petitioner entitled to the release of all the increments that had fallen due from February 24, 1969 to November 23, 1986 when he was permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar ?
3.
Rule 4.8 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, Part I as applicable to the employees in the State of Haryana, provides that when an efficiency bar is prescribed in a time-scale, the increment next above the bar shall not be given to a Government employee without the specific sanction of the competent authority.
Note 1 to this rule provides as under :-  "When a Government employee is allowed to pass an efficiency bar which had previously been enforced against him, he should come on to the time-scale at such stage as the authority competent to declare the bar removed may fix for him, subject, of course, to the pay admissible according to his length of service".
The above provision authorises the competent authority to fix the pay of the employee who has been allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
It also imposes a condition that the competent authority shall not fix the pay at a stage which may be in excess of that admissible on the basis of length of service.
However, in Dr. RN Arora's case, it has been held as under :-  "Secondly, when the petitioner was ultimately allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from 1st April, 1985, he was entitled to have his pay fixed at the stage in the time scale on the basis of his length of service meaning thereby that all the increments in the time scale were to be released to him and the effect of stoppage at the Efficiency Bar was only to deprive him of the increments only for the period during which those increments were not released.
The non-accrual of increments during the period the petitioner stood stopped at the Efficiency Bar, was not of a recurring nature but like the punishment of stoppage of increments without future effect.
Thereafter the pay of the petitioner was to be fixed by adding three increments and not one increment with effect from 1st April, 1985.
This is the true intent and spirit of Rule 4.8 and the Note appended thereto, of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part I".
4.
I have certain reservations about the view expressed by the learned Judge.
In my view the rule does not entitle the employee to an automatic release of all the increments that have accrued during the period he was held up at the efficiency bar.
The provision vests a discretion in the competent authority.
If it chooses to release only one increment, its action cannot be said to be contrary to the rule.
Sitting singly, I am bound by the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
However, in the circumstances of the case, it appears to be just and fair that this case be considered by a Division Bench.
5.
Accordingly, it is directed that the papers of this cases be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice for appropriate orders so that the matter can be heard by a Division Bench.
The petitioner had been brought to the Court.
He did not appear to be in good health.
It was pointed out that he had met with a serious accident.
It would, therefore, be proper if the case is heard expeditiously.