NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner was appointed an Assistant Engineer in the Improvement Trust, Hansi on ad hoc basis with effect from 2311991 in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500.
His services were regularised by the State Government as per its order dated 661994.
After the dissolution of the Improvement Trusts in the State of Haryana, the assets and liabilities of Improvement Trust, Hansi came to vest in the Municipal Council, Hansi where the petitioner is working.
He has filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution with a prayer that he be given the revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 which his counterparts are drawing in the State Public Works Department (Building and Roads Branch) on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
2.
The matter whether the employees of the Improvement Trusts in the State should be granted the revised scales as sanctioned by the State Government to its employees had been under the consideration of the State Government and on 1661970 it had been decided that the Government had no objection if the employees of the Improvement Trusts were also given the same revised scales.
Again, in the year 1987, the State Government decided to permit Improvement Trusts to revise the scales of pay of their employees with effect from 111986 on similar pattern as was done by the State Government subject to the condition that expenditure on account of revision of pay scales would be borne by the respective Trusts out of their founds.
It is common case of the parties that every time the Government permitted the Improvement Trusts to revise the pay scales of their employees, the latter were given the same scales as were drawn by their counterparts working with the State Government.
In the year 1989, the State Government again revised the pay scales of its doctors and engineers with effect from 151989.
The pay scale of Assistant Engineers/Sub Divisional Engineers/Sub Divisional Officers was Rs. 2200-4000.
The grievance of the petitioner is that this revised grade of the Assistant Engineers in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads) is not being given to him though the qualifications that he possesses and also the nature of duties that he performs are the same which are being performed by his counterparts in the Public Works Department.
3.
The claim made by the petitioner is resisted by the respondents and in the written statement filed on their behalf it is pleaded that the administrative set-up and working of the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads) is quite different from that of the Improvement Trusts.
It is stated that various promotional posts like the Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers, Chief Engineers, etc. are in the Public Works Department and that a Sub- Divisional Engineer in that department also performs administrative duties like issuing of cheques, maintenance of cash book etc. whereas in the Improvement Trusts no such duties are performed by the Trust Engineer and that there is no promotional post above the rank of Trust Engineer in the Trust.
It is for this reason that an Assistant Engineer with an Improvement Trust is entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500.
4.
Having heard counsel for the parties and after going through their pleadings, we are of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to the same scale of pay that is being given to his counterparts in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads) of the State Government.
There is no gainsaying the fact that every time when the State Government revised the pay scale of its employees, the same were allowed to be given by the Improvement Trusts to their employees as well.
It is not seriously disputed that an Assistant Engineer in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads) and also in the Improvement Trust are performing the same kind of duties except that in the Public Works Department when he is posted as Sub Divisional Engineer he performs the administrative duties like issuing of cheques and maintenance of cash book.
This is hardly any difference in the performance of their duties.
An Assistant Engineer when posted in the Sub Division is designated as Sub Divisional Engineer and is then required to issue cheques and look after the cash book as well but not otherwise.
He can be given another posting where he does not perform these duties.
The pay scales of an Assistant Engineer working in the Public Works Department and in the Improvement Trust have been equated on earlier occasions and there being no change in the nature of duties of either of them, there is no reason why an Assistant Engineer working with an Improvement Trust should not be given the same scale of pay which his counterpart is drawing in the Public Works Department.
In Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India Limited v Union of India and others, 1991(2) SCT 339(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1367, the Supreme Court while granting the same scales of pay to the employees of the Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India which their counterparts were drawing in the Cotton Corporation of India observed as under :-  "Here we are not concerned with the equation of posts because the posts falling in the above mentioned four categories of employees in the respondent-Corporation as well as the Cotton Corporation of India are of the same level and employees working on these posts were having the same pay scales in 1970.
There is nothing on the record to show that after 1970 there has been change in the duties and functions of the persons holding these posts in the two Corporations which may justify fixation of different pay scales for these posts in the two Corporations."
Similar view was taken by this Court in Harsaran Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1984 (2) S.L.R.
384; KK Mehta and another v. State of Punjab and another, 1983 (3) S.L.R.
732 and RS Sharma and others v. State of Punjab, 1991(3) SCT 228 (P&H) (Civil Writ Petition 614 of 1982 decided on 30.4.1991).
In the above view of the matter, we have no option but to allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to pay the revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 to the petitioner which is being given to his counterparts in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads).
The revised grade will be given to the petitioner with effect from the date of filing of the present petition and the arrears will be paid within three months from the date of receipt of a copy this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.