TS Doabia, J - The grievance of the petitioners is that they are entitled to regularisation.
At least, one of the petitioners Ganesh Ram Tiwari is working since 14th of January, 1987.
The petitioners approached this Court earlier also and a direction was given that the claims of the petitioners be considered.
The grievance which has arisen now is that one respondent No. 4 has been appointed on regular post.
It is this appointment which has again led the petitioners to prefer this petition.
According to them the stand taken by the respondents that there exists no vacancy cannot be sustained because they have given regular appointment to respondent No. 4.
2.
The stand taken by the respondent No. 3 is that respondent No. 4 has been appointed on a direction having been given by the State Government.
It is said that this is a case of compassionate appointment.
Even this plea is without any basis.
The father of respondent No. 4 was working with Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti, Dabra.
Even if appointment was to be given, this should have been given with Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti, Dabra.
The rights of the petitioners cannot be taken away by super-imposing another person.
3.
On 13th of December, 1995, the State was directed to place on record the policy which permits the State Government to adopt the course which has now been adopted.
This policy has not been placed on the record.
Even if there is some policy that compassionate appointments can be given, then it cannot be so implemented so as to take away the rights of the petitioners.
The State cannot pass an order which may deprive the petitioners of their rights.
Any direction given by the State Government to appoint respondent No. 4, over and above the petitioners would lead to the creation of a situation, which would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is difficult to come to a conclusion that the State Government intended this situation to arise.
4.
As such, either respondent No. 4 be given appointment on daily wages or the claims of the petitioners for regular appointment be considered.
5.
Accordingly a direction is given that before giving regular appointment to respondent No. 4, the claims of the petitioners for regular appointment be considered.
Let this be done within a period of one month.
The period of one month would begin from the date, copy of the order passed by this Court, alongwith writ petition and its annexures are made available.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.