GS Singhvi, J - In these petitions similar relief involving determination of seniority in the cadre of Accounts Clerks in the Public Works Department (B&R Branch) has been prayed for and, therefore, both the petitions are being decided by a common order.
2.
Petitioners Madan Lal Sharma and five others, who have filed C.W.P.
No. 2064 of 1985, as also the petitioners in CWP No. 4372 of 1982 were initially appointed as Clerks in the Public Works Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab.
They were allocated to Haryana on 1111966, the date on which the State of Haryana came into existence.
All of them were promoted as Sub Divisional Clerks in the State of Haryana.
Later on they were promoted as Accounts Clerks in relaxation of the executive instructions issued by the Chief Engineer, Public Works (B & R) Department, Punjab.
Respondent Nos. 4 to 8 in CWP No. 2064 of 1985 as well as respondent Nos. 4 to 8 in CWP No. 4372 of 1982 who were employees of the Bhakra Management Board, were rendered surplus and in pursuance of the decision of the Government, they were absorbed in the services of the Public Works Department of the State of Haryana.
For facilitating their absorption in the Department, the Cheif Engineer, PWD (B&R Branch), Haryana, issued instructions vide Annexure P1 dated 7101970 and Annexure P2 dated 3111970.
3.
In the seniority lists of the Accounts Clerks/Stenographers of Ambala and Hissar Circles the private respondents were shown below the writ petitioners.
However, these lists were subsequently revised.
The revised tentative seniority list issued on 16.1.1985 is Annexure P5 in CWP No. 2064 of 1985.
The petitioners made representations against the tentative seniority list but the same has been turned down by the departmental authorities.
Similar list was issued for Hissar/Gurgaon in the year 1973.
The petitioners in CWP No. 4372 of 1982 represented against the same but their representations did not find favour with the Government, which made the private respondents senior to the petitioners and also confirmed them on the posts of Accounts Clerks with effect from the dates earlier than the confirmation of the petitioners.
4.
The impugned decision of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 has been challenged on the ground of violation of the provisions contained in the Punjab Public Works Subordinate Service (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1934 (for short 'the 1934 Rules') as well as the Haryana Public Works Department Buildings and Roads Branch (State Service Group - C Ministerial Establishment of Subordinate Offices), Rules, 1980 (for short 'the 1980 Rules').
5.
Shri CM Chopra, appearing for the petitioners in CWP No. 2064 of 1985, argued that the petitioners, who had been promoted as Accounts Clerks prior to the absorption of the Sub Divisional Clerks of the Bhakra Management Board, could not have been placed below those employees.
He argued that seniority in the cadre of the Accounts Clerks should have been determined from the date of appointment as Accounts Clerks and the action taken by the respondents is against the rules as well as the policy decision contained in Annexures P1 and P2.
6.
Shri RN Raina, learned Deputy Advocate General, argued that the petitioners had been promoted as Accounts Clerks even though they did not possess the requisite experience of three years and, therefore, the subsequent decision taken by the respondents vide Annexure R2 dated 27111984 cannot be termed as arbitrary or illegal.
7.
Though I gave Shri Raina time to show to the Court any rule laying down a condition that a Sub Divisional Clerk can be promoted as Accounts Clerk only after completion of three years of service, but Shri Raina could not place any such rule before the Court.
In so far as 1934 Rules are concerned, no such provision has been incorporated requiring three year's service as Sub Divisional Clerk as a condition for promotion to the post of Accounts Clerk.
Therefore, it is reasonable to hold that the fact incorporated in Annexure R1 (CWP No. 2064 of 1985) and the assertion made in CWP No. 4372 of 1982, namely, that requirement of three years' experience as Sub Divisional Clerk for promotion to the post of Accounts Clerk was incorporated by executive instructions are correct.
This being the position, there was nothing illegal in the respondent No. 2 relaxing the requirement of three years' experience by issuing another executive instructions.
This the respondent No. 2 did vide Annexure R1 dated 511971.
Thus the promotion of the petitioners in both the petitions as Accounts Clerks will be deemed to be regular and it was not open to respondent No. 2 to direct that they should be treated as promoted from the date of completion of three years' service as Sub Divisional Clerks.
Respondent No. 2 was not vested with jurisdiction to revise the date of the promotions of the petitioners vide order Annexure R2 dated 27111984.
8.
In so far as the private respondents are concerned, it is an admitted position that they were absorbed in the service of the Government of Haryana on the basis of the policy instructions issued vide Annexures P1 and P2 dated 7101970 and 3111970, respectively.
Annexure P1, which was issued by the Chief Engineer prior to the absorption of surplus staff of Bhakra Management Board, Nangal reads as under :-  From  The Chief Engineer, Haryana, PWD, B&R Branch, Chandigarh.
To The Superintending Engineer, Ambala/Karnal/Rohtak/Hissar/Gurgaon/Electrical Mechanical Circle Karnal.
Memo No. 94-Eii/69/11555-60/Eii Dated Chandigarh the 7101970.
Subject : Establishment of Accounts Clerks - Absorption of surplus staff of Bhakra Management Board, Nangal.
Reference : Your letters on the subject noted above In order to meet the requirement of this department in the cadre of Accounts Clerks on account of sanction of additional field charges, it has been decided to absorb the following Sub Divisional Clerks of Bhakra Management Board as officiating Accounts Clerks in the Public Works Department Building and Road Branchs :-  S. No. Name S.No.
of Seniority list as SDC.
Proposed station of their posting Name of Circle to which allocated.
xx xx xx xx xx 3.
The broad stipulations in their absorption be as under :-  (i) Their appointment in this department will be subject to the approval of SSS Board.
(ii) Their seniority will be below the last promoted Accounts Clerk of the PWD, B&R, Haryana, on the date of issue of orders.
(iii) In case of permanent hands their rank and permanency will be protected.
(iv) The inter se seniority of S.D.Cs.
coming on permanent for absorption in the B&R Department will be maintained as per their present seniority in the Irrigation Department irrespective of the date on which they actually join the B&R Department.
(v) The lien of permanent hands will be maintained in the Bhakra Management Board Organisation till they are absorbed permanently on the B&R Haryana side.
The Haryana PWD B&R will have no difficulty in their absorption permanently in that department.
It is requested that appointment letters to these candidates may please be issued and posted at the Stations indicated against each under intimation to this office.
The written consent of the officials with regard to their transfer/absorption in the B&R may please be obtained before they are actually got relieved.
Sd/- for Chief Engineer, Haryana PWD B&R Branch, Chandigarh.
This has been reiterated in Annexure P2.
It is, therefore, clear that the clause regarding seniority constituted a part of the conditions on which the private respondents were absorbed in the service of the Department and, therefore, they could not have been placed senior to the petitioners, most of whom were promoted as Accounts Clerks prior to the private respondents.
The action taken by respondent No. 2 in downgrading the seniority of the petitioners on the basis of Annexure R2 and by ignoring Annexures P1 and P2 (All documents filed in CWP No. 2064 of 1985) cannot but be termed as arbitrary and illegal.
The action of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 in declining the seniority of the petitioners has resulted in placing senior persons below their juniors and in this manner the respondents have acted in violation of the constitutional right of the petitioners regarding equality.
9.
In the result the writ petitions are allowed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to prepare a revised seniority list of the petitioners and the private respondents by assigning seniority to the petitioners from the date of their promotion as Accounts Clerks and by assigning seniority to the private respondents from the date of their absorption in the service of the Department.
Such revised seniority lists should be issued within two months of the submission of certified copy of this order before respondent No. 2.
If during the pendency of the writ petition any person junior to the petitioners has been promoted to the next higher post, persons senior to him should be considered for such promotion and on being found suitable, all the benefits of promotion should be given to such senior persons.
This exercise should also be completed within four months of the issue of the revised seniority list in terms of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own cost.