Amitava Lala, J - The writ petitioner has made the petition for issuance of writ of mandamus commanding the respondents and/or each of them to cancel, revoke or if the panel prepared by the Selection Committee in terms of the interview dated 18.9.97 and not to accord the panel and/or give effect by the concerned authorities along with the consequential further reliefs.
The petitioner contended that he is an able candidate for all practical purposes as would be evident from the statement in the petition as well as an annexure made therein but his candidature was not accepted on the plea that in the demonstration and oral test he had not obtained appropriate marks which give lower in rank in the panel than the successful candidate.
2.
The petitioner herein came to know from the reliable sources that the respondent No. 7 stood first in the panel for getting service by obtaining 4145 marks approx.
(3145 in academic + 10 in interview & demonstration).
Second candidate in the panel is respondent No. 8 herein and obtained 4083 marks approach.
(40 in academic + .83 in interview and demonstration) and the petitioner stood third in the panel by obtaining 4079 marks approx.
(3996 in academic + 0.83 in interview and demonstration).
3.
The appropriate Recruitment Rules prescribe that the Selection Committee should be constituted by five members under that Act., i.e.
I - Secretary, II - Headmaster, III - one teacher representative, IV - one nominee of the Panchayat Samiti in rural area, for other one member of managing committee other than teaching or non-teaching staff, V - expert.
But in this case, the Selection Committee was constituted for holding interview only by three members consisting of Secretary, expert and one teacher representative in clear violation of Recruitment Rules.
4.
That apart, from the nature of allocation of marks itself says that action on the part of the respondents is arbitrary, motivated, purposeful, illegal and mala fide in violation of the norms and procedure of the Recruitment Rules and outcome of colourable exercise of power.
The petitioner demonstrated the case in the following way  Name Marks Interview Marks  Demonstration Total 1.
Md Fahim 5+5+5/3 = 15/3 5+5+5/3 = 15/3 = 10 2.
Nadim Ahmed Siddique 1+0.5+0/3 = 1.5/3 1+0+0/3 = 1/3 = 083 3.
Md Tanweer Alam 1+0+0/3 = 1/3 1+0.5+0/3 = 1.5/3 = 083 5.
He further contended that although the score sheets were signed by Selection Committee of the School on 20997 but the panel was forwarded by them to District Inspector of the Schools (SE) Calcutta by 18997 ie two days before the signing of score sheets.
6.
In all, the petitioner wanted to establish that gross injustice was caused in the Selection process made by the Selection Committee to which the writ court should interfere.
7.
Mr. Milan Bhattacharjee, learned Senior Counsel appearing in support of the petitioners formulated certain points for the purpose of meeting the queries of court.
Firstly, he cited a judgment reported in 1998(2) Calcutta High Court Notes 121, Jadav Mukhopadhyay v. The State of WB & Ors. and relying upon paragraphs 39 and 21 thereof, he contended that the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court held that the order which was passed on concession and without considering the fact in issue could not be said to be an order binding on them.
It is true that this court in exercise of its power of judicial review has a limited jurisdiction, it can interfere only when the decision of the administrative body suffers from illegality, irrationality or procedural irregularity.
It is also true that this court cannot sit in appeal over the decision of the Selection Committee but that does not mean that the court would shut its eyes despite availability of bare facts of records of the case.
Although this court would not interfere into the selection process but can verify only fair consideration at the hands of Selection Committee has been around and the selection should be fair and should not suffer for arbitrariness, nor the same should be capricious or fanciful.
8.
He further relied upon 1993(1) SCC 154 : 1993(2) SCT 276 (SC), Union Territory of Chandigarh v. Dilbagh Singh & Ors. and relying upon paragraphs 7 and 9 therein contended that yet, having regard to the said marks awarded by the Selection Board of high interview marks to candidates with low marks got for their educational qualification and of low interview marks to candidates with high marks got for their educational qualifications, the administration discerned tilting of balance by Selection Committee in favour of candidates with poor qualifications and against candidates with high qualifications.
Consequently, it concluded that the Selection Board had not prepared the select list of candidates in a fair and judicious manner.
If administration prepares dubious select list, it should be cancelled and they will be directed for fresh selection.
9.
He further contended that in view, interview marks purported to have been awarded by the members of the Selection Board for the performance of candidates at their interview were either inflated to push up the candidates who had got poor marks with their educational qualifications or deflated to pull down the candidates who had got high marks for their educational qualifications.
The select list was also found to have been prepared without common eligibility criteria for all candidates.
10.
Next phase of his argument is in respect of violation of the Recruitment Rules in making selection body.
To that, he relied upon various judgments.
He relied upon a judgment reported in 1996(10) SCC 657 : 1996(4) SCT 234 (SC), Amalapuram Municipal Council & Anr. v. U. Simhadri to advance the argument by saying that in a question of change of rules after inviting applications but before the date of selection, the new rule will be applicable.
He also relied upon 1997(10) SCC 264, Vice-Chancellor, University of Allahabad & Ors. v. Anand Prakash Mishra & Ors. and contended that process of selection must be in accordance with law existing as on the date of selection.
He also relied upon AIR 1990 SC 1233, NT Devin Katti etc. v. Karnataka Public Service Commission & Ors., 1992(2) S.C.T.
578 in its paragraph 11 and contended if the Recruitment Rules are amended retrospectively during the pendency of the selection, in that event selection must be held in accordance with amended rules.
Thereafter, he relied upon an unreported judgment passed by a Single Bench of this Hon'ble Court in WP No. 2350 of 1996, which is also similarly placed with the judgment reported in AIR 1990 SC 1233.
He also relied upon a Division Bench Judgment in 1997(2) CLJ 386, Smt. Bharati Roy v. Sri Shyamal Mukhopadhyay & Ors. and relied upon paragraph 9 therein contended that it is well-settled principle that on the date of interview the Recruitment Rules in vogue at the time of selection should be adhered to.
Thereafter, he relied upon 1997(3) SCC 59 : 1997(1) SCT 763 (SC), Dr. K Ramulu & Anr. v. Dr. S Suryaprakash and contended that since the Government has taken a conscious decision not to make an appointment till the amendment of the rules, the change of rules does not in any way help the respondent.
The respondent has not acquired any vested right for being considered for promotion in respect of the repealed rules in view of the policy decision taken by the Government which we find justifiable.
In 1987(2) CLJ 240, Smt. Binapani Kundu & Ors. v. Sailabala Dutta Banick & Ors., a Special Bench of this Hon'ble Court also principally held similarly in a different situation.
Thereafter, he relied upon the Single Bench Judgment of this court reported in 1991(1) CLJ 303, Mahadeb Khan v. State of WB which is also similarly placed.
11.
Next phase of his argument is on the question of locus standi.
He relied upon AIR 1990 SC 434, Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan and contended that it is not the function of the court to hear appeals over the decision of Selection Committee and to scrutinise the relative merits of the candidates whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not.
The court has no such expertise.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection or proof of mala fide affecting the selection etc.
He also relied on the score in AIR 1997 SC 2618 : 1997(2) SCT 538 (SC), Durga Devi & Anr. v. State of HP & Ors. and stated that the decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the committee or its procedure vitiating the selection or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc.  12.
Therefore, in all, I found two parts of argument of Mr. Bhattacharjee in support of the petitioner i.e. one is that Selection process was not good and other is that Recruitment Rules were violated in governing the Selection Committee.
13.
Upon hearing the argument made by the learned Counsel appearing for the writ petitioner, I called upon the contesting respondents to give the reply thereto.
14.
Mr. Malay Bose, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents formulated certain points :  (a) There shall be harmonious construction of the rules; (b) The action is effect of order of District Inspector of Schools; (c) Compilation of the score sheets were made by the Selection Committee on 20.7.97 for the purpose of sending to the District Inspector of Schools for his approval which was actually sent to him on 23797 but interview was held on 18797 and signed by the individual members of the Selection Committee on that very day; (d) Process of selection was followed.
Expert was a Physics Professor.
The rules do not say that since the petitioner is Science Graduate, selection should be made by such persons who are acquainted with the line of subject; (e) The petitioner having participated, cannot challenge the selection process; (f) The Court cannot sit on appeal of selection process unless there is arbitrariness; (g) Both the rules of 1993 and 1995 were considered.
But the re-interview is not an interview afresh.
Therefore, old rule will be applicable in the selection process.
15.
Out of the seven points, Mr. Bose has made his strongest argument in respect of locus standi of the petitioner in challenging selection process.
He cited three judgments on that score.
First of all, he relied upon AIR 1998 S.C. 795 : 1998(1) SCT 631 (SC), (Union of India v. N Chandrasekharan & Ors. and contended that it is not in dispute that all the candidates were made aware of the procedure for the proper prospective before the written test or appearance.
Therefore, they cannot turn around and contend later when !hey found, they were not selected by challenging the procedure and contending that the marks prescribed in interview and confidential reports are disproportionately considered.
16.
He also relied upon 1995(3) SCC 486 : 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC), Madan Lal & Ors. v. State of Jammu & Kashmir & Ors. and stated that similarly on the basis of petitioner's apprehension or suspicion they were deliberately given less marks at the oral interview as compared to the rival candidates, it cannot be said that the process of assessment was vitiated.
17.
He also relied upon 1998(2) CLJ 125 : 1998(4) SCT 101 (Cal.)
(DB), Steel Authority of India v. Nayan Kr.
Roy wherein a Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court held that necessarily a candidate cannot have a right to question the mode of selection subsequently after participation in the process.
18.
According to me to come to an appropriate conclusion scrutiny is necessary.
I am of the view that there is basis of making an allegation before the Court of law.
It is for the court of law to decide as to whether such basis is justifiable and applicable within the four corners of the illegality, irregularity or procedural impropriety or not.
However, this is not the case which should be thrust (thrown?)
out at the threshold specially for the following :  (a) Earlier Recruitment Rule was made in the year 1993.
There is another Recruitment Rule which had come into force in the year 1995.
Therefore, upon going through the arguments, it appears that the petitioner's case must be considered in accordance with the Recruitment Rules of 1995, when the interview was held.
But a plea was taken by the respondent that as because it is re-interview, therefore, Rules of 1993 will be applicable.
This is not an acceptable explanation for this Court; (b) Allocation of marks in the first demonstration and oral test in favour of the candidate definitely creates a suspicion in the mind of the Court.
Such suspicion leads the court to intervene in the matter to find out illegality, irregularity or procedural impropriety.
The first candidate in the panel, having no degree in Honours obtained full marks of demonstration and oral test which definitely creates a cloud in the mind of the court and further cloud when it appears that a candidate having Honours degree and passed the degree and after obtains much more marks for his academic qualification only obtained 050 marks each in demonstration and oral test respectively.
Therefore, the case is not free for dismissal of the writ petition in limine; (c) Although an explanation is given that individual score sheets were made on 18.09.97 and the resolution of the meeting is recorded under the signature of the President as on 18.09.97 and only a common score sheet was signed only on 20.09.97 but forwarding of the panel to the authority, District Inspector of Schools (SE), Calcutta, was made by a letter dated 18.09.97 for his approval furnished by such School Authority without signature of the common score sheets so hurriedly also clinches the mind of the court about illegality, irregularity or procedural impropriety.
19.
Under such circumstances, I do not find any reason to refuse to pass an order in this respect.
Therefore, the writ petition is allowed.
An appropriate selection committee having been formed consisting of five members as per 1995 Rules is hereby directed be formed to call a fresh demonstration test and oral interview amongst the empanelled candidates within a period of four weeks from the date of communication of this order and forward such panel to the concerned District Inspector of Schools only after compilation of common score sheets and also after signing of individual score sheets within two weeks thereafter.
No norms or procedure would be deviated this time.
No approval of existing panel will be given effect by the concerned District Inspector of Schools (SE), Calcutta.
Such authority will complete the formalities of approval of such panel positively within a period of one month from the date of forwarding the same.
20.
In view of the order passed herein, the writ petition made by the first incumbent in the panel being WP No. 12769(W) of 1998 (Md Fahim vs.
The State of WB & Ors.) stands dismissed.
21.
This order will govern both the writ petitions as aforesaid.
No order is passed as to costs.
Orders accordingly.