VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to advertisement dated 2811994 (Annexure P-3) whereby the post of Professor in Bio-chemistry has been advertised and restricted to only those who possess medical qualification, and orders Annexures P-14 and P-15 whereby decision has been taken to appoint the seniormost teacher having medical qualification as Head of Department of Bio-chemistry and consequent thereupon respondent No. 3 has been so appointed.
2.
Petitioners are presently Associate Professors in the Department of Bio- chemistry at Medical College-cum-Hospital, Rohtak.
Initially, petitioners 1, 2 and 4 joined as Demonstrators but later on in the year 1976 they were appointed as lecturers.
Petitioner No. 3 joined as lecturer in the year 1976.
It is the case of the petitioners that as per seniority-list as it stood on 111985, there was one permanent post of Professor in the Department of Bio- chemistry which was then occupied by Dr. AS Saini and petitioners then were working as Readers.
Respondent No. 3, namely, Dr. GP Singh is junior to them and is at serial No. 5 of the joint seniority list.
Petitioners are non-medical teachers possessing PhD degree in the speciality of Bio- chemistry in the faculty of Medicine.
The grievance made in the petition is that as Dr. AS Saini was due to retire on 3131994, an advertisement dated 2811994 was published in the daily Tribune inviting applications for the post of Professor in various faculties.
It also included one post of Professor in Bio-chemistry but the applications have been restricted to those having medical qualification meaning thereby that the petitioners who are non-medical teachers have been excluded.
Petitioners are also aggrieved of letter dated 16121994, Annexure P-14, whereby petitioner No. 1 has been informed that doctors/teachers who have non-medical qualification, cannot become candidates for the post as advertised i.e.
Professor of Bio-chemistry and Head of Department.
Challenge to these orders is on the ground that appointment of respondent No. 3 as Head of Department amounts to change of service conditions of the petitioners.
3.
Two sets of written statements have been filed, one by respondents 1 and 2 and the other by respondent No. 3.
It is not denied that petitioners are senior to respondent No. 3.
However, case of the respondents is that the Medical Council of India in its letter dated 1711994 has issued instructions to the effect that the Head of Department must possess basic university medical degree qualification i.e. MBBS and in view of these instructions, non-medical candidates cannot be appointed as Head of Department.
It is in view of these instructions that Dr. GP Singh has been appointed as Head of Department.
It has further been averred that there is only one post of Professor in Bio-chemistry and as such, Professor is also the Head of Department.
Since according to the instructions of Medical Council of India the Head of Department must possess recognised basic university medical degree qualification or its equivalent, the post of Professor in Bio-chemistry has, thus, been advertised with only medical qualification.
4.
Respondent No. 3 in his written statement has questioned the locus standi of the petitioners to file the writ petition on the ground that appointment to the post of Professor (Medical), MBBS is the basic qualification and since the petitioners do not possess this qualification, they are not eligible to be appointed as Professor in Bio-chemistry.
In regard to his appointment as Head of Department, respondent No. 3 has submitted that the same is in consonance with the instructions of Medical Council of India and cannot be called into question.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that there is only one post of Professor in the Department of Bio-chemistry and as per the rules, petitioners who are eligible for the post of Professor, cannot be excluded.
Mr. Balhara also made reference to Annexure P-4, list of non-medical teachers working as Professors and Heads of Department in various Medical Colleges in India to contend that the MBBS qualification is not essential for appointment as Professor/Head of Department.
6.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the State and Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Advocate, counsel for respondent No. 3, have contended that the Medical Council of India has prescribed that a person appointed as Head of Department must possess the basic university medical degree i.e. MBBS and therefore, the petitioners who do not possess the medical degree are not eligible to be appointed as Head of the Department.
As regards advertisement, Annexure P-3, he contended that the State has the complete option of appointing either Professor (Medical) or Professor (Non-Medical) and in the present case, the State having decided to make appointment of Professor (Medical), the decision is not open to challenge.
7.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of learned counsel, it becomes necessary to notice the rules prescribing qualifications for appointment to the post of Professor.
The qualifications are prescribed in Appendix-B read with Rule 7 of the Haryana Medical Education Service Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the 1988 rules) which read as under :-  "Rule 7 : No person shall be appointed to any post in the service unless he is in possession of the qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment or appointment by transfer or deputation and those specified in column 4 in the case of appointment by promotion.
The qualification and experience in the case of Reader/Associate Professor for their redesignation as such shall be as specifided in column 5 of the said Appendix B" Appendix B"  General :- In respect of all the posts in the service, persons must possess -  (a) Medical men must be registered under the Punjab Medical Registration Act, 1916, or any other Act, corresponding thereto in force in any other State/Central Medical Registration Act, and non-medical persons must fulfil the qualifications and experience as laid down by Medical Council of India before appointments are made.
(b) In case of Dentistry, must be registered under Dental Council of India Act, 1948 or any other Act corresponding thereto in force in any other State/Central Medical Registration Act.
They should be registered with the Haryana State Dental Council.
S. No.
Designation No. of posts Academic qualifications and experience if any, for direct recruitment and appointment by transfer/deputation.
Academic qualifications and experience if any for appointment by promotion Academic qualifications and experience on re-designation as Reader/Associate Professor.
1 2 3 4 5.
1 to 6 xxx.
xxx.
xxx.
xxx.
7.
(i) xx.
xx.
xx.
xx.
7.
Professor
(ii)(Medical.
(1) A basic University qualification included in the schedule in Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
(1) A basic University qualification included in the schedule to Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
(2) M.D./M.S.
or equivalent postgraduate qualification in the subject concerned.
(2) M.D./M.S.
or equivalent postgraduate qualification in the subject concerned.
Experience : Five year's teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Reader or an equivalent post.
Experience : Five years' teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Reader or an equivalent post.
7.
(iii) Professor (Non-Medical) (1) Post-graduate qualification in the subject concerned.
(1) Post-graduate qualification in the subject concerned.
(2) PhDD.Sc.
in the subject concerned.
Ph.D/D.Sc.
in the subject concerned.
Experience : Five years teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Reader or an equivalent post.
Experience : Five years' teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Reader or an equivalent post.
Appendix-A gives the number of post of Professors and teachers in the college and also its department-wise break-up.
In Bio-chemistry there is one permanent post of Professor open to Medical/Non-Medical candidates meaning thereby that for appointment to the post of Professor in Bio-chemistry, it is not necessary that a candidate must possess MBBS degree.
Persons possessing medical or non-medical degrees are qualified for being appointed as Professor in Bio-chemistry.
In this context, reference can also be made to the letter dated 23.9.1994 from the Medical Council of India addressed to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Health and Medical Education Department, reiterating that a non-medical person can be considered for the post of Professor in Bio-chemistry.
This position is not being seriously disputed by counsel for the respondents.
However, they have contended that the Government has the complete option of appointing either Professor (Medical) or Professor (Non-Medical) and this option is not open to challenge.
This contention of counsel for the respondents is not acceptable.
Appendix-B provides for qualification required for appointment as Professor (Medical) as well as Professor (Non-Medical).
For appointment to the post of Professor (Medical), MBBS degree is the basic qualification while for appointment to the post of Professor (Non-Medical), post-graduation in the subject concerned is the required qualification.
It has already been noticed that there is only one post of Professor in Bio-chemistry which under the rules is open both to medical and non-medical candidates.
Petitioners who are non-medical candidates fulfil the prescribed qualification for the post of Professor in Bio-chemistry and cannot be excluded merely because the Medical Council of India has recommended that the Head of Department must possess the recognised basic university medical degree and there being only one post of Professor in the department, the same has to be filled only from amongst the persons possessing medical qualification.
Recommendations made by the Medical Council of India cannot override the statutory rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service.
The recommendations of the Medical Council of India if they purport to alter or modify the already existing rule can have no legal validity and shall be inoperative and no legal right can be based on such recommendations.
The Apex Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Km.
Nivedita Jain, AIR 1981 SC 2045 and its subsequent judgment in Government of Andhra Pradesh and another v. Dr. R Murali Babu Rao and another, AIR 1988 S.C. 1048, had the opportunity to consider the effect of the recommendations and regulations framed by the Medical Council.
The Apex Court held that the recommendations made by the Medical Council of India or the Regulations framed by it are only recommendatory and not mandatory.
If further held that it is not for the Council to prescribe qualifications for recruitment to posts of Professors, Readers and Lecturers.
It can only lay down broad guidelines therefor.
Such qualifications have necessarily to be prescribed by the framing of Rules under proviso to Article 309.
Petitioners who have been working in the department for the last more than 20 years and have been appointed and promoted as Associate Professors and according to the service rules, fulfil the qualifications and eligibility conditions for appointment to the post of Professors, thus, cannot be excluded by saying that a person must possess MBBS degree.
The Government by executive instructions could make provision only with regard to matter which was not covered by the rules but the executive instructions cannot override any provision of the rule.
In other words, the instructions can only supplement and not supplant the rule.
8.
It was next contended by counsel for the respondents that the 1988 Rules only talk about the appointment to the solitary post of Professor in Bio- chemistry and do not pertain to appointment to the post of Head of Department of Bio-chemistry.
The recommendations of the Medical Council have been accepted by the State Government and accordingly, appointment of respondent No. 3 has been made as Head of the Department.
Council submitted that gaps in the rule can be filled up and since the rules do not provide for appointment as Head of the Department, no benefit can accrue to the petitioners from the rules.
He cited judgments in OP Gupta v. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi and others, 1973(1) S.L.R.
209, Sant Lal and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1978(1) S.L.R.
133 and BM Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1987(5) S.L.R.
531, to contend that it is open to the employer to prescribe the qualifications for eligibility to a post and the employer is the best judge of the qualification and experience required to discharge the functions of a particular post.
The principles laid down in the judgments cited by the counsel have no application to the facts of the present case.
It is not the case of the respondents that the post of Head of the Department is independent to the post of Professor, rather it is the case of the official respondents that there is only one post of Professor in Bio- chemistry and as such the Professor is also the Head of Department.
The effect of accepting the contention of counsel would mean that the petitioners though fulfil the requisite qualifications and are eligible for being appointed as Professors, would never come to be appointed so long as the post remains one because a Professor alone can be appointed as Head of Department.
Respondents have failed to bring any material on record to show that the duties assigned to the Head of the Department, like Department of Bio- chemistry which is non-clinical one, are such which the petitioners may not be able to discharge.
As a matter of fact, it has come on record that in absence of Professor of Bio-chemistry, petitioners have been acting as Head of the Department.
Annexure P-4, i.e. list of non-medical teachers working as Professor and Head of Bio-chemistry departments in various colleges in India has revealed that there are as many as 43 teachers who are working as Professor and Head of the Department in Bio-Chemistry in various colleges in India which also include the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGI) and All India Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi.
Further, petitioners 3 and 4 have been offered appointment as Professor and also as Head of Department in Bio-chemistry at Government Medical College, Chandigarh and respondent No1 has issued orders of deputation of petitioner No. 3 from Medical College, Rohtak to Government Medical College, Chandigarh as Professor of Bio-chemistry.
These circumstances have clearly demonstrated that the duties assigned to the Head of the Department are not such which cannot be performed by the petitioners who are non-medical teachers.
Accordingly, the action of respondent No. 2 in appointing respondent No. 3 as Head of Department over and above the petitioners who are senior to him as Head of the Department of Bio-Chemistry being arbitrary has to be quashed.
9.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed.
Annexure P-3, i.e. advertisement dated 2811994, whereby the post of Professor in Bio-chemistry had been advertised and restricted to only those who possess medical qualification shall stand quashed.
Orders, Annexures P-1 and P-15 whereby decision has been taken to appoint the senior-most teacher having medical qualification as Head of Department of Bio-chemistry, as a result of which respondent No. 3 has been appointed as such, too shall stand quashed.
Respondents 1 and 2 are further directed to appoint senior-most teacher to act as Head of the Department till regular appointment of Professor is made in accordance with the rules.
No costs.
Petition allowed.