Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is working as an Officer with the United Commercial Bank.
He was served with a charge sheet dated September 20, 1988.
It was alleged that he had cheated, committed fraud with the Bank and failed to discharge his duties honestly.
Details of various financial irregularities committed by him were duly furnished.
One of the allegations against the petitioner was that on October 10 and November 2, 1987, he had debited the amounts of Rs. 3500/- and Rs. 3000/- to the current account of M/s Upkar Textiles and credited these amounts to his own Savings Bank Account No. 3791 without the permission of the customer and by abusing his official position.
Similarly, on June 24, 1987, he had debited an amount of Rs. 3500/- to the account of Mr. VK Aggarwal, another officer of the Bank and credited the amount to his own account.
Various other instances of financial irregularities were also given.
After a detailed enquiry, the Enquiry Officer found that some of the allegations against the petitioner were not established.
However, he recorded a positive finding that the petitioner had acted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the Bank and that he had cheated/committed fraud with the Bank.
He had not discharged the duties with diligence and honesty.
He had violated the norms/rules and regulations of the Bank.
The punishing authority examined each one of the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and ultimately, imposed punishment in respect of each of the charges.
In a nutshell, it was ordered that the petitioner's promotion to the next higher scale shall be withheld for a period of three years from the date of the order.
His five annual increments were stopped with cumulative effect.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
The appellate authority on examination of the matter felt that the penalty imposed by the disciplinary authority was "not commensurate with the gravity of charges proved against Shri Wadhawan".
It, therefore, sent a letter dated August 6, 1990 to the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why he be not dismissed from the service of the Bank.
The petitioner submitted a reply on September 5, 1990.
He was granted personal hearing on September 10, 1990.
The appellate authority felt the necessity of verifying certain facts.
After checking up the factual position, the petitioner was again given an opportunity on October 19, 1990.
The petitioner made his submissions after a month on November 19, 1990.
The appellate authority then found that :-  (i) The petitioner had passed cheques in excess of sanctioned limits in utter disregard of the directives of the Head Office regarding credit restraint; (ii) He had debited different amounts of money on different dates from clients' accounts in the Branch for his own benefit; and (iii) He had passed cheques from staff though there was no sufficient debits in their accounts.
2.
Finding that "a Bank Officer occupies a place of trust and confidence", and that "if any one violates this trust, he has no place to continue in the service of the Bank", the appellate authority enhanced the punishment to the reduction of the petitioner's basic pay by five stages with cumulative effect and debarred him from participating in any promotional exercise for a period of 10 years.
Aggrieved by the order of punishment, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The impugned orders of punishment have been challenged on various grounds which shall be presently noticed.
3.
The claim of the petitioner that the impugned orders were illegal and that those deserved to be set aside, has been controverted by the respondents by filing a detailed written statement.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
5.
Mr. Ravinder Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner has made the following submissions.
(i) The impugned orders are vitiated as the petitioner was not given any opportunity to show cause against the reasons recorded by the disciplinary authority for differing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of Item No. V relating to charge No. 1.
(ii) The action was violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as definite findings of guilt had been recorded in the charge sheet itself and the matter was prejudged before the enquiry had been held.
(iii) More than one punishment could not have been awarded to the petitioner.
(iv) The punishment is totally disproportionate to the charges established against the petitioner.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Rajesh Mahajan, learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
We have gone through the record of the case with the help of the counsel for the parties.
We now proceed to consider each one of the contentions.
Reg.
(i)  Two things which deserve notice at the outset are that the petitioner was working as an Assistant Manager with the Bank.
He was holding a position of responsibility.
It was a position of trust.
A person who misuses his position for personal gain and betrays the confidence of the employer, is not fit to hold any position of responsibility in a Bank.
People who deposit their money do it on the faith that it is lying in trust and can be withdrawn by them at the time of need.
The petitioner admittedly issued the debit and credit vouchers in one of the cases and transferred the amounts of Rs. 3500/- and Rs. 3000/- to his own account for personal use.
He committed a similar irregularity even in respect of the account of one of his colleagues.
Other instances of misuse of official position have also been proved against him.
Consequently, even if the items in respect of which the Enquiry Officer has found in favour of the petitioner, are ignored, the allegations that the petitioner had not worked in the interest of the Bank; that he had not maintained integrity and that he had violated the rules, would still be clearly proved.
That being so, the order of punishment cannot be quashed merely on the ground that the punishing authority had not conveyed the reasons for differing with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in respect of one or the other item.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that there was any miscarriage of justice.
7.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner had challenged the order passed by the punishing authority by filing an appeal.
The appellate authority had considered the whole matter de novo.
It was prima facie of the opinion that the punishment awarded to the petitioner was not adequate.
It had, accordingly, issued a letter dated August 6, 1990 calling upon the petitioner to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
For reasons best known to him, the petitioner has not produced this letter.
However, a perusal of the order passed by the appellate authority indicates that the circumstances on account of which it wanted to enhance the punishment, have been duly indicated.
The petitioner had filed a reply to this letter on September 5, 1990.
He was thereafter granted an oral hearing on September 10, 1990.
It appears that the petitioner's statement was recorded.
Thereupon, the petitioner was given a fresh opportunity to make his submissions.
He had explained the position on November 19, 1990.
Thereupon, the appellate authority had recorded its findings in respect of the various charges.
It is, thus, clearly established that the petitioner had been afforded adequate opportunity in respect of all the matters before the appellate authority had passed the final order.
It has not even been alleged much less than proved that the findings recorded the appellate authority are contrary to the evidence on record.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner was really prejudiced in any manner whatsoever.
Another thing which deserves notice in this behalf is that the case against the petitioner is primarily based on documents.
He has not challenged the authenticity of the credit and debit vouchers issued by him.
These clearly show that the petitioner had misused his official position, violated the rules, derived personal advantage illegally and betrayed the trust reposed by the Bank in him.
8.
Mr. Chopra also submitted that the copy of the enquiry report had not been furnished to him.
This, according to the learned counsel, was violative of the principle enunciated in Mohd.
Ramzan's case, AIR 1991 SC 471.
Even this contention is wholly fallacious.
As observed by their Lordships, the decision in Mohd.
Ramzan's case is only prospective.
The impugned order of punishment had been passed in the present case in March 1990 while their Lordships had decided the case on November 20, 1990.
9.
In view of the above, the first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be sustained.
It is, consequently, rejected.
Reg.
(ii) :  10.
Mr. Chopra submitted that the disciplinary authority had prejudged the matter while issuing the charge-sheet.
According to the learned counsel, the finding of guilt had been recorded in the charge sheet itself.
A copy of the charge-sheet has not been produced.
A reference to the enquiry report in which the charges as well as the statement of allegations have been broadly quoted, does not show that the petitioner had been held to be guilty before the initiation of enquiry proceedings.
A perusal of the report indicates that in the statement of allegations, details of various irregularities which were alleged to have been committed by the petitioner, have been given.
It was nowhere observed that the allegations or charges have been proved.
Still further, if the petitioner felt that the matter had been prejudged, he should have raised an objection at the threshold.
Even a copy of the reply by the petitioner to the charge-sheet has not been placed on record.
Even in the writ petition, such an objection does not appear to have been raised.
The employer who initiates disciplinary proceedings against an employee on the basis of certain allegations, has to disclose the relevant facts in the charge-sheet so that the employee gets a fair chance to prove his innocence.
The charges mentioned in a charge-sheet are merely allegations.
The employer has to prove these by adducing relevant evidence.
The mere levelling of allegations cannot be interpreted as a final finding of guilt.
Mr. Chopra placed strong reliance on the decision of this Court in Hans Raj Gupta v. State of Punjab.
We have examined the judgment.
It is clearly distinguishable on facts.
11.
In view of the above, the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is rejected.
Reg.
(iii) & (iv)  12.
It was then contended that the action suffers from the vice of double jeopardy as more than one penalty has been imposed on the petitioner and that in any event, the punishment was totally disproportionate to the charges established against the petitioner.
13.
We are unable to accept these submissions.
The petitioner is admittedly governed by the provisions of the United Commercial Bank Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
These regulations have been framed under Section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970.
Regulation 4 enumerates the minor and major penalties which can be imposed by the Bank.
Withholding of increments and of promotion have been mentioned as minor penalties.
Reduction to a lower grade or post or to a lower stage in a time scale has been prescribed as a major penalty.
There is nothing in the rule to indicate that the disciplinary authority is not competent to impose more than one penalty on an employee.
Even otherwise, in principle, we find no warrant for holding that only one of the prescribed penalties can be imposed in one case.
Supposing an employee acts negligently or dishonestly and causes loss to the Bank, he cannot only be awarded one of the enumerated penalties but even orders for the recovery of the loss suffered by the Bank can be passed.
The authority can say that the employee is censured and the loss caused by him shall be recovered from his pay.
Both these penalties have been mentioned in the rule.
Similarly, in the present case, the authority has imposed the penalty of withholding of promotion (which is a minor penalty) and reduction to a lower stage in the time scale (which is a major penalty) on the petitioner.
The action is in strict conformity with the rules.
14.
Equally untenable is the suggestion that the punishment is dis- proportionate to the charges lavelled against the petitioner.
As already observed, the petitioner had betrayed the confidence of the employer.
A person who misuses his official position for personal gain and transfers the money belonging to a customer to his own account is not fit to continue in the service of the Bank.
The appellate authority had given the petitioner a notice to show cause as to why he be not dismissed from service.
However, it showed mercy and only imposed a lesser punishment.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, no ground for interference with the order of punishment is made out.
15.
No other point was urged.
16.
Accordingly, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.