Amarjeet Chaudhary and VS Aggarwal, JJ.
- The question which has cropped up for our consideration in this writ petition is whether the order of dismissal passed by respondent No. 3 by invoking the provisions of Punjab Police Rule 161 read with Section 7 of the Police Act 1861, and proviso (2) to Article 311 of the Constitution of India, is legal or not ?
2.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the case of the petitioner, as set up in the writ petition, is that the petitioner-Lalji Dass was inducted into Police Department on 191980 as Constable.
Petitioner while posted in Police Lines, Tarn Taran, proceeded on earned leave.
He was to report back on 20.7.1992 but he did not join on account of alleged sudden illness.
The petitioner applied for extension of leave but he did not receive any communication whether the leave had been sanctioned or not.
3.
To petitioner's great dismay, Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran, passed the impugned order dated November 10, 1992, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, dismissing the petitioner from service in exercise of powers vested in him under Rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules read with Section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 and Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner against this order filed an appeal under Rule 169 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The appeal was rejected by the Inspector General of Police, Border Range, Amritsar.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed an appeal-cum-representation before the Director General of Police, Punjab, dated 1391993 which was also rejected.
4.
In this petition, the petitioner has challenged the orders on the ground that there was no material before the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran on the basis of which he could form an opinion that it was not practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The other plea to challenge the orders aforesaid is that there was no application of mind which smacks of arbitrariness.
5.
On notice of motion having been issued, the respondent-State has put in appearance and filed detailed written statement.
6.
Shri Randhir Singh, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, has argued vehemently that the petitioner was found mixed up with the extremists inasmuch as he was found supplying them information relating to police department and was carrying their arms and ammunition from one place to another.
On the basis thereof, the competent authority dismissed him from service by invoking the powers vested in it under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
The learned Assistant Advocate General has also contended that it was not practicable to hold regular inquiry or to serve the charge-sheet when the petitioner was associated with the extremists and no witness was prepared to depose against the petitioner under the prevalent circumstances.
7.
Shri Randhir Singh, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, on our asking has produced the case file in which decision to dismiss the petition was taken.
From the perusal of the same, we find that the Lines Officer has recorded that through secret source it has come to his notice that the petitioner by remaining absent was actively associated with the extremists and was supplying information to them relating to police and they were gaining benefit out of that and he was also helping them in carrying arms and ammunition.
The said note was also sent to the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran.
The DSP, Tarn Taran on the basis of the note of the Lines Officer of Police Lines, Tarn Taran, dated 2111992 recommended the dismissal of the petitioner to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran, District Amritsar.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran dismissed the petitioner from service.
8.
In order to appreciate the controversy it would be worthwhile to go through Article 311 of the Constitution of India which reads thus :-  "311(1).
No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or an All India Service or a Civil Service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed : Provided further that this clause is all not apply :-  (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or (c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry; (3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2) the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final."
From the close reading of Article 311(2), it cannot be denied that a Government employee cannot be dismissed from service without holding an inquiry and affording an opportunity of hearing.
However, clauses (b) and (c) of Article 311 (2), give ample power to the authority empowered or the President or the Governor to impose penalty of dismissal, if it is satisfied that it is not practicable to hold inquiry.
The order of dismissal or removal from service can be passed under any of the three clauses.
9.
There are two conditions precedent which must be satisfied before action under clause (b) of second proviso is taken against a government servant.
These conditions are :-  (i) There must exist a situation which makes the holding of an inquiry contemplated by Article 311(2) not reasonably practicable.
What is required is that holding of inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of a reasonable man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
It is not possible to enumerate all the cases in which it would not be reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry.
Illustrative cases would be :-  (a) Where a civil servant, through or together with his associates, terrorises, threatens or intimidates witnesses who are likely to give evidence against him with fear of reprisal in order to prevent them from doing so; or  (b) where the civil servant by himself or with or through others threatens, intimidates and terrorises the officer who is the disciplinary authority or members of his family so that the officer is afraid to hold the inquiry or direct it to be held; or  (c) where an atmosphere of violence or of general indiscipline and insubordination prevails at the time of attempt to hold the inquiry, is made.
The disciplinary authority is not expected to dispense with a disciplinary inquiry lightly or arbitrarily or out of ulterior motives or merely in order to avoid the holding of an inquiry or because the department's case against the civil servant is weak and, therefore, is bound to fail.
In the present case none of the contingencies exist.
10.
The other aspect of the matter is that in the impugned order it was held that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
The respondents should have justified their stand in arriving at the conclusion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
Had any attempt to hold inquiry been made i.e. witnesses called and they failed to appear only in such eventuality it could be held that it was not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
In this case no inquiry was made and the petitioner was dismissed from service by invoking the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
11.
There is no material on the record that witnesses could not come forward freely to depose against the petitioner in a regular departmental inquiry and the case of the petitioner is fully covered by the judgments reported as Union of India v. Tulsi Ram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 570, Chief Security Officer v. Singasan Ravi Dey, 1981(2) SLR 140 and Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 125 : AIR 1991 SC 385.
12.
From a careful perusal of the case file, it is observed that the Lines Officer in his report had mentioned that he had some source of information from which it was gathered that the petitioner was having links with the terrorists.
At no stage, the statement of the Lines Officer or any other person to the effect that the petitioner was having links with the terrorists was recorded by the authorities.
The Deputy Superintendent of Police had forwarded the note to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Tarn Taran, who in turn accepted the same.
However, no effort whatsoever was made by the DSP or the SSP to verify the authenticity and correctness of the contents of the report of the Lines Officer.
The report of the Lines Officer has no weight as he had only mentioned in the report that the petitioner had links with the terrorists but had not given sufficient reasons from which a conclusion could be drawn that the petitioner had links with the terrorists.
The DSP and the SSP had accepted the report of the Lines Officer as a gospel truth.
We are convinced that there was no application of mind of any of the authorities and the impugned order dismissing the petitioner from service was passed in an arbitrary manner.
13.
It is also well settled that statutory powers conferred upon authorities have to be exercised by them and if in substance it is exercised by another, it will be a case of failure to exercise the said statutory powers resulting decision in such a case to be ultra-vires and void.
Admittedly, in the present case, the Senior Superintendent of Police has not applied his mind and virtually surrendered his powers only to the Deputy Superintendent of Police and without any material before him blindly dittoed the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police which is not permissible under the law.
14.
In Naresh Kumar v. Comm.
of Police, 1982(7) SLR 177 it has been held that dismissal of constables without holding a regular inquiry on the ground that the employees were allegedly of desperate character and their continuance in service was hazardous to public was hardly relevant for invoking the powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
In Union of India v. Subramanian, 1985(1) SLR 238, the action taken by the employer to dispense with the inquiry by declaring it to be reasonably impracticable to hold, was declared to be invalid.
The Court held that the constitutional requirement of Article 311(2) cannot be converted into a dead letter for the simple reason that the employees have developed class or group feelings.
In Arun Chaubey v. Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 1356 the apex Court quashed the orders passed by the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent of the Northern Railways while exercising the powers under proviso (b) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India, on the ground that no material was available with the said authority for satisfying itself that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry.
15.
The requirement of law is that if any order for removal from service is passed against a delinquent employee, he is to be afforded an opportunity of hearing and supplied a copy of the charge-sheet.
The only reason to dispense with the inquiry is that it was not reasonably practicable to hold it.
At least the statement of Lines Officer, who had sent a note, should have been recorded as he would have been the best person to explain that on what material he had come to the conclusion that the petitioner was having links with the terrorists.
16.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the orders, Annexures P-1, P-2 and P-5 are quashed.
However, the respondents would be at liberty to pass a fresh order after holding proper inquiry in accordance with law, if so advised.
However, the petitioner shall not be entitled to claim salary for the period between the date of his dismissal and reinstatement.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.