GS Singhvi, J - The only question which requires adjudication in this writ petition is whether the respondents are right in declining the regularisation of service of the petitioner as Sewing Teachress on the ground that confidential reports of the petitioner were not available.
2.
After having secured necessary qualifications for appointment as Sewing Teachress the petitioner was appointed on the post of Sewing Teachress (Craft Teachress) under the Panchayat Samiti, Shahbad with effect from 30.3.1979 where she worked upto 28.9.1982.
Thereafter she worked as Sewing Teachress under the District Rural Development Agency, Kurukshetra, between 9.10.1982 to 30.6.1984 and 30111984 to 3131985.
With effect from 341985 the petitioner was appointed as ad hoc Sewing Teachress in Panchayat Samiti Pehowa on the consolidated salary of Rs. 525/- per month.
The Government of Haryana took a policy decision to regularise the services of Sewing Teachresses having experience of three years or more.
In furtherance of this policy decision, circular letters dated 1821983 and 451983 were issued by the Government directing all the competent authorities to take steps for regularisation of the services of Sewing Teachresses working in various Panchayat Samitis.
In the list prepared by the Director, Women Programme, on behalf of the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Development and Panchayat Department, name of the petitioner was shown at serial No. 29.
This was followed by different orders issued in favour of other persons for regularisation of their services.
However, in the case of the petitioner, order for regularisation was not issued on the ground that the Lady Circle Supervisor, Kurukshetra, under whom the petitioner had worked, did not send her confidential reports.
The petitioner pursued her case at different levels but could not get a satisfactory reply.
After about six months, she received communications Annexures P17 and P18 rejecting her claim for regularisation on the ground that there was no confidential report of the petitioner and after such a long time the confidential report could not be written.
This has led to a situation in which the petitioner continues to be an ad hoc teachress and is being paid fixed wages.
3.
The respondents have justified their action on the ground that the petitioner was in the employment of the District Rural Development Agency, Kurukshetra, and as she did not want to go far away from District Kurukshetra, her case was not considered for regularisation of her services.
4.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that rejection of the case of the petitioner for regularisation of the service is based on wholly irrelevant consideration and is, therefore, arbitrary and unreasonable.
The fact that the petitioner fulfilled the conditions of eligibility laid down by the Government for regularisation of the services of the Sewing Teachresses is not in dispute.
Experience certificate issued by the controlling officers shows that the petitioner has been in the service under the Rural Development and Panchayat Department for more than three years.
It was not within the jurisdiction of the petitioner to get her confidential reports written.
Rather it was the duty of the competent authority to initiate and write all the confidential reports of the petitioner.
The respondents cannot take shelter of their own failure to get the confidential reports of the petitioner prepared and cannot deny fair consideration to the petitioner's case for regularisation of the service merely because her confidential reports had not been written.
5.
The plea of the respondents that the petitioner's case could not be considered because she was already employed under the District Rural Development Agency is a clear after-thought because that is not the ground enumerated in Annexure P18 for rejecting the case of the petitioner for regularisation and as has been held by the Supreme Court in Commissioner of Police v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR (39) 1952 SC 16, when an order passed by a public authority is challenged in a Court of law, its validity has to be tested on the basis of reasons contained in the order itself and cannot be examined on the basis of other reasons.
The same view has been reiterated in Mohinder Singh Gill and another v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC 851.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order (Annexure P10), which has been communicated to the petitioner vide Annexure P17, is quashed and the respondents are directed to regularise the service of the petitioner by considering the record relating to the service of the petitioner, which may be available with them.
Her claim should not be rejected on the ground that her confidential reports were not written by the competent officer.
Appropriate order after consideration of the case of the petitioners shall be passed by the respondents within a period of three months of the submission of the certified copy of this order before respondent No. 3.