Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These five writ petitions filled by the six petitioners who are members of Scheduled Castes, contain a common grievance.
The petitioners allege that in spite of fact that six posts had been reserved for the category of Scheduled Castes, only one post has been filled up from amongst them.
Consequently, they submit that the recruitment of persons from the general category against the posts reserved for members of Scheduled Castes is illegal.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to the facts as averred in Civil Writ Petition No. 11616 of 1989.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
On March 26, 1989, the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) advertised 32 posts of Junior Engineers (Civil).
Curiously, out of the 32 posts, 25 posts had been reserved for the categories of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes, Physically Handicapped and Ex-Servicemen.
The selection was held.
On August 14, 1989, the respondent- Board issued a letter of appointment to 30 candidates out of whom 15 belonged to the general category, 4 to the Backward Classes, one each to the category of Scheduled Castes and Physically Handicapped and the remaining 8 were ex- servicemen.
In a rejoinder filed in Civil Writ Petition No. 10885 of 1989, it has been averred that 11 more candidates belonging to the general category were appointed vide order dated November 7, 1989.
The petitioners' grievance is that six posts having been reserved for members of Scheduled Castes, the respondent-Board could not have diverted these posts for recruitment from amongst the persons belonging to other categories.
Consequently, they claim that the action of the respondent-Board is arbitrary, illegal and unfair.
On these premises, the petitioners pray that the impugned selection and the appointments of respondent Nos. 2 to 31 made vide order dated August 14, 1989, be quashed.
3.
The respondents contest this claim on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been averred that the petitioners were not found suitable.
Secondly, it has been pointed out that even though while issuing the advertisement, six posts had been reserved for members of Scheduled Castes, yet it was subsequently found while reviewing the implementation of the reservation policy, under instructions from the Government, that against a total of 79 appointments made from February 9, 1979 onwards, 21 persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes had been appointed.
Their quota in fact worked out to only 16 posts.
Since 5 persons belonging to Scheduled Castes were found to be in excess of their actual entitlement, the number of posts reserved for them was reduced to that extent.
4.
The petitioners have filed a rejoinder controverting the averments made on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that they have had good academic record and consequently, there was no basis for declaring them unsuitable.
It has been further pointed out that the members of Scheduled castes are not holding posts in excess of the quota.
5.
I have heard Mr. Surya Kant, learned Counsel for the petitioners.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
6.
Mr. Surya Kant has contended that the petitioners have had a consistently good academic record and have been wrongly rejected.
He has further submitted that the number of vacancies reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes has been wrongly reduced from 6 to 1 by reviewing the recruitment made from February 1979 onwards.
In fact, the respondents should have reviewed the position with effect from April 30, 1971 when the policy for reservation was initially issued by the Board.
If that had been done, it would have been found that the members of Scheduled Castes were entitled to more posts.
Lastly, the counsel has submitted that in pursuance to the advertisement, the respondent-Board has actually appointed 41 persons and 8 posts should have been reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
7.
It is true that Article 16(4) permits the State to make a special provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of a backward class which is not adequately represented in the Services under the State.
In pursuance to this enabling provision, 20% posts have been reserved in Class III Services under the State.
Even the Board appears to have adopted this policy.
However, it cannot be forgotten that the claims of the members of Scheduled Castes have to be taken into consideration "consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of Administration" while making appointments to various posts.
Posts under the State are not a largesse to be bestowed on any one and everyone.
The person to be appointed must be found to be suitable for discharging the duties of the post.
Consequently, the first thing which the State is legitimately entitled to examine, is as to whether or not a candidate for a post is suitable for appointment.
8.
In the present case, it is the admitted position is that the claims of the petitioners were duly considered.
They were interviewed on April 24, 1989.
However, the committee "did not find the petitioners suitable for appointment as Junior Engineers".
Mr. Surya Kant submits that no reasons having been assigned, the action of the committee cannot be sustained.
This submission cannot be accepted.
Firstly, there is no rule which may require the committee to assign any reasons.
Secondly, the committee has not even been impleaded as a party.
In such a situation, the Board cannot be accused of having failed to disclose the reasons.
If the petitioners have been found unsuitable for appointment to the posts, this Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, cannot foist them on the employer.
9.
It has been further contended by the learned counsel that the number of posts falling to the share of Scheduled Castes, has not been correctly computed by the respondent-Board.
Learned counsel submits that the position of the reserved vacancies should have been reviewed with effect from April 30, 1971 instead of February 9, 1979.
10.
It is true that the respondent-Board in the written statement has disclosed the position with effect from February 9, 1979.
This review appears to have been conducted in pursuance to the instructions issued by the Government.
However, the petitioners have attempted to bring the factual position on record.
It has been inter alia pointed out that since April 30, 1991, 148 Junior Engineers had been appointed by the respondent-Board.
This statement has been made on the basis of the gradation list issued by the Board as it stood on January 1, 1989.
An extract therefrom mentioning the names of the members of the Scheduled Castes has been produced as Annexure P-9 with the rejoinder.
It appears that this list was issued by the Chief Administrator of the respondent-Board vide his letter dated April 20, 1989.
It was addressed to all the SDOs and Junior Engineers.
A perusal of this list shows that the Board had prepared a joint seniority list of persons who were working as SDOs and Junior Engineers.
The names of SDOs appear in the beginning of the list.
Even at Sr. No. 56, Mr. Surinder Mohan is shown to be officiating as SDO with effect from September, 17, 1986.
It is on the basis of this list that learned counsel for the petitioners has tried to contend that 148 posts of Junior Engineers had been filled up by the Board since April, 1971.
On a perusal of the document, I am satisfied that it is not so.
In this situation, there is nothing on the record on the basis of which it may be said that in fact, 148 posts of Junior Engineers had been filled up and out of which members of Scheduled Castes were entitled to 30 posts.
The list as produced by the learned counsel along with the covering letter thereon is placed on record as Mark 'A'.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioners then contended that in November 1989, 11 more persons had been appointed by the Board.
As a result, in pursuance to the advertisement of 32 posts, the Board had actually recruited 41 persons.
According to Mr. Surya Kant, the members of Scheduled Castes were entitled to 8 posts.
12.
This contention cannot be accepted.
Firstly, the petitioners having been found to be unsuitable, cannot have any legitimate grievance about the number of posts that may have been filled up.
Secondly, the selection and appointment of 11 persons who were appointed vide order dated November 7, 1989 is sought to be challenged but they have not been impleaded as respondents.
Thirdly, these persons have been working in the Board since 1989.
It would not be fair to interfere with their appointment after the lapse of more than five years.
13.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the Motion Bench vide different orders had directed that 4 posts be kept reserved for the petitioners.
Even if that be so, the petitioners cannot be granted any relief as they had not been found to be suitable by the selection committee.
14.
No other point has been urged.
15.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, I find no ground for either quashing the appointments made by the Board or for directing it to consider afresh the claims of the petitioners.
In case, the petitioners have not got any job so far, it would be open to them to compete for such posts as may be subsequently advertised, subject to their fulfilling the conditions of eligibility.
In the present case, there is no ground for interference.
16.
Consequently, there is no merit in these petitions.
These are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.