TS Doabia, J - The brief facts which led to the filing of this petition are as under :-  2.
Petitioner is working as Daftari with the respondent-Bank.
He is entitled to promotion.
This promotion is dependent upon the result of a written-test followed by an interview.
Petitioner has successfully qualified the written test thrice and was called upon thrice for interview as well.
Even though he was declared successful in the written test, but was unsuccessful in the interview.
The net result is that he has not been promoted to the post of clerk.
3.
Petitioner alleged that the action of the respondents in not promoting him is mala fide.
It is also alleged that the exercise of powers on the part of respondents is arbitrary and has been labelled as unconstitutional and accordingly he seeks judicial review.
The result sheet was called for.
From the perusal of the same, it is found that 60 marks are meant for written test and 40 marks are meant for interview.
These 40 marks are further sub-divided into two categories, 20 marks are for judging the intelligence and 20 marks are for assessing job knowledge of the candidate.
The only argument which has been advanced is that prescription 40 marks of the total marks for interview are not in consonance with the judicial pronouncements as it leaves much room for manoeuvring the ultimate result.
4.
In Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 1777, the purpose behind written test was brought out.
Reference was made to the Hand Book on Civil Service Laws and Practice prepared by United Nations.
Relevant part reads as under :-  "....The written papers permit an assessment of culture and intellectual competence.
The interview permits an assessment of qualities of character which written papers ignore; it attempts to assess the man himself and not his intellectual abilities."
5.
The Supreme Court in the above case, pointed out the purpose behind the written test and the interview in the following words :  "It is now well recognised that while a written examination assesses a candidate's knowledge and intellectual ability, an interview test is valuable to assess a candidate's overall intellectual and personal qualities.
While a written examination has certain distinct advantages over the interview test, there are yet no written tests which can evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness, resourcefulness, dependableness, cooperativeness, capacity for clear and logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity."
6.
It was ultimately concluded that, "thus the written examination assesses the man's intellect and the interview test the man himself and "the twain shall meet" for a proper selection."
7.
Thus, petitioner's intelligence was determined in the written test.
He qualified, but he failed in the interview and the "twain" never met in this case.
As noticed above, the petitioner was not selected.
8.
The argument that prescription of 40 marks for interview are not in consonance with the principle of equality and fair play as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution be now examined.
9.
First of all, it may be seen that there is a further division of 40 marks, 20 marks for judging intelligence and 20 marks for assessing job knowledge.
As such, factually, it may not be correct to say that no criteria has been indicated for prescription of 40 per cent marks.
Apart from this, in Mehmood Alam Tariq v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1988 SC 1451, the prescription of minimum qualifying marks of 30 per cent for the viva voce examination was held to be in line with the safeguard laid down in the Constitution and no constitutional infirmity was found.
The same view was expressed by a Division Bench of this Court in 1993 MPLJ 50.
10.
Thus, I am of the view the criteria adopted by the Bank is not violative of concept of equality and fair play.
This petition is without any merit, and is dismissed with no order as to costs.