TS Doabia, J - A charge-sheet issued on 10th of March, 1993 is the subject matter of challenge in this petition.
The main allegation is that the petitioner extended undue credit facilities without financial constraints to about 25 concerns.
The petitioner has challenged the issuance of this charge-sheet on the ground of delay, mala fides, condonation and also on the ground that the officer who issued the charge-sheet was not within his rights to do so.
According to the petitioner, it is the Assistant General Manager, who is competent to issue a charge-sheet and a person who is holding officiating appointment cannot be put at par with a regular incumbent.
2.
So far as the grounds of delay, condonation, mala fides are concerned, these have already been dealt with in detail in writ petition No. 36 of 1992.
It is only that delay which causes prejudice to the petitioner is to be taken into consideration.
It has to be established and shown that facts are such which cannot be recapitulated on account of delay by the delinquent or by the witnesses.
There is a detailed charge-sheet.
As many as 25 instances have been quoted therein.
Change-sheet issued on 10th of March, 1993 deals with instances which are also of the year 1989 and 1990.
These cannot be said to be belated.
In any case, for the reasons mentioned in writ petition No. 36 of 1992 decided today, it cannot be said that the delay is fatal.
What has been said with regard to other matters i.e. estoppel and condonation in writ petition No. 36 of 1992 would apply to this case also.
3.
One argument with regard to the competency of the officiating Assistant General Manager to initiate the proceedings still remains and it be examined.
Serious challenge has been made in this regard.
4.
The relevant rules which deal with holding of departmental enquiries are contained in UCO Bank Officers (Employees Discipline and Regulation) Appeal Rules, 1976.
The term 'Competent Authority' and 'Disciplinary Authority' has been defined.
These read as under :-  "Competent Authority" means the authority appointed by the Board for the purposes of these regulations : "Disciplinary Authority" means the authority specified in the Schedule which is competent to impose on an office employee any of the penalties specified in regulations.
5.
So far as officers in Middle Management Grade Scale II are concerned, the competent authority has been mentioned as "Assistant General Manager".
The disciplinary authority is again the Assistant General Manager.
This is apparent from Annexure P/29.
As reference is being made to Note appended to this Annexure P/29, it would be apt to notice this part of the annexure.
This reads as under :  "NOTE (i) Where a post of any of the above said authorities remains vacant without officiating/acting arrangement having been authorised, the powers should be exercised by the next higher authority; and (ii) the powers of any of the above specified authorities may be exercised by any of the other authority nominated by the Executive Director/Chairman/Managing Director who is equal in rank to or higher than the authority referred to above."
6.
In this regard, it would be apt to refer to a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Dinesh Kumar Agarwal v. Bank of India and others, 1995 JLJ 578.
Officiating Regional Manager was held to be Regional Manager for all practical purposes.
It was held that the Officiating Regional Manager can place an officer or an employee under suspension.
Similar note as referred to above was subject-matter of consideration.
It would be apt to notice para 4 of the judgment.
It reads as under :  "The first contention advanced is that the suspension order passed on 19.2.1987 has been passed by the Officiating Regional Manager who is not "the Competent Authority" as prescribed under the Bank of India Officers Employees (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976, framed under section 19 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the "Regulations" and the "Act" respectively).
In support of the above contention the learned counsel invited attention of this Court to the definitions of "Competent Authority" and "Disciplinary Authority" under Regulation 3(f) and (g) respectively.
The "Competent Authority" has been defined to mean the authority appointed by the Board for the purposes of the Regulations.
The "Disciplinary Authority" has been defined to be the authority specified in the Scheduled to the Regulations which is competent to impose on an officer employee any of the penalties specified in the Regulations.
A distinction is sought to be pointed out that "Disciplinary Authority" is different from "Competent Authority" and the order of suspension can be passed only by the Competent Authority as provided in Regulation 12(1) of the Regulations.
The learned counsel has elucidated his above contention on the competence of officiating Regional Manager to pass the order of suspension by referring to the Schedule to the Regulations which was brought into force with effect from 171982.
In Col. 3 of the said Schedule, for Officers in Scale I, working at the Branches, the 'Disciplinary Authority' and the 'Competent Authority' under Regulations 3(g) and 3(f) and 12 has been shown as 'Regional Manager incharge of the concerned Region'.
It is then pointed out that the above Schedule was superseded by the Branch Circular No. 81/273, dated 7th October, 1987 (marked as Annexure P/25 with the main petition) and in the proper column of the Schedule for Officers in Scale I, the 'Competent Authority' and 'Disciplinary Authority' has now been described as only 'Regional Manager' instead of 'Regional Manager in-charge of the concerned Region.
The argument built by reading the above two circulars is that the Officiating Regional Manager was not the Competent Authority and could not have passed the impugned orders of suspension.
In place of the above Circular, reliance is placed on a document at page 50 of the Paper Book which shows that for all Officers Employees, the Competent Authority prescribed is General Manager or any other Executive appointed by the Board.
It is contended that it is only the Regional Manager or any other Executive appointed by the Board which alone could have placed the appellant under suspension.
The order of the learned Single Judge is criticized by submitting that the circulars above-mentioned have been misinterpreted and the learned Single Judge has placed reliance on the following Note below the Circular dated 7.10.1986 (at p. 63 of the Paper Book).
The relevant Note reads as under.
"Where any Disciplinary or Appellate Authorities as mentioned above is not in position to function then appropriate Reviewing Authority of a concerned officer, may nominate appropriate officers in the same scale to function as such Disciplinary or Appellate Authority."
It is argued that the above-mentioned Note also stood repealed.
We find no merit in the contention advanced on behalf of the appellant on the question of competence of Officiating Regional Manager to place him under suspension.
In both the circulars, at the appropriate column, one common authority has been prescribed to act as Disciplinary Authority and Competent Authority for the purposes of the Regulation.
That is clear from the heading of the Form in the Schedule.
It is true that in one circular, the power conferred is on the Regional Manager in-Charge and in the other circular, it is the Regional Manager.
In our opinion, the Officiating Regional Manger for all practical purposes is the Regional Manager and the schedule has to be reasonably construed to hold that the Officiating Regional Manager who exercises all powers of the Regional Manager during the period of his incumbency is deemed to be authorised to act as the Competent Authority.
The contention advanced that the Officiating Regional Manager could not pass the order of suspension is, therefore, rejected."
7.
In the light of the above, there can be no dispute with regard to the proposition that the disciplinary authority of the petitioner is Assistant General Manager.
The only challenge which is being made is that a person who is holding the officiating charge is not competent to initiate disciplinary proceedings.
8.
I have examined this aspect of the matter.
There is apparent fallacy in the argument so raised.
It has been indicated in the note itself that power is to be exercised by the next higher authority only in those cases where there is no officiating or acting arrangement.
It be seen that the Officer who issued the charge-sheet was member of Scale V There was an officiating arrangement.
Accordingly, it cannot be said that the officiating Assistant General Manager was not competent to issue the charge-sheet.
This petition is as such without merit and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.