Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner impugns the order dated July 3, 1992 vide which he was retired from service with effect from July 31, 1992.
He prays that this order be quashed and he be declared to be in continuous service with all consequential benefits.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled as constable on December 6, 1971.
On October 1, 1989 he was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on ad hoc basis.
On March 13, 1992, he was promoted on officiating basis.
The petitioner says that he has a consistently good record of service.
He was awarded 109 'good entries and cash awards' amounting to 10,130/-.
On June 1, 1992 the petitioner made a request to the respondents to permit him to retire voluntarily with effect from August 1, 1992.
A copy of the letter sent by the petitioner is attached as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
On July 19, 1992, the petitioner withdrew his request.
In spite of this, the respondents passed the impugned order and retired him with effect from July 31, 1992.
The petitioner challenges this order on the ground that he having withdrawn his request, the action of the respondents in retiring him from service is wholly illegal.
He also submits that the respondents had no jurisdiction to retire him from service even a day prior to the date actually stipulated by him.
Consequently the petitioner prays that this order be quashed.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the petitioner's claim has been disputed on the ground that all retiral benefits having been sanctioned on the petitioner's own request, he is now estopped from challenging the order of retirement.
It has been further submitted that an employee cannot unilaterally withdraw his request for voluntary retirement.
He can do so only with the approval of the appropriate authority.
Since the appropriate authority did not grant any approval, the action in retiring him is legal and valid.
4.
Shri Ram Kumar Malik, Advocate, on instructions from the petitioner, who is present in court, states that if the order of retirement is set aside and petitioner is ordered to be reinstated, he would not claim anything beyond 50 per cent of the wages for the period from August 1, 1992 to the date of his reinstatement.
On merits the learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner having withdrawn his request, the respondents could not have ordered his voluntary retirement.
He further submits that under the rule the respondents do not have an absolute power to decline the request for withdrawal of the offer made by the employee.
They could do so only for a good reason.
No reason having been assigned in the present case, the action of the respondents in retiring the petitioner with effect from July 31, 1992, cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner made a request for his retirement with effect from 181992.
On 1971992 he had addressed a communication by which he had withdrawn his request.
There was thus nothing before the respondents on the basis of which they could order his retirement.
The request made by the petitioner on June 1, 1992 was inchoate till August 1, 1992.
He having withdrawn it before that date, the action of the respondents in proceeding to retire him cannot be sustained.
It is undoubtedly true that an employee can withdraw his request only with the approval of the competent authority.
The competent authority under rules has not got any absolute authority to decline approval.
It can do so only for legitimate reasons.
In the present case no reason whatsoever has been disclosed in the written statement.
It has not been shown as to why the petitioner's request for withdrawal was not accepted.
The rule in this behalf was enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Balram Gupta v. Union of India and another, A.I.R. 1987 SC 2354.
Their Lordships had inter alia observed that "the approving authority who has the statutory authority must act reasonably and rationally."
It was further held as under :-  "The counter-affidavit filed in this proceeding by Shri Majgaonkar, who is the respondent No. 2 in the appeal reveals very little as to why the sanction was withheld.
It is stated in paragraph 5 of the said affidavit that it was not in the knowledge of the respondent as to what prompted the appellant to request the withdrawal.
What is important in this connection to be borne in mind is not what prompted that desire for withdrawal but, what is important is what prompted the government from withholding the withdrawal.
In this respect the government affidavit certainly lacks candour.
Similar is the situation in the present case.
No reason having been disclosed the action of the respondents in not according its approval cannot be sustained."
6.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
Order of premature retirement is set aside.
As a result, the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service so far as the benefits of seniority and confirmation etc. are concerned.
However, in view of the categorical statement made by the learned counsel for the petitioner, he would be entitled to only 50 per cent of the back wages that may have accrued during this interregnum.
The respondents shall determine the amount of arrears to be paid to the petitioner.
If something more is required to be deposited by the petitioner, out of the payments already made, he shall do so within one month from the date of the issue of the order by the respondents.
The respondents shall reinstate the petitioner within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.