Ashok Bhan and NK Sodhi, JJ.
- Petitioner, who was ordered to be compulsorily retired by the respondents on 3041991, has filed this writ petition for fixing his pension, gratuity and release of retiral benefits with some ancillary prayers for other minor reliefs, reference to which would be made in the subsequent part of this judgment.
2.
Shortly, stated the facts are :-  Petitioner joined the respondents in the Excise and Taxation Department on 2221955.
While the petitioner was posted as Taxation Inspector with the respondents, he was ordered to be placed under suspension on 31101988 due to certain acts of omission and commission.
Petitioner was reinstated in service with effect from 3151989 without prejudice to any departmental inquiry that could be held against him.
Thereafter, a charge sheet was issued to the petitioner on 1491989 to which the petitioner submitted his reply on 5101989.
After submission of the reply by the petitioner, respondents did not choose to proceed further and take any action.
Petitioner filed representations with the respondents that since the proposed departmental action against him had virtually been abandoned, he was entitled to the grant of all the benefits of arrears of salary etc., which had been denied to him on account of the pending proposed departmental action.
No action was taken on any of the representations filed by the petitioner.
3.
Meanwhile, an order dated 15111990 was conveyed to the petitioner on 3111991 compulsorily retiring him from the Government service on completion of three months from the date of receipt of the notice, which would come to 3041991.
Copy of the same has been attached as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
Petitioner did not challenge the order, Annexure P-3, compulsorily retiring him from service and accepted the same.
Petitioner, however, filed a representation with respondent No. 3 to release to him the arrears of salary and for release of post retiral benefits due to him, which had not been released to him.
Aggrieved against the inaction of the respondents, the present writ petition has been filed.
4.
Petitioner has claimed several pre and post retiral benefits, which have been summed up in the petition and which are as follows :-  "(a) He has been denied full salary for the period 1111989 to 3151989 vide Annexure P-16 dated 2361994 in gross violation of the Civil Service Rules and the settled principles of natural justice.
(b) He has not been paid gratuity till date and the same has been withheld without plausible reasons and without even issuing any order withholding the gratuity.
(c) The pension of the petitioner has wrongly been fixed as in the first instance against Rs. 2,540/-, only Rs. 2,300/- has been taken as a basic pay for the purpose of determination of pension.
Secondly, his qualifying service has not been taken more than 33 years, the actual service put in by him, rather the same has been taken for about 31 years only.
(d) For reasons best known to the respondents, the petitioner has unjustifiably been denied the benefits of commutation of pension.
(e) The petitioner has also not been released the General Insurance benefits which accrued automatically to a Govt. servant on retirement and the same has not been released to him till date.
(f) Payment of market/penal interest on the delayed payment of CPF amount.
(g) Lastly, the petitioner is claiming market and penal interest on all the delayed payments indicated above."
5.
In response to the notice of motion issued to the respondents, written statement has been filed.
Replication to the written statement filed by the respondents has also been given by the petitioner.
6.
In the written statement filed, respondents made an effort to defend their action.
A lengthy explanation has been given for not releasing certain benefits to the petitioner.
7.
Today in Court, respondents have placed on record a copy of the chart showing that certain retiral benefits have been released to the petitioner, which are as follows :-  PENSION :  A sum of Rs. 69,810-00 due from 151991 to 2831994 was paid to the petitioner on 2831994.
The delay in releasing the pension has been explained due to the disciplinary action pending against the petitioner.
No disciplinary action was taken against the petitioner till his retirement and none has been taken till date although the petitioner retired nearly 4-1/2 years back.
LEAVE SALARY AND UN-UTILIZED LEAVE :  A sum of Rs. 27,784-00 and Rs. 32,528-00 was released on 2361993 and 15.6.1993, respectively.
Regarding leave salary, it has been stated that the official was on leave from 2671990 to 3041991 on unauthorised leave.
The payment was released to the petitioner on 2361993 after his leave case was decided by the concerned authority on 931993.
On this account, it has been explained that there was no undue delay in releasing the amount due in lieu of the leave salary.
GENERAL PROVIDENT FUND :  A sum of Rs. 28,000-00 towards General Provident Fund was released to the petitioner on 451993.
No explanation has been rendered for late release of the amount of the General Provident Fund.
GROUP INSURANCE SCHEME :  A sum of Rs. 11,4500-00 due towards the Group Insurance Scheme was released to the petitioner in July 1995.
GRATUITY :  Out of a sum of Rs. 37,950-00 due towards gratuity, only a sum of Rs. 12,430-00 was released in July 1995.
A sum of Rs. 24,520-00 for recovery of an alleged embezzlement of the equal amount by the petitioner and a sum of Rs. 1,000-00 towards penalty which had been imposed upon the petitioner in a disciplinary action case, was withheld.
8.
Counsel appearing for the respondents fairly conceded that no disciplinary proceedings were pending against the petitioner on the date he was compulsorily retired; that no disciplinary action has been taken against the petitioner so far and that the sum of Rs. 24,520-00 due towards the balance amount of gratuity shall be released to the petitioner within one month from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
We, accordingly, order that a sum of Rs. 24,520-00 be released to the petitioner within one month from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
9.
COMMUTED PENSION :  The case of the petitioner for commutation of pension had been rejected by the Goverment on the ground that the petitioner did not make the application for commutation of pension within six months of his retirement, as required under the rules.
10.
With the replication filed by the petitioner, Annexure P-17, which is an application filed by the petitioner asking for commutation of pension, release of gratuity, General Provident Fund, benefits of Group Insurance Scheme and salary for unutilized leave of 8 months, had been filed.
Prayer was also made for supply of necessary proformas which were required to be filled in by the petitioner for commutation of pension and for release of all the retiral benefits.
11.
Counsel for the parties are agreed that the petitioner could apply for commutation of pension only after the proformas were supplied by the authorities concerned.
Application, Annexure P-17, was filed by the petitioner on 421991 i.e. prior to his retirement.
Necessary proformas were supplied to the petitioner on 471992 and the petitioner was directed to fill in all the proformas and send the same immediately along with certain other papers.
Petitioner filled in the proformas and sent the same to the authorities concerned on 891992.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner could not be denied the right to get his pension commuted on the ground that he did not submit the application within six months as the proformas for making the application had not been supplied to him in spite of his request to do so.
12.
We find substance in this submission of the counsel for the petitioner.
Petitioner had written letter, Annexure P-17, to the concerned authorities on 421991 i.e. prior to his retirement, requesting them to supply to him the necessary proformas to enable him to get his retiral benefits processed.
Due to the fault of the respondents, the same were not supplied to the petitioner till the end of June 1992.
Necessary proformas were sent to the petitioner vide letter dated 471992, Annexure P-18/T Petitioner filled in the same within two months and submitted the application along with duly filled in proformas, for commutation of his pension and for release of other benefits.
Failure on the part of the petitioner to apply within six months of his retirement for commutation of pension, under the circumstances, cannot be attributed to any fault of his.
After the supply of the proformas, petitioner filed the application along with duly filled in proformas within two months.
Under the circumstances, the petitioner could not be denied his right to get the pension commuted.
Accordingly, it is held that denial of commutation of pension to the petitioner is bad in law.
A direction is issued to the respondents to process the case of the petitioner for commutation of pension and finalise the same within four months from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
If any excess amount has been released to the petitioner while releasing his full pension and any recovery is to be effected because of commutation of pension, then, the same be adjusted from the amount which becomes payable to the petitioner because of commutation of pension.
13.
ARREARS OF SALARY :  Next prayer made by the petitioner is for release of arrears of salary.
It has been alleged by the petitioner that his crossing of efficiency bar was wrongly withheld.
We find no substance in this submission.
Petitioner was not allowed to cross his efficiency bar in the year 1988.
On 30.7.1990, Government took a decision to withhold the crossing of efficiency bar to the petitioner.
A copy of this letter was endorsed to the petitioner, which is presumed to have been received by the petitioner although, the petitioner in the petition has stated that he did not receive the same.
This writ petition has been filed after four years of the communication of the decision by the Government to withhold the crossing of efficiency bar to the petitioner.
On this account, and with regard to the relief of arrears of salary, the petition is dismissed due to laches.
14.
RE-FIXATION OF PENSION :  Relief regarding re-fixation of pension cannot be granted to the petitioner as we have declined to him the relief of crossing the efficiency bar.
15.
ARREARS OF SALARY DURING SUSPENSION :  Petitioner was placed under suspension on 31101988.
He was reinstated on 3151989 without prejudice to the inquiry pending against him.
No departmental inquiry was held.
According to the provisions of Rule 7.3(2) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I, a Government servant is entitled to full pay and allowances for the period of suspension, only if he is fully exonerated of the charge.
Taking the view that the petitioner had not been fully exonerated because a penalty of Rs. 1,000/- had been imposed, which was deducted from his gratuity vide order dated 931993, the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana, vide his order dated 2361994, Annexure P-16, held that the petitioner would not be entitled to be paid more than the subsistence allowance he had already got during the period of his suspension.
The period of suspension was, however, ordered to be treated as a period spent on duty for all other intents and purposes.
16.
Admittedly, order Annexure P-16, was passed without giving any opportunity to show cause.
Counsel for the petitioner relied upon a decision of this Court in Hem Raj Goel v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(4) SLR 258 : 1992(3) S.C.T.
295 : 1992(3) S.C.T.
648, and argued that denial of full salary for the period of suspension without giving an opportunity of hearing was violative of the principles of natural justice.
18.
We find substance in this submission of the counsel for the petitioner.
Admittedly, order, Annexure P-16, denying the petitioner full salary for the period of suspension has been passed without giving any opportunity to show cause, which is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Order, Annexure P-16, under the circumstances, cannot be sustained as this order has been passed without affording any opportunity to the petitioner.
Order, Annexure P-16, is, accordingly, quashed.
However, we leave it open to the respondents to pass a fresh order regarding payment of salary for the period of suspension after affording an opportunity to the petitioner, within four months of the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
If the respondents fail to pass any order within four months, then the respondents shall be liable to release the arrears of salary for the period of suspension, within one month after expiry of the period of four months.
18.
INTEREST ON DELAYED PAYMENT :  In the end, counsel for the petitioner pressed for interest on delayed payment of various amounts from the date the amounts became due till their realisation.
19.
We find substance in the submission made by the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is entitled to interest on delayed payment of the retiral benefits.
Since in the present case, arrears of retiral benefits have been paid on different dates, in order to avoid any further complication regarding calculation of the amount of interest, we determine the amount of interest to be Rs. 20,000-00 in lump sum, for delayed payment of any/all of the retiral benefits.
This amount of Rs. 20,000-00 be released to the petitioner within one month from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
This writ petition is partly allowed in terms of the directions given against each of the item of the retiral benefits with no order as to costs.