Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who retired as the Principal of a Government Senior Secondary School in June 1990, was aggrieved by certain orders passed by the respondents.
He represented.
The representations were not decided.
He, consequently, approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and decide the representations by passing a speaking order in accordance with law.
The writ petition was admitted.
Simultaneously, the Motion Bench gave a direction to the respondents to "pass appropriate orders on the representations filed by the petitioner with regard to the reliefs claimed and submit an additional affidavit in this court in that respect."
In pursuance to the directions of the Motion Bench, the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, passed an order dated December 8, 1994.
A copy of the order was produced on the record.
The reliefs claimed by the petitioner were declined.
Vide order dated July 21, 1995, the petitioner was permitted to file an affidavit challenging this order.
The respondents were permitted to file a reply.
The affidavits have been filed.
2.
The petitioner has made a grievance in respect of the following four claims :-  (i) Leave encashment for a period of seven days for the work done by the petitioner during vacation from May 26, 1967 to June 15, 1967; (ii) The refund of the excess amount of honorarium paid to him; (iii) The refund of security of Rs. 12,000/-; and  (iv) The benefit of one additional increment with effect from July 20, 1981 in lieu of the sterilization operation undergone by the petitioner.
3.
While the petitioner claims that the benefits have been wrongly denied to him, the respondents urge that the benefits are not admissible.
What is the correct position ?
Each one of the claims can be separately considered.
Reg : (i and ii) :  4.
The petitioner had worked as a resource person in the refresher course organised at the Government Senior Secondary School, Karnal from May 26, 1967 to June 15, 1967.
The petitioner claims that since he had worked during the period of vacation, he was entitled to the grant of leave to the extent of seven days regarding this period.
However, while examining his claim for leave encashment, the benefit of seven days' leave was not given to the petitioner.
He prays that the respondents be directed to make this payment to him.
He further submits that an honorarium of Rs. 910/- was granted to him in lieu of the extra work done by him.
He submits that the recovery made by the Department on July 1, 1990 was wholly unauthorised.
5.
In accordance with the provisions of Rule 8117 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I, "earned leave is not admissible to a Government employee serving in a vacation department in respect of duty performed in any year in which he avails himself of the full vacation".
However, when he is "prevented from availing himself of the full vacation", the earned leave at the prescribed rate is admissible.
6.
The Education Department is admittedly a vacation department.
An employee is entitled to claim earned leave when he is prevented from availing himself of the full vacation.
In the present case, it has not been averred that the petitioner had been prevented from availing of the full vacation.
In fact, it is the admitted position that he had worked only for three weeks from May 26 to June 15, 1967.
The benefit of leave encashment in this behalf has been given to the petitioner.
It has been averred in the order dated December 8, 1994 that the "applicant was given benefit of leave encashment for the period he worked during vacation period....".
In this situation, it cannot be said that any more benefit was admissible to the petitioner.
Accordingly, the claim for leave encashment for seven days in addition to what has already been given to the petitioner, cannot be sustained.
7.
This does not, however, mean that the respondents were entitled to order the withdrawal of the honorarium paid to him.
Rule 5.55 permits a Government employee to receive an honorarium as remuneration for the duties performed by him.
On examination of the facts, the competent authority had granted the honorarium to him.
The payment was made.
Nothing has been brought on record to show as to why it was ordered to be recovered.
The only reason mentioned by the respondents is that the applicant was given the benefit of leave encashment for the period he worked during vacation period.
Assuming it to be so, the respondents had no jurisdiction to review the order passed by the competent authority at the relevant time.
Even otherwise, it has not been shown that the petitioner was given any opportunity to show cause before the order of review was passed.
The mere fact that the benefit of leave encashment had been granted, did not ipso facto mean that the honorarium had to be recovered.
The action of the respondents in ordering the recovery of the honorarium was wholly illegal and violative of the principles of natural justice.
It cannot, consequently, be sustained.
Reg : (iii) :  8.
The petitioner claims that the respondents have illegally rejected his request for the refund of security of Rs. 12,000/- furnished by him on the ground that he had illegally made an excess payment of Rs. 11,159/-.
In this behalf, it deserves mention that vide order dated July 4, 1989, the petitioner was directed to release payment to the squad teachers.
He had complied with the directions.
It is now alleged by the respondent that he had made excess payment.
The petitioner disputes this.
9.
Admittedly, the respondents had decided to withhold the security without affording any opportunity to the petitioner.
If such an opportunity had been granted, the petitioner could have shown that no excess payment had been made.
Even now, he has furnished details to show that, in fact, no excess payment had been made.
Indisputably, an order of recovery has civil consequences.
The order had to be passed after complying with the principles of natural justice.
The respondents have virtually imposed a penalty on the petitioner without giving him any opportunity whatsoever.
Their action in doing so cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the petitioner's claim for the refund of the security is well-merited.
The action of the respondents cannot be sustained.
Reg : (iv) :  10.
The petitioner had admittedly undergone the sterilization operation on September 23, 1976.
According to the respondents, the benefit had been given to the employees who had undergone operation prior to July 20, 1981.
Even though the date has no reasonable nexus with the object of providing incentive to those who undergo the sterilization operation, yet the petitioner fulfilled even this pre-condition.
Consequently, he was entitled to the grant of an increment in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government.
The mere fact that he had retired in the year 1990, does not mean that his claim stood defeated.
The department delayed the release of the benefit.
It cannot take advantage of its own wrong.
11.
In view of the above, it is held that the grievance made by the petitioner in respect of the withdrawal of the honorarium, the refund of the security and the release of the increment, is well merited.
His claim is, consequently, upheld.
The respondents are directed to release the dues of the petitioner within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
He will also be entitled to the payment of these amounts with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual till the date of release.
12.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
The petitioner shall be paid his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.