Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner was recommended by the State Employment Exchange and was selected by the Department Selection Committee as Lecturer vide order dated 19.8.1994, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The petitioner was to be posted at Government Senior Secondary School, Jalbehra (Ambala).
She was to submit medical fitness certificate.
She appeared before the Chief Medical Officer for medical examination but she was declared temporarily unfit due to her pregnancy.
She submitted a representation to the Education Minister, Haryana for grant of extension to join duties.
The Education Minister, Haryana had granted extension to the petitioner.
She was informed by respondent No. 2 that she will be appointed on submitting medical fitness certificate.
Subsequently, she was declared medically fit and was granted medical fitness certificate.
She submitted medical fitness certificate but to petitioner's great dismay, she was not allowed to join duties.
She was left with no other alternative but to file present writ petition seeking direction to the respondents to allow her to join duties.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the vacancy is still existing and the action of the respondents in not allowing her to join duties is unjust, unfair and arbitrary and is liable to be quashed.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued, the State has put in appearance and filed written statement as also additional affidavit in which it has been stated that post of Lecturer Physics is still vacant in Government Senior Secondary School, Jalbehra (Ambala) but there is no work load in the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Commerce and as such the petitioner cannot be permitted to join duties.
4.
We have learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
5.
From the perusal of paper book, it is observed that the petitioner was to assume charge upto 15.9.1994, failing which the offer was liable to be cancelled.
The petitioner could not assume charge as she was in family way and was declared temporarily unfit.
The petitioner was allowed time to join her duties by the Education Minister, Haryana and subsequently she was granted medical fitness certificate but she was not allowed to join duties on the ground that since there is no work load in the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Biology and Commerce, she cannot be permitted to join duties.
6.
We find no merit in the stand taken by the respondents.
Had the petitioner joined duties on or before 15.9.1994, her services could not have been terminated even if there would have been no work load.
This Court in Dr. Subedar Singh Arya v. The State of Haryana and others (Civil Writ Petition No. 3037 of 1994) decided on 1251994, had held that the services of the Lecturers are not to be terminated till the recommendees of the Haryana Public Service Commission join.
This Court has been informed that the regular incumbent recommended by the Commissioner has not joined and the post is still lying vacant.
7.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to join duties henceforth.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.