RP Sethi, J - The petitioners who are working as Lecturers and Librarians in G.G.S.
Khalsa College, Sarhali, District Amritsar have prayed for issuance of appropriate direction to the respondents to pay them rural area allowance in terms of the instructions and policy decision of the State Government at the rates at which the employees of Government Colleges are being paid.
It is submitted that respondent No. 3 is getting 95 per cent grants in aid to meet the deficit on account of pay and allowances to the teachers and allied staff.
The Punjab Government issued a letter dated 1911994 directing the payment of house rent to the employees of the recognised and affiliated privately managed colleges in the State of Punjab at the rates admissible to the Punjab Govt. employees.
On the basis of the recommendation of the 3rd Punjab Pay Commission, the Government sanctioned rural area allowance to the employees posted in the rural areas at the rates ranging from Rs. 50/- to Rs. 250/- per month depending upon the pay range in the revised pay scales vide its letter dated 3081988.
The petitioners submit that respondents cannot discriminate and are liable to pay the house rent to them also as is being paid to the government employees.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it is submitted that as the government is paying grant in aid upto 95 per cent to respondent No. 3, they are not obliged to pay the allowances claimed by the petitioners.
The rural area allowance if required to be paid is stated to be the liability of respondent No. 3.
The other averments made in the petition have not specifically been denied.
3.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh and others v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1663; The Kurukshetra Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Kurukshetra v. Addl.
Registrar (Stores), Co-operative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh, 1992(3) SCT 632 (P&H) : (1992)2 R.S.J.
618, and Radha Krishan etc. v. State of Haryana etc., Civil Writ Petition No 1865 of 1991 decided on 1551992 and C.W.P.
No. 12866 of 1991 decided on 421992 by this court, to submit that similarly situated persons as the petitioners have already been granted the relief and the respondents are not justified in refusing the grant the relief to the petitioners now on the pleas raised in the written statement.
4.
In Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh's case (supra) it was held by the Supreme Court that :  "...the approved expenditure extends to the salaries paid to the teaching and non-teaching staff, which includes the Pay and Dearness Allowance and Interim Relief before 1 April, 1981 and the Pay and Additional Dearness Allowance beyond April 1, 1981, the deficit expenditure minus income and certain other items, but does not including House Rent Allowance, Medical Allowance, City Compensatory Allowance and the other heads claimed by the petitioners.
In our opinion, the teachers of aided schools must be paid the same pay scale and Dearness Allowance as teachers in Government Schools for the entire period claimed by the petitioners and that the expenditure on that account should be apportioned between the State and the Management in the same proportion in which they share the burden of the existing emoluments of the teachers......" 5.
In Prem Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No 10596 of 1989 decided on 20.2.1990, a prayer was made to direct the respondents to pay the petitioners house rent allowance on account of their postings and residence within ten miles from International Border at the rate 12-1/2% of the basic pay as it admissible to their counterparts working in Government Schools in view of the government decision.
This petition was allowed with a direction to the respondent-State to pay the house rent allowance to the petitioners who are posted in the city/town/villages falling within 10 miles belt of the International Border in the districts of Ferozepur, Gurdaspur and Amritsar.
6.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in this case have alleged that they are not liable to pay to the petitioners rural area allowance as claimed which is stated to be the liability of respondent No. 3.
Once the state has opted to hold respondent No. 3 entitled to the payment of grant-in-aid, they cannot deny their liability to compensate the petitioners to the extent of their liability regarding emoluments which are being paid to the government employees.
The mere fact that the petitioners are employed in privately managed institutions cannot be made the basis for denial of the relief as claimed in this writ petition.
From Annexure P/3 it is established that upon the recommendation of the 3rd Punjab Pay Commission the employees of respondent No. 1 have been sanctioned rural area allowance at the rates specified therein which have been determined according to the scale of pay of such employees.
Such allowance is admissible only to those employees who are posted in rural area, that is, in villages and not in the cities/towns or Notified Area Committees and they have their place of residence at the place of posting or at any other place in the rural area as permitted by the controlling officers.
7.
After going through the pleadings in this case, various judgments referred to and relied by the learned counsel for the petitioners, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to pay to the petitioners rural area allowance at the same rates as are mentioned in the order, Annexure P/3, from the date it fell due to them according to the said order.
The expenditure on this account shall be apportioned between the State Government and the Management in the same proportion in which they share the burden of the existing emoluments of the teachers.