Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Roshan Kumar Sharma, petitioner has filed this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction, for quashing the order dated 561998, Annexure P-1 to the petition, passed by the respondents.
Vide this order, the respondents denied the benefit of pension to the petitioner for the reason that he does not have requisite qualifying service to his credit, for receiving such benefit.
2.
Under Regulation 79(1)(i) of Navy Pension Regulations, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as Regulation), there is legislative mandate to exclude the service rendered by a person below the age of 17 years from the total service, towards qualifying service for recurring (reckoning ?)
the prescribed qualifying service for grant of pensionary benefits.
This implied prohibition is the very foundation of the case of the respondents pleaded in response to the claim of the petitioner, before this Court.
3.
In order to examine the merit of this controversy, reference to basic facts would be necessary.
The petitioner joined the Indian Navy on 14.12.1959 as a `boy'.
He claims to have taken oath of allegiance on 15.12.1959 and was discharged from service on 28th February, 1975.
According to the petitioner, he has rendered total service of 15 years, 2 months and 13 days, while the prescribed qualifying service for grant of pensionary benefits is 15 years.
Having service in excess of the qualifying service the petitioner has staked his claim for claiming pensionary benefits.
It appears from the record that the petitioner did not press his claim in this regard for quite some time but after the pronouncement of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Anuj Kumar Dey and another v. Union of India and others, 1997(1) RSJ 113 : 1997(1) SCT 412 (SC), he pressed his claim in the year 1996 and after rejection thereof, served a notice upon the respondents through his counsel on 2971997.
Referring to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of 1997(1) RSJ 113, he sent a reminder to the notice, which was obviously not replied to.
Thus, the petitioner was compelled to file the writ petition before this Court being C.W.P.
No. 16494 of 1997, in which a Division Bench of this Court directed the respondents to provide copy of the order of rejection or appropriate order passed by them on the notice of demand served upon them by the petitioner.
Resultantly, Annexure P/5 was served upon the petitioner.
The concluding paragraph of the impugned order, Annexure P/5 reads as under :-  "(c) It is evident, therefore, that the service rendered as a Boy by the ex-sailor prior to his being transferred as Artificer Apprentice trainee does not qualify towards pensionable service (Regulations 79 of Navy Pension Regulations 1964 is relevant).
Further vide the Supreme Court judgment ibid, the ex-sailor does not benefit to earn pension as he has completed only 14 years, 2 months, and 15 days of service prior to his expiry of engagement/release."
4.
The petitioner aggrieved from the said order has filed the present writ petition.
Upon notice, the respondents have filed the reply reiterating their basic stand that under regulation 78, the minimum qualifying service for receipt of pension is 15 years.
The petitioner has completed only 14 years, 24 days service, which is less than the prescribed qualifying service and thus, the petitioner is not entitled to receive the pensionary benefits.
5.
Though the controversy in the present case appears to fall in a narrow compass but still has far reaching consequences.
Can the respondents be permitted to avoid the inevitable consequences which flow from the rendering of service by the petitioner for a period of four years as `boy' when recruited in accordance with the rules.
6.
It is undisputed fact that a `boy' is recruited in the Indian Navy by due process of recruitment and is obviously under the age of 18 years at the time of recruitment.
Rule 261 is the rule which provides source for recruitment to `sailor' in the Indian Navy.
One source is by direct entry, while the other is from amongst the persons, who have entered the service as a `boy' or Artificer Apprentice.
They shall be recruited under the said regulations and as per the terms and conditions, as specified by the Chief of Naval (Staff) and other relevant rules governing the subject.
In other words, service rendered by a person as a `boy' is a concept duly accepted under the rules and regulations and is not a simplicitor contract of a tenure employment.
This concept is elucidated by the rules making authority in regulation 100 of the said regulation.
Under those provisions a `boy' is entitled to get disability pension along with sailor and other persons specified therein.
This further indicates that the `boy' by virtue of his employment attains a status which is equivalent to the regular employee of Navy in certain aspects and matters.
The service so rendered by the petitioner entitled him for some other benefits at par with the regular members of the Naval service.
If the Union of India has made recruitment to the post of `Boy' in violation of Regulations, it can hardly blame any one else except its own self, for the consequences flowing from such error.
It cannot be disputed that the Union of India now cannot act to the prejudice to the petitioner, more particularly when the Union had taken regular service from these ranks with its eyes open and complete knowledge of the rules.
The inevitable conclusion, therefore, is that such employment would create a liability on the part of the Union to grant resultant benefits to the petitioner.
An employer is always at liberty to command his condition of service, but once conditions of service are accepted and the service is rendered as regular service, the employer cannot turn back to say that the employment given by him was contrary to law and the service rendered would be ineffective or void in the eye of law, for grant of benefits.
7.
It has also to be noticed that the service rendered by a person as a `boy' or an Artificer Apprentice is counted for the purpose of computation of 15 years for retiring a person.
Upon no prudent reasoning, thus, the same could be excluded while reckoning the qualifying service for granting the pensionary benefits.
The approach adopted by the Union of India is not only unconscionable but its very basis are opposed to the fundamental rules of law.
Fairness in State action is of paramount consideration in a democratic set up and the State must show proper reasoning in its administrative action.
The State, thus, in any case is in commanding position and it must avoid unfairness in grant of the requisite relief to a person, less (lest ?)
it offends the basic protection available to a citizen under the Constitution of India.
Once employment is made in accordance with the rules and upon process provided, such service must be counted for benefits to the person so appointed when he is given regular appointment.
Providing such benefit of continuity of service is in the interest of employee-employer relationship.
In this regard, reference can be made to the judgment of Full Bench of this Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar Singla v. State of Haryana through Financial Commissioner, Irrigation and Power, Civil Secretariat, Chandigarh and another, 1995(3) P.L.R.
411 : 1995(4) SCT 285 (P&H) (D.B.).
8.
At this stage, it would be relevant to refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Anuj Kumar Dey v. Union of India, 1997(1) RSJ 113 where the Hon'ble Supreme Court after considering the relevant rules at some length repelled the contention of the Union of India that Artificer Apprentices were not entitled to the benefits of the service rendered by them in that capacity prior to age of 18 years.
I consider it more appropriate to refer to the reasoning and conclusion given by the Hon'ble Apex Court in said judgment, which reads as under :-  "15.
All these facts and the various provisions of the Act and the Regulations leave no room for doubt that the appellant even during the period he was working as Artificer Apprentice was in the service of the Navy, was given Good Conduct Badges for this service and four years' service was counted from the year 1971.
The Discharge Certificate which is a statutory document clearly records that he has served in the Indian Navy from 12th August, 1971 to 31st January, 1988.
The respondents after granting all these certificates and badges, cannot be heard to say that the appellant had not put in the qualifying period of service of fifteen years and, therefore, was not entitled to get pension.
16.
Our attention was drawn to a judgment of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of HS Sarkar v. Union of India & Ors., 1994(2) An.
W.R. 221 : 1995(2) SCT 414 (A.P.
), where it was held that "it does not stand to reason that when the training period of four years is reckoned for the purpose of computation of 15 years for retiring a person, the same is not reckoned for the purpose of pension.
Payment of only a consolidated pay during the training period and not regular scale of pay is immaterial in so far as the computation of the period is concerned."
17.
We are of the view that the Division Bench of the High Court was in error in holding that the period of four years when the appellant was employed Artificer Apprentice could not be counted for computation of the qualifying period of pension.
18.
For the reasons stated hereinabove, the appeal is allowed.
The judgment of the High Court dated 17th July, 1991 is set aside.
There will be no order as to costs."
After pronouncement of the judgment by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, a writ was filed in the Bombay High Court by Vilas Mahadev Kulkarni and others for seeking the same benefits.
Before the Bombay High Court, learned Additional Solicitor General, on behalf of the Union of India made a statement that the petitioners would be granted benefits.
The order passed by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1446 of 1999 titled Vilas Mahadev Kulkarni v. The Union of India and others decided on 2112000 reads as under :-  "Dr. Chandrachud, learned Addl.
Solicitor General has placed on record letter dated 1412000 from the Ministry of Defence New Delhi whereby it is recorded that the benefits of counting boy service be extended for processing the cases of 21 petitioners, whose list is attached to the letter for pensionary entitlements in relaxation of the provisions of Regulation 79 of Navy Pension Regulations, 1984 (Statutory).
It is also recorded by the said letter that the amount will be computed by CCDA (P), Allahabad and will be intimated to the Ministry of Defence, Government of India for issue of necessary sanction for release of amount on charged expenditure basis.
The said letter is taken on record.
In view of the aforesaid letter, the grievance made in the above petitions do not survive and the petitions stand disposed of.
Dr. Chandrachud assures the Court that the order will be implemented within a period of three months from today, after the submission of the pension papers by the respective petitioners.
Parties and authorities to act on the ordinary copy of this order duly authenticated by the Court Associate."
9.
Learned counsel appearing for the Union of India submits that the proposal, as noticed in the order of the Division Bench, is under active consideration of the Union of India, where relief to 21 petitioners in that writ petition is about to be finalised.
10.
It is a matter of regret that the Union of India despite the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, which was pronounced as back as in 1997, has still not finalised the scheme in relation to the matters squarely covered by the said judgment.
It is further totally unnecessary that every petitioner must be compelled to come to the Court for the purpose of seeking a relief which otherwise he is entitled to in law and the government is bound to grant him the same in accordance with the rules.
11.
For the reasons aforestated, order dated 561988.
Annexure P/5 is hereby set aside.
The respondents are directed to grant to the petitioner the pensionary benefits in accordance with law and while further directing the respondent to count the service of the petitioner towards the minimum qualifying service for pension which he rendered as a `boy' in the Indian Navy.
12.
With these direction, writ petition stands disposed of.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
13.
Copy of order be given dasti.
Petition allowed.