GS Singhvi, J - This writ petition has been jointly filed by Raj Kumar Verma and 26 others with a prayer that Rule 821 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, be struck down and a direction be issued to the respondents to give benefit of the entire unutilized leave lying at the credit of the petitioners for the purpose of cash payment.
2.
Petitioners have stated that they have either retired from the service or about to retire on attaining the age of superannuation.
Their grievance is that by virtue of Rule 821, the unutilized leave lying in their credit as on the date of superannuation is being treated to have lapsed and in this manner they are being deprived of the benefit of cash payment in lieu of the un- utilized leave.
Further case of the petitioners is that after the amendment of Rule 821, an employee is entitled to a cash payment equivalent to leave salary to a maximum of 240 days and that though this rule has been enacted in order to benefit the employees, in fact it has turned out to be wholly arbitrary.
3.
The respondents have pleaded that the provisions of Rules 821 and 2116 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, are applicable only to the employees of non-vacation departments and as the petitioners are working in the vacation department, they are not entitled to any benefit under the rules.
Describing the Rule 821 as just and proper, the respondents have pleaded that the leave is not admissible to an employee as of right during the period of service and the grant of cash payment in lieu of the unutilized leave is nothing but a concession granted by the Government and, therefore, no right can be claimed by an employee to be granted cash equivalent to the entire unutilized leave.
The respondents have pleaded that grant of limited monetary benefit in lieu of earned leave upto a maximum of 240 days does not suffer from any arbitrariness or irrationality.
4.
We have heard Shri Sadana, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri Randhir Singh, learned Assistant Advocate General.
5.
Rule 8.116 and Rule 821 read as under :-  "Rule 8.116.
(i) The earned leave admissible to a Government employee in permanent employ is :- (a) 1/24th of the period spent on duty, during the first 10 years of his service; (b) 1/18th of the period spent on duty during the next 10 years of his service; and 1/12th of the period spent on duty, thereafter.
(ii) Accumulation of earned leave shall be permissible to any extent but the maximum earned leave that may be granted at a time to a Government employee shall be (a) 120 days if spent in India (b) 240 days if the entire leave so granted or any portion thereof is spent outside India, Burma, Ceylon, Nepal and Pakistan, provided that where earned leave exceeding 120 days is granted under this sub-rule the period of such leave spent in India shall not in the aggregate exceed 120 days.
Provided further that, except as provided in the Study Leave Rules contained in Appendix 20 to the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part- II, if a Government employee goes on a course of study or research or work which in the Government's view increases his competence, knowledge or efficiency or adds to the technical knowledge, he may be granted earned leave to the extent it is due to him and not limited to 120 or 240 days."
Rule 821 "(a) Leave at the credit of a Government employee in his leave account shall lapse on the date of his retirement; Provided that the Government employee retiring on superannuation on or after the 30th day of September, 1977, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (c), be entitled to cash payment in lieu of the unutilised leave due as leave preparatory to retirement as under:- (i) the cash payment shall be equivalent to leave salary limited to a maximum of 180 days' earned leave; (ii) the cash payment shall become payable on retirement on superannuation in lump sum as a one-time settlement; (iii) XXX XXX XXX XXX (iv) XXX XXX XXX XXX (v) XXX XXX XXX XXX (b) XXX XXX XXX XXX (c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub-rule (a) on or after the 11th day of March, 1981, the cash payment for the un- utilized leave preparatory to retirement admissible under the aforesaid sub- rule (a) shall be calculated as under :- Pay admissible on the date of retirement plus dearness allowance admissible on that date Number of days of unutilized earned leave at credit on the date of retirement subject to a maximum of 180 days.
30 (d) XXX XXX XXX XXX + (i) XXX XXX XXX XXX + (ii) XXX XXX XXX XXX" + 6.
A combined reading of the above-quoted provisions makes it abundantly clear that the Government has from time to time liberalised the provisions regarding grant of leave to the retiring employees and as per the amended Rule, the Government has granted the benefit of conversion of earned leave into money but upto a maximum of 240 days.
The object for amending Rule 821 is apparently to provide an incentive to the employees to devote more time during Government service and to compensate those employees who do not avail a particular amount of leave during their service.
Grant of such benefit cannot but be treated as a concession.
It cannot be placed at the pedestal of legal or constitutional right.
Therefore, if the rule-making authority has thought it proper to limit this benefit to the maximum of 240 days, the Rule cannot be termed as arbitrary or irrational.
7.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that cash payment should be given to the retiring employees in respect of the entire unutilized leave has been negatived by the Full Bench of this Court in Surjit Kumar Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1992(3) SCT 485(P&H)(FB) : 1992(2) PLR 428.
Similar view has been expressed by a Division Bench in Gurdev Singh and others v. State of Punjab, 1994(1) SCT 276(P&H)(DB) : (C.W.P.
No. 5087 of 1993) decided on 3131993.
This judgment of the Division Bench has been affirmed by the Supreme Court with the dismissal of S.L.P.
No. 1612 of 1994 vide order dated 131994.
The Division Bench has dealt with the rationality of the rule whereby the benefit of cash payment in lieu of leave has been restricted to the earned leave.
In our opinion, the ratio of the judgment of the Division Bench in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) is fully applicable to the facts of this case.
8.
We are also of the opinion that benefit of Rule 821 has been extended to all employees without any discrimination and, therefore, it cannot be said that the Government has acted in violation of the equality clause enshrined in the Constitution.
That apart, being a concession given to the retired employees, the petitioners cannot claim that the Government must extend this concession in respect of the entire unutilized leave lying in the credit of an employee at the time of his superannuation.
9.
In view of the above conclusions, the writ petition fails and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.