GS Singhvi, J - The only point which requires determination in this writ petition pertains to the grading of the petitioner in the category of the sportsperson for admission in the Punjab Engineering College and Chandigarh College of Architecture, Chandigarh.
2.
Guru Nanak Dev University conducted common entrance test for admission to the Panjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, Chandigarh College of Architecture and the Department of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The petitioner was one of the candidates.
He had applied for grant of benefit of reservation made in favour of sports-person.
The petitioner claimed that he had participated in the National Hand Ball Championship (Junior, held at Kotkapura).
He had also participated in the 8th Junior Chandigarh State Hand Ball Championship held in October, 1993.
The assertion of the petitioner has been supported by Annexures P1 and P2.
The petitioner says that on the basis of his second position in the 16th Junior National Hand Ball Championship and his participation in the 8th Junior Chandigarh State Hand Ball Championship, he has a right to be categorised in Grade B under Para 2245. of the rules framed by the Panjab University which have been published in the form of the "Admission Brochure".
According to the petitioner he fulfils all the conditions enumerated in para 2245., but the respondents have arbitrarily given him Grade-D and have in this manner deprived him of preferential right to be admitted in the Punjab Engineering College.
3.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents who have stated in their reply that the candidature of the petitioner was considered by a Committee in terms of para 2.2.4.9 of the admission rules and after evaluation of the performance of the petitioner the committee granted him Grade-D and as persons having Grade-C were available the petitioner could not have been preferred in the matter of admission.
4.
The only argument advanced by Shri Batra, the learned counsel for the petitioner, is that once different grades have been specified in para 2245 which are to be given on the basis of the performance in the particular sports disciplines, the Committee envisaged in para 2.2.4.9 cannot downgrade the performance of a candidate and, thereby, deprive him of his right to be considered for admission against the seats reserved for sports-person.
The learned counsel argued that the certificates issued in favour of the petitioner by the competent authority should be treated as conclusive and he ought to have been placed in Grade-B for the purpose of determination of his merit.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents argued that para 2245 forms part of the same set of rules on which the petitioner has placed reliance for the purpose of admission and as there is no challenge to the vires of para 2.2.4.9, he is bound by the provisions of rule 2.2.4.9.
The learned counsel argued that in the absence of any allegations of mala fide against the members of the committee grading of the petitioner cannot be termed as arbitrary and irrational.
5.
Paras 2245. and 2.2.4.9 of the rules for Admission reads as under :  "2245.
The sports gradation certificates shall be in the following descending order of merit :  Grade 'A'  Sportsmen/women of International standing i.e. those who have represented India in the following International tournaments/Meets/Competitions/Champions etc.  (a) Olympic Games.
(b) Commonwealth Games.
(c) Asian Games.
(d) Test Match/One day matches in Cricket.
(e) Davis Cup in Tennis.
(f) Word Cup Tournaments in respective games.
Grade 'B'  Sportsmen/Women who have participated or took first three positions in the following tournaments/meets/competitions/championships etc. as the case may be :  (a) World Universities Games.
(b) Asian Federation Cup/Asian Tournaments.
(c) First three positions in recognised National Championship, Inter-State Championships organised by the recognised National Federation/IOA.
(d) Recognised International Meets/Championships for Juniors.
(e) Asian School Games.
(f) A sports-person representing All-India Combined Universities teams in the National Championships.
(g) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the All-India Intervarsity tournaments.
(h) First three positions in the National Championship for Women/National Sports Festival for Women, organised by Sports Authority of India.
(i) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the National Championship for Juniors.
(j) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the National School Games organised by the National School Games Federation.
(k) KVS Team participation in National School Games.
Grade 'C'  (a) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the State/UT Championship/Inter-District Championships in the Senior Section and by virtue of his representing in the All-India National Championships.
(b) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the University/inter-College Tournament and by virtue of his representing in the All-India Inter-University Tournaments.
(c) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the State/UT Champions/Inter-District Championships in Junior Section and by virtue of his representing in the Junior National Championships.
(d) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the State School Games and by virtue of his representing in the National School Games.
(e) A sports-person getting any of the first three positions in the KVS regional tournaments and by virtue of his representing in the Kendriya Vidayala Sangathan Games.
(f) A sports woman getting any of the first three positions in the State/UT Women Festival and by virtue of her representing in the National Women Festival.
Grade 'D'  (a) Participation in the Senior National Championships.
(b) Participation in the recognised Junior National Championships.
(c) Participation in the National School Games.
(d) Participation in the National Women Festival.
2246 to 2.2.4.8 XXX XXX XXX  2.2.4.9.
A committee of at least three persons, constituted by the Home Department, Chandigarh Administration shall screen all applicants under this category through interview and ascertain their competency through a trial on the sports ground and give the necessary grading as mentioned in para 2245 above.
The committee shall be competent to cancel any certificate at any time, if it is found to have been issued on a false/incorrect information or record."
6.
A bare reading of the two paragraphs quoted above shows that the grades are required to be determined on the basis of performance of the candidates in various disciplines of the sports keeping in view their participation in different tournaments and also on the basis of the performance before the committee envisaged in para 2.2.4.9.
I do not find any reason to ignore the grading of the petitioner assigned to him by the committee and, therefore, the petitioner cannot claim that he has been discriminated or has been arbitrarily denied the admission to the Engineering College.
Purpose of evaluation of the performance of the candidates by the process of interview and trial at the sports grounds is to find out as to whether a candidates who has been awarded certificate of participation had in fact participated and is capable of rendering good performance in the particular sport.
A person like the petitioner who was a member of a team may not have physically participated in the sport/game and yet may have been awarded a certificate as a member of the team, It is in order to check the actual performance of the candidates that a fresh evaluation is contemplated by para 2.2.4.9.
7.
The learned counsel for the respondents are right in contending that in the absence of any allegation of mala fide grading of the petitioner does not call for interference by this Court.
8.
In the result it is held that the writ petition is without merit and is liable to be dismissed.
Ordered accordingly.
Stay order passed by this Court on 3rd August, 1994 stands automatically vacated.
It is hoped that the respondents 1 to 3 will now undertake an exercise for giving admission to the eligible candidates at the earliest.
Petition dismissed.