VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioners are seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent No. 2 to recommend the name of the petitioners as lecturers in Physics (College Cadre) H.E.S.
Class-II cadre in Haryana State, and also a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing the selection/appointment of candidates namely respondents 4 to 7.
2.
Haryana Public Service Commission (in short, the Commission) advertised 65 posts of Lecturers (College Cadre) HES Class-II in various subjects including two posts of Lecturers in Physics.
Two posts in Physics were reserved for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates.
The closing date for submission of applications was 1551985.
Petitioners who belong to backward classes having applied against the said posts, were called for interview.
Petitioners were not selected, but respondents 4 to 7 who belong to general category were selected/appointed.
In this petition, the grievance of the petitioners is two-fold.
The first one is that vide letter from the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana dated 30.7.1986, a decision was taken by the Government that if after two advertisements, the candidates belonging to scheduled castes are not available, the posts will be re-advertised for the third time indicating that if candidates belonging to scheduled castes are not available, these posts will be filled up from amongst backward class candidates.
Similarly, if after two advertisements, the candidates belonging to backward class category are not available, the posts will be re-advertised for the third time indicating that if candidates belonging to backward class category are not available, these posts will be filled up from amongst the scheduled caste candidates.
If, however, the candidates belonging to the scheduled caste category as well as backward class category are not available, the posts will be filled up from the candidates belonging to the general category.
The precise grievance is that these instructions have not been followed and the posts reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes cannot be filled from the general category candidates, even if these are re-advertised for the third time, without affording opportunity to the candidates, belonging to the backward classes.
The second grievance is that though two posts were advertised, but instead of recommending the names of two persons against these two posts, four persons have been recommended and appointed.
3.
Respondents No. 1 and 3, 2, 5 and 7 and 6 have filed written statements.
The commission in its written statement has denied the allegations made in the petition and has stated that the instructions in regard to selection have been followed by the Commission.
Both petitioners were duly considered against the posts reserved for scheduled castes belonging to Haryana, and they have not been found suitable, candidates from general category, namely respondents 4 to 7 were recommended for appointment.
In answer to the second grievance, reference has been made to government instructions contained in circular letters No. 2311-IGSI-72/15727 dated 26.5.1972 and No. 5024-IGSI-72/26877 dated 891972 which provide that the Commission can recommend extra names.
Respondents 5 and 7 in their written statement have stated that they were higher in merit in comparison to the petitioners.
Respondent No. 7 had passed her Matric with 571 out of 900 marks and B.Sc.
with 594 out of 950 marks and MSc.
with 694 out of 1000 marks.
Respondent No. 5 passed B.Sc.
with 64% marks and MSc.
previous with 644% marks and MSc.
final with 575% marks.
Apart from that, respondent No. 5 is good speaker, having stood first in district level debate in 1978 and 1979 and second at State level debate in 1978; first in Debate and 2nd in Symposium in Zonal Youth Festival of M.D.U.
Rohtak in December, 1983; first in Debate in Inter Zonal Youth Festival of MDU Rohtak in February, 1984.
Respondent No. 5 also delivered talks on All India Radio, Rohtak, several times.
Respondent No. 6 in his written statement has submitted that he was appointed on ad hoc basis as Lecturer on 791981 and he was continuing on ad hoc basis, when the Government offered him the post of Lecturer on the recommendation of the Commission and he joined as such on 25.2.1988 on regular basis.
He has also submitted that if he had not joined the present post, he would have been regularised when the Government had taken a decision that all ad hoc lecturers who had completed two years' service on 31.12.1990 are entitled to regularisation.
The policy decision in this regard has been annexed as Annexure R-6/1.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the posts advertised for scheduled caste/scheduled tribe categories at best could be filled up from amongst the candidates belonging to backward class, i.e. the class to which petitioners belong, and not from the general category.
He next contended that the Commission could not make selection of more candidates than the advertised number of posts because other eligible candidates are denied the chance of consideration if more candidates are selected than the advertised number which is contrary to the settled law.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the respondents have contended that the petitioners had applied for the posts in question and having not been selected after consideration, have no locus standi to challenge the selection.
They also contended that selection was made after following due procedure and there was no infraction of the instructions as contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that as regards the first grievance of the petitioners, the same is without any merit.
It has come in the written statement of the respondents that the posts were advertised for the third time with the condition that if the candidates belonging to reserved category are not available, others would be considered.
Admittedly, no scheduled caste candidate of Haryana applied against these posts.
According to the advertisement, the other candidates including the petitioners, were called for interview.
Petitioners belonging to backward classes were duly considered for the posts of lecturers in Physics reserved for scheduled caste category.
There were only two backward class candidates, viz. the petitioners, but both were not found suitable for the post and it was thereafter that the candidates belonging to general category were considered and recommended as provided under the instructions.
A plain reading of the instructions reveals that if after two advertisements, the candidates belonging to scheduled castes are not available, the posts will be re- advertised for the third time indicating that if candidates belonging to scheduled castes are not available, these posts will be filled up from amongst the backward class candidates.
Similarly, if after two advertisements, the candidates belonging to backward class category are not available, the posts will be re-advertised for the third time indicating that if candidates belonging to backward class category are not available, these posts will be filled up from amongst the scheduled caste candidates.
If, however, the candidates belonging to the scheduled caste category as well as backward class category are not available, the posts will be filled up from the candidates belonging to the general category.
Admittedly, candidates belonging to scheduled caste category did not respond to the first two advertisements and in this third advertisement, the candidates belonging to backward class and general categories were called for interview and after the candidates from backward class were not found suitable, candidates from general category were taken.
This having been done, no grievance in this regard can be made by the petitioners.
6.
The second grievance of the petitioners is well-merited.
Admittedly, requisition was for two posts of lecturers in Physics and that too were meant for scheduled caste candidates.
The commission instead of recommending the names of two persons against these posts recommended the names of four in the following order :-  1.
Mrs. Deepa  2.
Mohd.
Rafique  3.
Mrs. Neelam Chaudhary; &  4.
Om Parkash Kathuria  It now stands well-settled that the selecting agency cannot select candidates far in excess of the posts available on the date of the advertisement.
A small percentage of candidates or as may be desired by the Government can be kept on the waiting list so that in the event of some candidates not joining the posts or being found unsuitable on verification of their antecedents, the next in order of merit may be made available.
In this context, a reference may be made to decisions in  Bijender Singh etc. v. The State of Haryana etc., 1994(4) SCT 382 (P&H)(FB) : 1994(3) PLR 1, Madan Lal and others v. The State of Jammu and Kashmir and others, 1995(2) SCT 880(SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 291 and Hoshiar Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC) : JT 1993(5) SC 63.
Requisition, in the present case, by the Government was for holding selection by the Commission for filling up two vacancies of lecturers in Physics.
The process of recruitment was initiated by the State through Commission for only two vacancies as is evident from advertisement which was issued for the purpose.
Accordingly, it has to be held that selection of respondents 5 and 6 who in order of merit were put at Sr. Nos. 3 and 4 cannot legally be sustained.
The contention that petitioners have no locus standi to challenge the selection, suffice it to say, this very argument was raised before the Full Bench in Bijender Singh's case (supra) and it was repelled by saying that the right of a candidate to be considered for appointment to a post under the State is not extinguished by a failure on one occasion.
Those who have failed in their first attempt can do better on the second occasion.
If a chance is due to them, it cannot be denied.
7.
Now the question arises as to whether appointment of respondents 5 and 6 deserves to be quashed.
In this regard, learned counsel for respondents 5 and 6 has contended that respondents were selected and appointed as far back as year 1988 and it would be unjust if their appointment is quashed at this stage.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has not disputed that respondents 5 and 6 were among the selected candidates.
Respondent No. 6 namely Om Parkash since September, 1981 was serving as lecturer on ad hoc basis, when he was offered the post of Lecturer on the recommendations of the Commission and he joined as such on 25.2.1988 on regular basis.
The academic record of respondent No. 5 is also very good.
If the selection of both these respondents is quashed, it would not be possible for them to obtain job of lecturer because the age limit prescribed for the post of lecturer is 35 years, whereas both of them have become over-age.
The Haryana Government has also changed the essential qualification prescribed for the post of lecturer on the recommendations of the University Grants Commission (UGC) and now one of the essential qualifications is that a candidate should have passed MPhil.
upto 31121992 and PhD upto 31121993 or who has passed U.G.C./C.S.I.R.
examination.
Respondents who are only MSc.
in Physics, do not possess the qualification which has been changed in the year 1994.
In these circumstances when respondents 5 and 6 are working on the posts in question for the last more than seven years on regular basis and respondent No. 6 has rendered 14 years' service in the Education Department and earned 14 increments and also when it has not been brought out by petitioners that during the said period their work and conduct was not good or any adverse reports were conveyed to them.
I am not inclined to quash their selection/appointment.
In this context, a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Prem Chand, Naib Tehsildar and others.
v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) S.L.R.
556, may be noticed.
In that case, appointment of respondent therein was not found in order and proper, but Division Bench relying upon judgment in Ajit Singh and others v. Services Selection Board, Haryana and others, 1988(1) SLR 352, and in view of totality of the circumstances of that case, did not quash the selection/appointment.
Petitioners here too are not going to gain even if the selection/appointment of respondents 5 and 6 is quashed as during the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner fairly stated that petitioners who were working as lecturers on ad hoc basis have since been regularised.
In view of the discussions made above, this writ petition shall stand dismissed.
No costs.