Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was initially enrolled as a Pleader in the year 1953, was selected and appointed on December 2, 1963.
He was promoted as District Attorney and then appointed as Joint Director (Prosecution and Litigation) in the State of Punjab.
The petitioner retired on attaining the age of 58 years on April 30, 1989.
The petitioner's grievance is that his pension has not been revised in accordance with the provisions of the rules as amended vide notification dated October 4, 1991.
2.
Vide notification dated October 4, 1991, Rule 15 of the Punjab District Attorneys Service Rules, 1960 was amended and it was inter alia provided that the actual period of practice at the Bar not exceeding five years in the case of an incumbent of the post in whose case the minimum period of practice at the Bar has been prescribed five years .... shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits.
The petitioner claims that since he had almost put in 10 years at the Bar before his appointment as Assistant District Attorney, his pension deserves to be revised and fixed afresh with effect from October 4, 1991.
3.
The respondent contests the petitioner's claim on the ground that the benefit of the amended rules is available only to those persons who have retired on or after October 4, 1991.
According to the respondent, all persons who had retired on or before October, 3, 1991 are not entitled to the benefit of the amended provisions.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
They are agreed that a similar question had arisen in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) SCT 340 (P&H) : 1992(2) RSJ 552, wherein, the provisions of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963, as amended vide notification dated February 22, 1992, were considered by this Court.
By amendment it was provided that in the case of a direct recruit to the Service, the actual period of practice at the Bar not exceeding 10 years shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits..." Mr. Narinder Singh, who had retired much prior to the year 1990 had approached this Court with the prayer that his pension should be refixed in view of the amended provision.
His claim was contested by the respondent on the ground that the benefit was admissible only to those who had retired after the amendment of the rules.
This contention was negatived.
It was held that the purpose of rule shall be defeated if the benefit thereunder was restricted only to those who retired after February 22, 1990.
5.
The petitioner's case is squarely covered by the aforesaid decision All retired persons constitute a homogeneous class.
With effect from the date of the amendment of the rules, each one of them had a right to be treated alike.
Differential treatment in the matter of grant of pension merely on the basis of the date of retirement would be clearly discriminatory and there would be no notional basis for treating persons who have retired on October 3, 1991 differently from those who retired on October 4,1991.
6.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
It is held that with effect from October 4, 1991 the petitioner's entitlement for pension has to be redetermined in view of the amended provision.
The respondent shall add the period of five years to his qualifying service and then determine his pension.
Whatever becomes due to the petitioner on this account shall be paid to him within four months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case the arrears are not paid within four months, the petitioner shall be entitled for payment of interest @ 15% per annum till the date of payment.
In the circumstances of the case, they will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.