KK Srivastava, J - This judgment will dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions (Nos. 3425 of 1997 and 3426 of 1997) filed by the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter to be referred as HSEB) against the award dated 681996 (copy Annexure P-1) passed by the Labour Court, Faridabad.
Brief facts relating to the writ petitions may be noticed as under :-  Civil Writ Petition No. 3425 of 1997.
Respondent No. 2 Bhura Lal care of Ajit Kaushik, resident of Kothi No. 499, Sector 16, Faridabad was employed with the petitioner/HSEB.
His service were terminated after conducting domestic enquiry into the charges that he had misbehaved with the senior officers by hurling abuses and causing physical assault.
Respondent No. 2/Bhura Lal challenged the order of termination by raising an industrial dispute, which was referred to respondent No. 1/Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Faridabad.
2.
On the respective pleas of the workman and the Management, the Presiding Officer framed the following issues :  1.
Whether the enquiry was fair and proper ?
2.
As per reference.
3.
Whether the Industrial Tribunal is barred to entertain the present reference on the ground of paras 2, 3 and 6 of the preliminary objections of the written statement ?
4.
Whether the claimant has no cause of action ?
5.
Whether the applicant is estopped by act and conduct for filing of present case ?
The respondent No. 2 examined himself as WW-1 and one witness Sant Ram.
The Management, i.e. HSEB examined five witnesses, i.e. Sh. Kishori Lal Superintendent as MW-1, Sh. BK Singal Superintendent as MW-2, Sh. WC Dua as MW-3, who has been allegedly assaulted and abused by the workman/respondent No. 2, Shri GC Dass as MW-4 and Sh. VR Desmukh as MW-5.
3.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the Management and it was held that a fair and proper enquiry was not held against the workman/respondent No. 2.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the Management and it was held that the Management had failed to prove the charges against the workman.
The termination of the services of the workman was held to be not justified and he was held entitled to reinstatement with the benefit of continuity of service but without back wages.
The remaining issues were decided in favour of the workman/respondent No. 2.
Feeling aggrieved against the award, the Management/HSEB has filed this petition and challenged the legality of the impugned award.
Civil Writ Petition No. 3426 of 1997  4.
The workman/respondent No. 2, Rajender Singh, care of Sh. Ajit Kaushik aforesaid joined as a helper in the Thermal Plant, Faridabad under the petitioner/HSEB on 881981.
He was an active member of the workers union.
The Management was allegedly having an ill-will against him.
On 2371985 a report was lodged with the police against respondent No. 2/Rajender Singh and two others (including respondent No. 2/Bhura Lal of CWP No. 3425/1997) to the effect that they misbehaved with their senior officer, an Assistant Engineer, by hurling abuses and physically assaulting him.
A domestic enquiry was held in which the respondent No. 2/Rajender Singh and two others were found guilty of the charge.
The grievance of the workman/Rajender Singh was that he was denied opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses of the Department and the enquiry was held in his absence, ex parte.
He had been going to the gate of the thermal plant upto 23.8.1985 when he was told that his services were terminated.
Thereafter he served a demand notice dated 4121985 on the Management.
Conciliation proceedings took place but no fruitful result could be arrived at and then a reference was made to adjudicate the question,  "Whether there is justification in the termination of the service of Sh. Rajender and if not to what relief the workman is entitled ?"
Before the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court, Faridabad/respondent No. 1, the Management/HSEB filed the written statement, taking the stand that the workman and his companions had misbehaved and abused a senior officer.
The Management defended the domestic enquiry which, according to them, was held fairly and properly and the workman and his companions were found guilty of the charges, which led to termination of services of the respondent/workman and his two companions.
It was also pointed out that the workman had approached the civil court, where the civil suit was dismissed.
It was further pointed out that the workman and his companions were facing a criminal trial.
5.
The Presiding Officer framed the following issue :-  1.
Whether the domestic enquiry against the claimant was fair and proper ?
2.
As per reference.
3.
Whether the present reference is not maintainable in the present form as alleged ?
4.
Whether the Tribunal is barred to entertain the present reference on the ground as alleged in the written statement ?
5.
Whether the applicant is estopped by act and conduct to file present application ?
The respondent No. 2 examined himself twice as WW-1 and another witness Sh. Moti Lal as WW-2.
The Management, i.e. HSEB examined five witnesses, i.e. Sh. Kishori Lal Superintendent as MW-1, Sh. BK Singal Superintendent as MW-2, Sh. WC Dua as MW-3, who had been allegedly assaulted by the workman/respondent No. 2, Shri GC Dass as MW-4 and Sh. VR Desmukh as MW-5.
6.
Issue No. 1 was decided against the Management and it was held that the Management had failed to prove the charges for which the domestic enquiry was held and even those charges could not be established before the Labour Court.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the Management and it was held that the termination of the services of the workman was not justified.
He was held entitled to reinstatement with benefit of continuity of service but without back wages.
Issues No. 3 to 5 were also decided in favour of the workman.
The award was, thus, passed in favour of the workman, by ordering his re- instatement with benefit of continuity of service but without back wages.
The Management/HSEB aggrieved against the award aforesaid filed this writ petition.
7.
From the narration of facts aforesaid, it is evidently clear that the matter involved in the two writ petitions was same inasmuch as the incident leading to the holding of domestic enquiry by the Management/HSEB was one and the same in which the two workmen i.e. Bhura Lal and Rajender Singh and another person were involved.
The same set of witnesses were examined in the two references before the Labour Court.
The findings of the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court are also identical in both these cases inasmuch as has held that the domestic enquiry conducted against the two workmen was not fair and proper and the evidence led before him did not establish the charge brought against the workmen.
Resultantly, the Labour Court ordered for re- instatement of the workmen with continuity of service but without backwages.
It is in this background that I propose to decide these two writ petitions filed by the Management/HSEB against the workmen, namely, Bhura Lal and Rajender Singh, by this judgment.
8.
I have heard learned counsel for the Management/petitioner, Shri Hemant Kumar and Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned counsel appearing for the workmen in both the writ petitions.
I have also perused the impugned award.
At the time of hearing, Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned counsel for the workmen placed on record attested copies of the statements of the witnesses examined before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court.
9.
Shri Hemant Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner/Management argued that respondent No. 1, i.e. the Presiding Officer has gone against the Management mainly on the finding that the Management failed to produce the inquiry officer, namely Shri CL Chhikara, who conducted the enquiry.
He further contended that such an inference could not legally be drawn against the Management by the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court.
10.
Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned counsel appearing for the workmen, on the other hand, submitted that the learned Presiding Officer was justified in law in drawing an adverse inference against the Management for non-production of the Inquiry Officer.
She also pointed out that there was definite and clear evidence led before the Labour Court to the effect that the workmen in the two cases were denied a fair and proper opportunity of defending themselves at the domestic enquiry.
They were not supplied with the copies of documents, including the report of the Inquiry Officer.
They were not allowed any opportunity of defending themselves and of cross-examining the witnesses of the Management.
She further argued that the Labour Court had after examining the evidence led by the Management as well as the workmen rightly concluded that the charges which were brought out against the workmen in the domestic enquiry were not proved.
She defended the impugned award and stated that the Labour Court had already taken into consideration the fact that the reinstatement was being ordered after a long period of 11 years and there was no sufficient evidence on record to hold that the workmen remained unemployed during this period and as such the back-wages were denied to both the workmen.
11.
So far as the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner about the Presiding Officer, Labour Court drawing a wrong inference from the non- production of the Inquiry Officer, Sh. CL Chhikara is concerned, the Labour Court, while deciding issue No. 1, which was framed about the domestic enquiry against the claimant being fair and proper, mentioned about production of two witnesses of the Management, namely, Sh. Kishori Lal Superintendent (MW-1) and Sh. BK Singhal Superintendent as (MW-2), who stated before him about the domestic enquiry being held properly.
Sh. OP Goswami, the authorised representative of the Management, however, made a statement on 1431991 regarding closing of the evidence of the Management.
Subsequently on 11111991 Sh. Goswami stated before the Labour Court that the Management did not want to produce the inquiry officer Sh. CL Chhikara.
The Labour Court after noticing the statement of the authorised representative about non- production of the enquiry officer, Sh. CL Chhikara, held, inter alia, as under :-  "............. Sh. CL Chhikara was the enquiry officer.
He was not produced.
Hence the management failed to bring on record the best evidence to prove the fairness and the propriety of the enquiry.
The allegations levelled by the workman are that he was not given the opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses and to produce own evidence in defence.
There are certain other allegations also which again had to be refuted and denied by the enquiry officer himself and the management has failed to do that much.
Even the workman has been deprived of his right of cross-examination over this material witness to substantiate this allegation.
In the circumstances the management has failed to establish that a fair and proper enquiry was held.
This issue is decided against the management."
Sh. Hemant Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner/Management has submitted that the Labour Court has drawn wrong inference from the non-production of the inquiry officer.
He further submitted that it is a settled law that in the domestic enquiries the strict rules of evidence do not apply.
To support his contention.
Mr. Hemant Kumar placed reliance on the decision of this Court in The Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, Sector 17, Chandigarh v. The Presiding Officer Labour Court, Patiala and another, 1995(2) SLR 505 : 1995(2) SCT 741 (P&H), wherein the domestic enquiry into the misconduct of the workman was conducted and the services of the workman were terminated after holding of departmental enquiry.
During the departmental enquiry the statement of an ex-employee filed by the Management was tendered in evidence and the same was taken into consideration by the Inquiry Officer without subjecting the employee to cross-examination.
The learned Single Judge held that the departmental enquiry was not vitiated and referring to the applicability of the strict rules of evidence, he observed in para 2, inter alia, as under :-  "It is by now well settled that in a domestic enquiry strict rules of evidence do not apply and all materials which are logically probative are permissible.
Even hearsay evidence can be taken note of provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility though the departmental authorities and Tribunals have to be careful in evaluating such evidence.
A domestic tribunal whose procedure is not regulated by a statute is free to adopt a procedure of its own so long as it conforms to the principles of natural justice.
They can unlike courts obtain all information and material for the points under enquiry from all sources without being hampered by rules of procedure which govern Court proceedings.
The only requirement is that whatever material they collect cannot be used by them unless it is put to the party against whom it is to be used.........." The aforesaid observation of the learned Single Judge itself goes to show that the material produced in the enquiry may be considered by the Inquiry Officer by not strictly following the rules of evidence provided the principles of justice are adhered to.
The Presiding Officer of the Labour Court took into consideration the plea of the workmen that no reasonable opportunity of hearing was offered to them in the domestic enquiry and they were not allowed an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the Management and even an opportunity to produce their own evidence in defence.
The Labour Court also found that there were certain other allegations also which had to be refuted and denied by the Inquiry Officer himself.
The question before the Labour Court, thus, was whether the domestic enquiry was conducted fairly and properly, after following the principles of natural justice and by giving proper opportunity to the workmen of cross-examining the witnesses examined in support of the charge and to produce their own evidence.
Since there was allegation on behalf of the workmen that they were denied such an opportunity and the enquiry conducted against them was not fair and proper, the non- production of the Inquiry Officer assumed significance and under those circumstances, the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court drew an adverse inference against the Management that the domestic enquiry conducted was not fair and proper.
The ratio of the decision in the case of Punjab State Co- operative Supply and Marketing Federation (supra) in a sense is against the petitioner and in favour of the respondent/workmen.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also relied on the decision in Kuldip Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(10) Supreme Court Cases 659 : 1996(4) SCT 595 (SC), wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court held that in a domestic enquiry the strict rules of Evidence Act do not apply and a confession of the guilt made by the accused of an offence before the police though otherwise inadmissible in a Court of Rule under Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act could be relied on as being relevant in a domestic enquiry.
In this regard, in para 10 of the judgment, the Hon'ble Apex Court held inter alia as under :-  "Now coming to the main contention of the learned counsel for the appellant, it is true that a confession or admission of guilt made by a person accused of an offence before, or while in the custody of, a police officer is not admissible in a court of law according to Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, 1872 but it is equally well settled that these rules of evidence do not apply to departmental enquiries - See State of Mysore v. Shivabasappa Shivappa Makapur (AIR 1963 SC 375) and State of Assam v. Mahendra Kumar Das (AIR 1970 SC 1255) - wherein the only test is compliance with the principles of natural justice - and, of course, compliance with the rules governing the enquiries, if any..............." 12.
In Vijay Kumar Nigam (dead) through LRs v. State of M.P. and others, 1996(11) SCC 599 the Hon'ble Apex Court held in para 3 inter alia as under :-  "Two grounds have been pressed for consideration in the High Court and reiterated in the appeal.
The main ground was that the report of the preliminary enquiry conducted against him before initiating departmental enquiry, was not supplied to him and, therefore, it is violative of the principle of natural justice.
The High Court has rejected the contention and, in our view, quite rightly.
The preliminary report is only to decide and assess whether it would be necessary to take any disciplinary action against the delinquent officer and it does not form any foundation for passing the order of dismissal against the employee.
The High Court also found as a fact that all the statements of persons that formed the basis for the report, recorded during the preliminary enquiry were supplied to the delinquent officer.
It was then contended that one of the constables, namely, Palairam was a co-accused who was also charged along with the appellant and his evidence was taken into consideration in deciding against the appellant which is inadmissible in evidence.
In a departmental enquiry, the question whether or not any delinquent officer is a co-accused with the other does not arise.
That would arise in a prosecution laid for an offence under the IPC or Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The evidence recorded in the departmental enquiry stricto sensu is not evidence as per the provisions of the Evidence Act, 1872.
Therefore, the statement of Palairam also formed part of the record which could be taken into account in adjudging the misconduct against the appellant................" Mr. Hemant Kumar after placing reliance on the aforesaid authorities contended that the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, has wrongly held that the non-supply of the copy of the domestic enquiry report prejudiced the workmen and further that the Labour Court has wrongly drawn an inference from non-production of the Inquiry Officer, Sh. CL Chhikara.
13.
Undoubtedly, as the law has been settled by the Apex Court in the case of Vijay Kumar Nigam (supra), copy of the enquiry report, which is preliminary in nature is not to be supplied and at any rate, the non-supply of the preliminary enquiry report is not prejudicial to the delinquent official.
However, in the instant case, the main question before the Labour Court was whether the workmen had been denied opportunity of hearing in the domestic enquiry inasmuch as they were allegedly not given an opportunity of cross- examining the witnesses examined by the employer of the Management and were not given an opportunity of leading their own evidence ?
They had levelled allegations against the Inquiry Officer to show that the enquiry conducted by him was not fair and proper.
The Labour Court had specifically framed issue No. 1 regarding the domestic enquiry being fair and proper.
According to the finding of the Labour Court, the Inquiry Officer Shri CL Chhikara was the proper person to state about the enquiry conducted by him against the workmen/respondents being fair and proper and further that he had complied with the principles of natural justice by affording reasonable opportunity to the workmen to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the Management and also given an opportunity to examine their own evidence.
The learned Single Judge of this Court in The Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation's case (supra) has categorically held that the Inquiry Officer may consider the material produced in the enquiry by not strictly following the rules of evidence provided the principles of justice are adheard to.
Even in the case of Kuldip Singh (supra) the Hon'ble Apex Court clearly held that in the domestic enquiry the only test is compliance with the principles of natural justice and, of course, compliance with the rules governing the enquiries, if any, Thus, the settled view is that in the domestic enquiry strict adherence to the principles of natural justice is required though in the strict sense rules of evidence under the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 do not apply to the domestic enquiries.
In this view of the matter, no fault can be found in the findings arrived at by the Labour Court on issue No. 1.
14.
The Labour Court after finding that the domestic enquiry held by the Management was not fair and proper, exercised its jurisdiction under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and allowed the Management an opportunity to lead evidence in support of the charges brought against the workmen/respondents.
On behalf of the Management application for additional evidence was moved, which was allowed and the Management examined three more witnesses, namely Sh. WC Dua (MW-3), Sh. GC Dass (MW-4) and Sh. VR Desmukh (MW-5).
The Labour Court proceeded to consider the evidence led by the Management and after dealing with the same in detail, recorded a finding that the Management had failed to prove the charges against the workmen/respondents before it.
15.
In The Workmen of M/s Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co of India P Ltd v. The Management and others, 1973 Labour and Industrial Cases 851, the Hon'ble Apex Court held that Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act (1947), as amended, empowered the Labour Court or the Tribunal to reappraise the evidence and examine the correctness of the finding thereat.
Section 11-A further empowers it to interfere with the punishment and alter the same.
In this case before the Apex Court, the parties were in agreement on the principles that even after Section 11-A, the employer and employee can adduce evidence regarding the legality or validity of the domestic enquiry, if one had been held by an employer.
It was held in para 36 of the judgment as under :-  "Therefore, it will be seen that both in respect of cases where a domestic enquiry has been held as also in cases where the Tribunal considers the mater on the evidence adduced before it for the first time, the satisfaction under Section 11-A, about the guilt or otherwise of the workman concerned, is that of the Tribunal.
It has to consider the evidence and come to a conclusion one way or other.
Even in cases where an enquiry has been held by an employer and a finding of misconduct arrived at, the Tribunal can now differ from that finding in a proper case and hold that no misconduct is proved."
In para 37, it was held inter alia as under :-  "............That is why, according to us, section 11-A now gives full power to the Tribunal to go into the evidence and satisfy itself on both these points.
Now the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to reappraise the evidence and come to its conclusion enures to it when it has to adjudicate upon the dispute referred to it in which an employer relies on the findings recorded by him in a domestic enquiry.
Such a power to appreciate the evidence and come to its own conclusion about the guilt or otherwise was always recognised in a Tribunal when it was deciding a dispute on the basis of evidence adduced before it for the first time.
Both categories are now put on a par by Section 11-A" The following observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 38 are relevant to be noticed :-  "Another change that has been effected by Section 11-A is the power conferred on a Tribunal to alter the punishment imposed by an employer.
If the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the misconduct is established, either by the domestic enquiry accepted by it or by the evidence adduced before it for the first time, the Tribunal originally had no power to interfere with the punishment imposed by the management.
Once the misconduct is proved, the Tribunal had to sustain the order of punishment unless it was harsh indicating victimisation.
Under S. 11-A, though the Tribunal may hold that the misconduct is proved, nevertheless it may be of the opinion that the order of discharge or dismissal for the said misconduct is not justified.
In other words, the Tribunal may hold that the proved misconduct does not merit punishment by way of discharge or dismissal.
It can, under such circumstances, award to the workman only lesser punishment instead.
The power to interfere with the punishment and alter the same has been now conferred on the Tribunal by S.
11-A."
Upholding the right of the employer to conduct a domestic enquiry, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed in para 40 inter alia as under :-  "..............This Court has consistently been holding that an employer is expected to hold a proper enquiry according to the Standing Orders and principles of natural justice.
It has also been emphasised that such an enquiry should not be an empty formality.
If a proper enquiry is conducted by an employer and a correct finding arrived at regarding the misconduct, the Tribunal, even though it has now power to differ from the conclusions arrived at by the management, will have to give very cogent reasons for not accepting the view of the employer.
Further by holding a proper enquiry, the employer will also escape the charge of having acted arbitrarily or mala fide.
It cannot be over-emphasised that conducting of a proper and valid enquiry by an employer will conduce to harmonious and healthy relationship between him and the workman and it will serve the cause of industrial peace.
Further it will also enable an employer to persuade the Tribunal to accept the enquiry as proper and the finding also as correct."
It will be seen that the Hon'ble Apex Court while upholding the right of the employer/management to conduct the domestic enquiry has emphasised that an enquiry has to be held in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
In the instant case there is a categorical finding of the Labour Court that the principles of natural justice were not followed while conducting the domestic enquiry.
The Labour Court, thus, drew an adverse inference from the fact that the Inquiry Officer did not enter into the witness box before him to rebut the allegations made by the workmen/respondents about the denial of opportunity of hearing and non-observance of the principles of natural justice on the part of the Inquiry Officer.
16.
Mrs. Abha Rathore, learned counsel for the respondent/workmen argued that this Court in exercise of the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India will not act as a court of appeal and re-evaluate the evidence.
She submitted that the finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal would normally be not interfered with by this Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
She placed reliance on a decision of the Apex Court in Syed Yakoob v. KS Radhakrishnan and others, AIR 1964 SC 477, wherein while dealing with the question about the limits of jurisdiction of the High Court in issuing a writ of certiorari, it was, inter alia observed in para 7 as under :-  "The question about the limits of the jurisdiction of High Court in issuing a writ of certiorari under Art. 226 has been frequently considered by this Court and the true legal position in that behalf is no longer in doubt.
A writ of certiorari can be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction committed by inferior courts or tribunals; these are cases where orders are passed by inferior courts or tribunals without jurisdiction, or is in excess of it, or as a result of failure to exercise jurisdiction.
A writ can similarly be issued where in exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it, the Court or Tribunal acts illegally or improperly, as for instance, it decides a question without giving an opportunity to be heard to the party affected by the order, or where the procedure adopted in dealing with the dispute is opposed to principles of natural justice.
There is, however no doubt that the jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is a supervisory jurisdiction and the Court exercising it is not entitled to act as an appellate Court.
This limitation necessarily means that findings of fact reached by the inferior Court or Tribunal as a result of the appreciation of evidence cannot be reopened or questioned in writ proceedings..............." It will thus be seen that the finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal cannot be challenged in writ jurisdiction on the ground that the relevant and material evidence adduced before the Tribunal was insufficient or inadequate to sustain the impugned finding.
The adequacy or sufficiency of evidence led on a point and the inference of fact to be drawn from the said finding being within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunal, the same could not be agitated before this Court in the writ jurisdiction.
In para 8 of the judgment in Syed Yakoob's case (supra), it was held inter alia as under :-  "...........What can be corrected by a writ has to be an error of law; but it must be such an error of law as can be regarded as one which is apparent on the face of the record.
Where it is manifest or clear that the conclusion of law recorded by an inferior Court or Tribunal is based on an obvious mis- interpretation of the relevant statutory provision, or sometimes in ignorance of it, or may be even in disregard of it, or is expressly founded on reasons which are wrong in law, the said conclusion can be corrected by a writ of certiorari.
In all these cases, the impugned conclusion should be so plainly inconsistent with the relevant statutory provision that no difficulty is experienced by the High Court in holding that the said error of law is apparent on the face of the record..........." Coming to the judgment of the Labour Court in the instant case, the learned counsel for the petitioner failed to show that the findings recorded by the Labour Court upon appraisal of evidence led before him were based on an obvious mis-interpretation of the relevant statutory provision or are expressly founded on reasons which are wrong in law.
It has not been shown that the impugned conclusions arrived at by the Labour Court are so plainly inconsistent with the statutory provisions that the same could be said to be error of law apparently on the face of the record.
17.
In view of the forgoing discussion, I find no infirmity in the impugned award of the Labour Court.
There is no merit in these two writ petitions, which are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.