GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves a challenge to the seniority-list (Annexure P-5) by which the petitioners have been rendered junior to respondent Nos. 3 to 10 in the cadre of Assistants.
Petitioners have prayed for quashing of Annexure P-5 and for restoration of their seniority as per Annexure P-1.
2.
Petitioners Bhim Singh and Manohar Lal were appointed as Clerks in the offices of the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak, and Ambala, respectively.
Both of them were subsequently transferred to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat.
Before their transfer to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, Annexure P-7 was issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, to all Heads of Departments in Haryana State, all District & Sessions Judges and other Heads of District Offices calling upon the clerical staff of those offices to give their option for transfer and appointment under the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, against the vacant posts of Clerks numbering 40.
Petitioners exercised their option in response to Annexure P-7 and thereafter orders (Annexures P-8 and P-9) were issued transferring them to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat.
Petitioner No. 1 was promoted as Assistant with effect from 2.2.1977 and petitioner No. 2 was promoted on that post with effect from 19101979.
3.
In the tentative seniority-list of Assistants issued by the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, Rohtak, names of the petitioners were placed at Serial Nos. 4 and 7 and that of respondent No. 3 was shown at Serial No. 5.
Other respondents were shown at Serial No. 10 and onwards.
Thus, qua petitioner No. 1 all the private respondents were shown junior and qua petitioner No. 2 all except respondent No. 3 were shown junior.
On the basis of this tenative seniority-list, the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Superintendents vide order (Annexure P-2) dated 12121990.
On completion of one year's service as Assistant Superintendents by the petitioners, order (Annexure P-3) dated 141991 was issued declaring that the petitioners have successfully completed the period of probation.
This was followed by a circular dated 1221992, issued by the respondent No. 2 whereby a tentative seniority-list of Assistant Superintendents was circulated and names of the petitioners were placed at appropriate positions.
After about 2 years and 10 months of their promotion as Assistant Superintendents, the respondent No. 2 issued another tenative seniority-list of Assistants in which names of the petitioners were placed below respondents Nos. 3 to 10.
Petitioners submitted their representation.
A final serniority list has been issued by respondent No. 2 vide order dated 1721993.
Immediately thereafter show-cause notices dated 2621993 was issued to the petitioners calling upon them to submit their explanation as to why they be not reverted from the posts of Assistant Superintendent.
4.
Petitioners have challenged the order by which their seniority in the cadre of Assistants has been re-determined and the show-cause notices by which they are sought to be reverted from the posts of Assistant Superintendent.
Petitioners have contended that under Rule 16 of the Punjab District Subordinate Service Rules, 1942, and the Haryana Revenue Department District Subordinate (Group C) Service Rules, 1988, seniority of each cadre is required to be determined on the basis of length of service and on the basis of their longer service in the cadre of Assistants, the petitioners were rightly placed above respondent Nos. 3 to 10 and that re-determination of seniority on the basis of date of confirmation is not only contrary to the rules but also constitutional code of equality.
Further contention of the petitioners is that confirmation on the post of Assistant depended on the fortuitous circumstance, namely, availability of vacancies and, therefore, merely because the respondent Nos. 3 to 10, who had been promoted after the petitioners, were confirmed from earlier dates will not entitle them to be placed above the petitioners in the cadre of Assistants.
Another contention of the petitioners is that if their seniority in the cadre of Assistants is to be maintained as per the length of service, respondent No. 2 cannot revert them from the post of Assistant Superintendents.
5.
In their written statement, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the petitioners have not availed the remedy of appeal which was available to them against the rejection of their objections to the tentative seniority-list.
These respondents further have stated that the petitioners were transferred to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, on their own request and, therefore, they cannot claim benefit of earlier promotions in district Sonepat.
Further plea of the respondents is that respondent Nos. 3 to 10 were confirmed as Assistants from a date earlier than the petitioners and in terms of Rule 20 of 1988 Rules, the right of seniority, derived by these respondents under 1942 Rules will have to be protected.
It has also been pleaded by the respondents that the final seniority list of Assistants has been issued after due consideration of the representations submitted by the petitioners and, therefore, the petitioners can have no grievance against the seniority-list of Assistants.
6.
In their separate written statement, respondent Nos. 5, 7, 8 and 10 have alleged that the petitioners were not appointed under the Punjab District Subordinate Service Rules, 1942 and their promotion as Assistants was temporary.
According to these respondents, the petitioners had been appointed on temporary posts and they were not entitled to be confirmed in the cadre of Assistants.
The department had prepared seniority list (Annexure R-1) according to the dates of confirmation and a number of Assistants were promoted as Assistant Superintendents on the basis of that seniority-list.
Respondents have further pleaded that appointment in terms of Rule 9(c) of 1942 Rules could be made only by way of selection and, therefore, the petitioners cannot claim that they had been regularly promoted.
Their further case is that seniority in the cadre of Assistants, which already stood determined vide Annexure R-1, had to be maintained even after coming into force the 1988 Rules.
Lastly, these respondents have peladed that ad hoc promotions accorded to the petitioners in the cadre of Assistant Superintendents did not give any right to them to hold those posts.
7.
After having heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and learned Assistant Advocate General for respondent Nos. 1 and 2, I am fully convinced that this petition deserves to be allowed.
Detailed reasons for this conclusion are set out hereinunder.
8.
A look at the documents which have been filed by the petitioners along with an application filed by them under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure clearly establish that all members of the Clerical cadre working in the various department of the Government of Haryana and various disctrict offices were given a choice to be appointed as Clerks in district Sonepat by way of transfer.
While the petitioners exercised their option and were appointed as Clerks in the new disctrict by way of transfer vide orders (Annexures P-8 and and P-9) respondent Nos. 3 to 10 did not exercise such an option.
Therefore, the plea raised by the respondents that the petitioners had been transferred to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, on their request is nothing but a distortion of the fact.
There can be no manner of doubt that the petitioners did exercise option to be appointed as Clerks in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, by way of transfer, but it is equally true that they were appointed by transfer in response to an open invitation given to all similarly situated persons.
Para 2 of Annexure P-7 in pusuance of which the petitioners were appointed by transfer in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, is very relevant and is, therefore, quoted below :-  ``The names of those Clerks who have been appointed on ad hoc basis through Employment Exchange be not recommended.
The willing employees may also be informed that after joining this office, they shall be governed by the Haryana District Subordinate Service Rules, 1942, and they shall be entitled to be considered for promotion to the posts of Assistant/Steno- typist/Stenographers under these Rules, and that there are about 10 vacant posts of these categories in this office which are proposed to be filled in from amongst the Clerks to be appointed by way of transfer in this office.
They shall not be paid any deputation allowance.
Under the above stated Rules, they can also be entitled for promotion to the posts of Assistant Superintendents/Superintendents as per their seniority and eligibility.''
9.
The above quoted extract of Annexure P-7 removes any doubt about the nature of promotion of the petitioners on the posts of Assistants.
It is clearly borne out from the above-quoted portion of Annexure P-7 that promotions to the posts of Assistants available within the jurisdiction of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, were to be made in accordance with the Rules of 1942 and even before this Court respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have not pleaded that promotion of the petitioners to the posts of Assistants had been made otherwise than the 1942 Rules.
Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners had been promoted as Assistants on regular basis, though against temporary posts, merits acceptance.
10.
Rule 16 of 1942 Rules contemplated seniority by the dates of substantive appointment.
Likewise Rule 11 of 1988 Rules prescribes the criteria of seniority to be the length of continuous service.
These Rules are also reproduced below for the purpose of ready reference :-  ``Rule 16 of 1942 Rules :-  The Superitnendent shall be senior to all other members in the same cadre and the seniority of other members in each cadre of the service shall in each class of appointment be determined by the dates of their substantive appointment to such class whether such appointment took place in the same office or in the office of the Deputy Commissioner or another district or in the office of a Commissioner.
This rule, however, shall not effect any member who was transferred on or before the 24th Februrary, 1941 from the office of a Commissioner or that of another Deputy Commissioner to the office in which he is now serving in the same time-scale of pay.
In such cases seniority shall be determined from the date of substantive appointments in the office to which the member was transferred.
Rule 11 of 1988 Rules : Seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the Service : Provided that where there are different cadres in the service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre.
Provided further xx xx xxx.''
11.
Rule 20 of 1988 Rules by which 1942 Rules were repealed provides that any order made or action taken under the repealed Rules shall be deemed to have been made/taken under the corresponding provisions of 1988 Rules.
In fact, Rule 20 protects the action already taken prior to the promulgation of 1988 Rules.
12.
A combined reading of Rule 16 of 1942 Rules and Rule 11 of 1988 Rules leaves no room for doubt that seniority in the cadre of Assistants was required to be determined on the basis of total length of service which followed regular appointment.
Meaning ascribed to the phrase ``substantive appointment'' in State of UP v. Dr. MJ Siddiqui, AIR 1980 SC 1098, Baleshwar Dass v. State of UP, AIR 1981 SC 41, and PD Aggarwal v. State of UP, AIR 1987 SC 1676, and a large number of other decisions of the Supreme Court shows that any appointment made in a regular manner, may be against a temporary post, will be deemed to be a substantive appointment and that availability of a permanent post is not sine qua non for treating an appointment to be a substantive appointment.
Therefore, once the promotion of the petitioners on the posts of Assistants are treated to be regular, they will have to be assigned seniority on the basis of length of service and not on the basis of date of confirmation.
Even otherwise confirmation to a post in the public service has been termed as inglorious uncertainty of service.
In SB Patwardhan v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1977 SC 2051, a rule by which seniority was made dependent upon the fortuitous circumstances of confirmation was held to be unconstitututional.
If Rules 16 and 11 and 1942 and 1988 Rules respectively were to be read as prescribing the date of confirmation as the criteria for determination of seniority, the same would have been open to the attack of unconstitutionality and it is one of the settled cannons of interpretation that if a rule is open to two interpretations, the one which makes it constitutionally intra vires has to be preferred as against the one which renders it constitutionally infirm.
It must, therefore, he held that the two Rules make the seniority dependent upon the length of continuos regular service and not upon the date of confirmation.
It is, therefore, logical to hold that determination of seniority of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 3 to 10 on the basis of date of confirmation is ultra vires to the Rules and, therefore, Annexure P-5 is liable to be quashed insofar as it concerns the petitioners and the private respondents.
13.
Notice issued to the petitioners for their reversion from the posts of Assistant Superintendents is founded on their seniority qua respondent Nos. 3 to 10 in the cadre of Assistants as determined by Annexure P-5 and once it is held that determination of seniority of the petitioners vide Annexure P-5 is contrary to Rules, the show-cause notice (Annexure P-6) is also liable to be nullified.
14.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Seniority-list (Annexure P-5) is declared illegal insofar as it relates to the petitioners and the private respondents.
Their seniority in the cadre of Assistants shall be determined on the basis of length of service in that cadre.
Show cause notice (Annexure P-6) is also declared illegal and is quashed.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.