GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner who possesses qualifications of BA and LLB and who claims that he belongs to Backward Class submitted an application for recruitment to the post of Naib Tehsildar in response to the advertisement issued by the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee, Patiala (Published in the Tribune) dated December 21, 1987.
In all five per cent posts were reserved for members of the Backward Classes.
A written test was conducted on 22101989.
The candidates who were successful in the written test were called for interview on 1331990.
The petitioner was one amongst them.
During the course of interview, the petitioner was directed to fill up a form containing the details of his particulars and bio-data.
The petitioner gave out that he wishe to be considered against the general category.
On the basis of performance of the candidates at the interview, the result of 20 candidates was declared on 951990.
Of these, 10 belonged to the category of riot victims/terrorist victims; six belonged to Scheduled Castes; one from the category of sportsmen, one from the category of physically handicapped and two from the general category.
The result of another batch of sixteen persons was declared in June, 1991.
Of these, four persons were from the category of riot victims/terrorist victims and twelve were from the general category.
No member belonging to the Backward Classes was declared selected or appointed.
2.
The petitioner represented to the respondents and claimed consideration of his case for the appointment against five per cent reserved posts of Backward Classes but his representation was turned down by the Commissioner, Jullundur Division, vide communication (annexure P-4) dated 751990.
Further representations made by the petitioner were considered by the Departmental Selection Committee and it was decided that the petitioner cannot be considered against the posts reserved for Backward Classes because he had shown himself to be belonging to general category at the time of the interview.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the decision of the respondents on the ground that once he had filed his application claiming himself to be a member of Backward Class he had a right to be considered against the posts reserved for Backward Classes and merely because at the time of interview, the petitioner gave out his choice to be considered in general category, his right of consideration against the reserved posts cannot be defeated.
The petitioner's assertion is that he belongs to Lubana community which has been declared as Backward Class vide notification dated 6.10.1956, issued by the Government of Punjab and at the relevant time his family income was less than Rs. 3,600/- per annum.
4.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents who have pleaded that the petitioner had shown himself to be belonging to general category in his bio-data (Annexures P1 and P2) filed along with the reply and, therefore, his name was not considered against the posts reserved for Backward Classes.
Further case of the respondents is that the Departmental Selection Committee had considered the case of the petitioner and found that the certificate produced by the petitioner was not in accordance with the Punjab Government Memo dated 1281990 and the prescribed form of Backward Class certificate.
The respondents have pleaded that the certificate which is said to have been produced by the petitioner along with his application form did not contain any stipulation about his family income and, therefore, the petitioner could not have claimed himself to be a member of the Backward Class.
5.
The main argument of Shri Rajeev Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that when the petitioner had applied for consideration of his case for recruitment as a member of Backward Class and had attached certificate showing himself to be a member of Backward Classes, it was not permissible for the respondents to ignore his candidature for the recruitment against the vacancies reserved for members of Backward Classes.
He further argued that mere expression of desire by the petitioner at the time of interview to be considered in general category cannot deprive him of his right to be considered on the basis of categorisation made in the original application form.
6.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab argued that once the petitioner had shown himself to be belonging to general category at the time of interview, he will be deemed to have given up his right for consideration as member of Backward Class and the Departmental Selection Committee has rightly rejected the claim of the petitioner to be treated as member of Backward Class.
She pointed out that the certificate of Backward Class produced by the petitioner along with his application form was not in the prescribed form and was not in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government.
She also pointed out that while the petitioner claims himself to be a resident of village Nadala District Kapurthala, he had produced the certificate issued by Sub Divisional Magistrate, Ropar, along with his application and this is by itself sufficient to cast a serious doubt on the genuineness of the certificate of Backward Class produced by the petitioner.
She contended that this Court should not issue a direction for appointment of the petitioner by treating him to be member of Backward Class.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions and perused the original record which has been produced by the learned Assistant Advocate General.
This record shows that in the application form submitted by the petitioner in response to the advertisement issued by the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee, Patiala, letters ``BC'' have been written against Column No. 9.
The words ``Freedom Fighter and Handicapped'' have been scored off.
This application is accompanied by a number of certificates including the one issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Ropar showing that the petitioner belongs to Lubana community which is declared as Backward in terms of the Government instructions dated 6.10.1956.
Whether the certificate produced by the petitioner is genuine or not and whether his claim to be treated as member of Backward Class could be rejected on the ground that the certificate was not in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government is a different issue.
However, once the petitioner had applied for recruitment by claiming himself to be the person belonging to Backward Class, that right of the petitioner could not have been ignored by the respondents merely because at the time of interview, the petitioner gave out himself to be a member of general category or desired that he may be considered in general category.
The eligibility of a candidate to be considered for selection and recruitment to public services is to be determined on the basis of the application submitted by him and the qualifications possessed by him as on the last date fixed for submission of the application unless some other date is specified in the rule relating to recruitment or in the advertisement itself.
Any subsequent change in the eligibility of the candidate cannot enure to his benefit.
Likewise, any subsequent change in the category of candidate cannot deprive the candidate of his right to be considered on the basis of his original application form.
What the Departmental Selection Committee and respondent No. 2 have done in the present case is to reject the claim of the petitioner for consideration as member of Backward Class solely on the ground that in his bio-data the petitioner had expressed his desire to be considered as a member of general category.
While doing so, they completely overlooked the fact that the petitioner had claimed himself to be member of Backward Class in the original application and he had done so apparently in view of the reservation in favour of members of Backward Classes.
Action of the petitioner to describe himself as a member of general category or his choice to be considered in the general category, which he gave out at the time of interview could not have been made basis for changing his category or erasing his eligibility as a Backward Class candidate.
If at all a candidate who had shown himself as a person belonging to unreserved class, had subsequently claimed the benefit of reservation, it could not have been possible for the Selection Committee to change his category.
In my opinion, the decision taken by the Departmental Selection Committee in the case of the petitioner is based on an erroneous assumption that the petitioner's eligibility was to be determined on the basis of what he had given out at the time of interview.
In fact, his eligibility was to be considered only on the basis of the contents of the application form and the certificate submitted by him alongwith the application form.
It must, therefore, be held that the rejection of the claim of the petitioner to be considered as member of Backward Class is arbitrary and this has obviously resulted in violation of petitioner's right of consideration against the posts reserved for member of Backward Classes.
8.
Whether the certificate produced by the petitioner showing himself to be member of Backward Class is genuine or not is an issue on which Ms. Tuli wanted this Court to record a finding.
However, in view of the fact that the petitioner did produce the certificate in accordance with the Government instructions at a later stage, I do not want to express my opinion about the genuineness or otherwise of the certificate produced by the petitioner alongwith his application form.
Instead, I deem it proper to leave it for the competent authority to consider the genuineness or otherwise of the certificate produced by the petitioner for taking decision as to whether the petitioner should be given benefit of reservations on the strength of such certificate.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision of the respondents as contained in communications Annexures P-4, P-6 and P-9 is declared illegal and these three Annexures are quashed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on the post of Naib Tehsildar in the Category of Backward Class.
It shall be open to the competent authority to examine the genuineness of the certificate produced by the petitioner in support of his claim that he belongs to Backward Class.
If it is found that the petitioner in fact belongs to Backward Class and his name appears in the merit list, appropriate order for his appointment shall be issued by the competent authority.
This exercise shall be undertaken by the competent authority within a period of two months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order before the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee.
10.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.