SS Sodhi, J - The challenge here is to the requirement of attaining the prescribed speed in typing as a precondition to confirmation in service.
It arises in the context of the termination of the services of the appellants consequent upon their failure to attain this speed.
2.
Ved Prakash Sagar and the other appellants had been appointed as clerks in the UP Financial Corporation in pursuance of an advertisement, where one of the essential qualifications was a typing speed of 25 words per minute.
It was on fulfilling this and the other prescribed conditions that they were appointed on October 28, 1989.
3.
According to the letter of appointment, the appellants were put on probation for a period of six months, with the condition that their confirmation in service shall be subject to their attaining a speed of 40 words per minute in typing in English.
This is what the appellants failed to achieve, not only during their initial six months appointment but also during the three subsequent such appointments too.
As a consequence, their services came to be terminated on November 20, 1991.
4.
The condition regarding the prescribed typing speed for confirmation in service was sought to be challenged on the ground that this was not one laid down in the relevant Regulations.
It was thus argued that it could not therefore be imposed.
Counsel emphasised, in this behalf, that the advertisement for the post required a typing speed of only 25 words per minutes and, therefore, the speed of 40 words per minute was contrary to law.
Support for the proposition canvassed was sought from the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Vinay Rampal v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, (1984) UPLBEC 137.
The matter there concerned admission to a postgraduate course for the M.D.
Degree from the Medical College.
The petitioner fulfilled the requisite conditions for admission as set forth in the advertisement but admission was denied to him on the basis of a Government Order to which no reference had been made in the advertisement.
The Court held that eligibility for admission had to be judged on the basis of the qualifications in the advertisement and not the Government Order.
5.
Reference was next made to Dr. Leena Khare v. UP Higher Education Service Commission, (1990)2 UPLBEC 919, where the point for consideration was whether the selection of teachers was to be made on the basis of the advertisement issued three years ago or as per the qualifications for the post statutorily amended relaxing certain essential qualifications a few months prior to the issuance of the interview letters ?
It was held that the selection had to be made on the basis of the advertisement.
6.
It will be seen that neither of these judicial precedents really has any relevance to the point in issue.
The matter there pertained to admission in a Medical College or qualifications for appointment as teachers, which are wholly different situations from what arises here, namely, the condition for confirmation in service.
The speed in typing prescribed for the purpose clearly denotes the standard or efficiency that the employer requires of the employee, whose duty includes typing.
It can by no means be said that the requirement of typing with a speed of 40 words per minute, was in any manner an unreasonable standard.
An aspect of material significance here is the ample time and opportunity afforded to the appellants to acquire this speed.
As mentioned earlier, they were given not just six months but two years for the purpose.
No legal infirmity can thus be imputed to the condition laid down for confirmation in service.
7.
Next, a plea of discrimination was sought to be raised on the ground that some persons, who had earlier been appointed as clerks, had been allowed to complete three years service and thereby got confirmed in service in terms of Regulation 17 of the relevant Regulations, even though they had not fulfilled this condition of typing speed.
The mere fact that some employees may have been confirmed by being allowed to continue in service for three years without acquiring the prescribed typing speed provides no ground to impute the vice of discrimination to the respondents in denying confirmation to the appellants, for their failure to fulfil the condition laid down in their letter of appointment.
8.
No exception can thus be taken to the services of the appellants being terminated on their failure to acquire the requisite typing speed.
9.
The judgment of the learned single Judge is consequently hereby confirmed and the Special Appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.