Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral)- This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos1700 and 3313 of 1993.
The Respondent-Department advertised 25 posts of Mukhya Sevikas.
Out of these 25 posts, 13 were to be filled up from amongst the candidates belonging to the General category and the remaining 12 had been reserved for members of Scheduled Castes etc.
The petitioners were candidates for these posts.
They were selected and placed at Sr. Nos10 and 12 in the merit list of candidates belonging to the General category.
In spite of their selection, the petitioners have not been appointed.
Their grievance is two-fold.
Firstly, it is alleged that one Smt. Krishna Devi who was at Sr. No13 has already been appointed while the petitioners who are admittedly above her, have not been appointed.
Secondly, it has been contended that persons who had been appointed in merely ad hoc basis and had been rejected at the time of regular selection or had not even appeared for competitive selection are continuing to work as Mukhya Sevikas while the petitioners who are regularly selected candidates, are not being appointed.
2.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents states that Smt. Hardesh Kumari and Smt. gyatri Devi, are working as Mukhya Sevikas on ad hoc basis since the year 1989 but their services have not been regularised so far.
Learned counsel, however, points out that these two persons are holding posts reserved for members of Schedules Castes etc.  3.
It is well-settled that a person who has been regularly selected has a better right to be appointed to a post than the one who has not been selected.
Admittedly, the two persons viz. Smt. Hardesh Kumari etc. have not been regularly selected.
They had either competed and were rejected or had chosen not to compete.
In such a situation, the petitioners are certainly entitled to be considered, for appointment in preference to the persons who have not been selected.
4.
It also deserves mention that even in Krishna Devi's case (CWP No.3451 of 1993) decided on October 19, 1993, a Division Bench of this Court had issued a direction to the respondents to appoint her in order of merit.
Still further, even while deciding Piara Singh's case, their Lordships of the Supreme Court had categorically observed in paragraph 25 that ``the appointment of regularly selected candidates cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary employee."
5.
In view of the fact that the petitioners are regularly selected candidates, it is directed that the respondents shall consider their claims and if they are otherwise found to be suitbale issue letters of appointments to them forthwith.
If necessary, the department would terminate the services of junior-most persons working on ad hoc basis.
The writ petition is disposed of in these terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.