Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral).
- The petitioner joined the B.Com.
Part-I course at the Multani Mal Modi College, Patiala in the session 1992-93.
Both of them appeared in the examination held in the year 1993.
After the declaration of the result, they applied for the re-evaluation of the answer books in the subjects in which they were shown to have failed.
The result of re-evaluation was declared and conveyed to the petitioners vide letters dated November 17 and November 16, 1993 respectively.
On the basis of the result of re- evaluation, they were eligible for the consequently sought admission to B.Com.
Part-II.
Their request having been declined in view of the order dated October 20, 1992 passed by the respondent-University, the petitioners have approached this court through the present writ petition.
2.
The primary grievance made by the petitioners is that the University cannot take advantage of tis own wrong and deny the benefit of late admission available to the students under the regulation on the basis of an executive order which has yet not been given a statutory sanction.
The respondents contest this claim on the ground that the decision of the Syndicate of the University is legal and valid and that the candidates who get the concession of re-evaluation cannot claim the benefit of late admission.
3.
It is not disputed that the petitioners had sought re-evaluation of their answer books within the time prescribed under the University Regulations.
It has also been conceded at the bar that there was delay in the re-evaluation of the answer books and as a result the candidates could not seek admission to the next higher class along with the other students.
Furthermore, it is also the admitted position that under the University Regulations a candidate, whose result is published late for reasons which are not attributable to the candidate, can be admitted without payment of late fee within ten working days from the date on which the result is published.
In the present case, the petitioners had applied for admission on November 19, 1993 and November 17, 1993 respectively.
This was within the prescribed period of ten days.
They were not to be blamed for the delay in the declaration of their result.
Denial of admission to the petitioners in this situation would be totally unfair and arbitrary.
4.
Even otherwise, the statutory provision in the University Calendar permits the admission of a candidate within ten days of the declaration of the result.
This right conferred by a statutory provision cannot be taken away by an executive decision of the Syndicate.
It has not been shown that in pursuance of the decision of Syndicate any amendment has been made in the provisions relating to late admission of candidates.
Even a perusal of the decision taken by the Syndicate on October 20, 1992, shows that amendment in the Regulation has to be made in pursuance to the decision of the Syndicate.
It has not been shown that necessary amendment has been made.
Consequently, the action in denying admission to the petitioners cannot be sustained.
5.
The view that I have taken finds support from the decision of a Division Bench of this court in Deepak Kumar v. Punjabi University, Patiala (Civil Writ Petition No.48 of 1994, decided on February 15, 1995), wherein, in a similar situation, necessary relief was granted regarding admission to B.Com.
Part-II.
A similar view has been expressed by me in Amit Puri v. Punjabi University, Patiala, 1995(2) SCT 634 (P&H) : (Civil Writ Petition No. 14656 of 1993, decided on January 24, 1995).
Motion Bench vide its order dated December 7, 1993 had granted provisional admission to the petitioners.
In view of the above, this provisional admission has to be treated as regular and the result of the examination, if any, taken by the petitioners shall be declared forthwith.
The writ petition is allowed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.