Swatantar Kumar, J (Oral) - The present appeal has been preferred by the appellant against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 2511994 of this Court vide which writ petition of the petitioner-appellant has been dismissed.
2.
Briefly, the facts stated are that the appellant was examinee of MA Geography from Panjab University and the result was declared on 991986.
The appellant was declared successful.
She obtained 3rd position in the said examination by securing 1037 marks.
Respondent No. 3 Miss Ranjit Kaur was also declared successful and secured 1st position and obtained 1045 marks in the same examination.
Miss Rekha Ahlawat secured 2nd position with 1041 marks.
3.
The appellant applied for re-evaluation of the answer-sheets for the papers of Climaterogy, Cartography (1st Semester) and Town and Country- Planning (3rd Semester).
Respondent No. 3 also applied for re-evaluation of Geography paper in 1st Semester.
On re-evaluation, appellant's claim to have been increased by 5 marks and respondent No. 3 was reduced by three marks.
The case of the appellant on these facts is that if five marks in her total are increased and three marks of respondent No. 3 are decreased, she will get highest marks in the University and would secure first position and consequently gold medal.
The case of the appellant is opposed upon the interpretation of Rule 9.2 of the Panjab University Calender Vol. III (Edition 1985).
4.
The respondents have stated that the appellant is not entitled to increase of any marks on the correct interpretation of the said rule.
Further, it is submitted that the appellant has incorrectly mentioned the marks in the writ petition.
The fact is that the appellant had originally secured 24 marks in theory and 11 marks in practical of her paper of Cartography (1st Semester).
The appellant has incorrectly stated in the petition that she obtained 25 marks in theory.
On re-evaluation, marks of respondent No. 3 were decreased by 2 and not by 3 as stated by the appellant in the writ petition.
Affidavit sworn by the Registrar of the University has been placed on record giving detail of the marks of these candidates at page 37.
5.
Before we revert to the discussion on merits of the case, it is pertinent to point out here that in the Letters Patent Appeal before us, respondent No. 3 has not been impleaded as a party (respondent).
It is also not so stated in the copy of the judgment placed on the record.
However, in the copy of the amended writ petition, which is at page 22 of the record, the name of respondent No. 3 has been mentioned.
Be that as it may, we proceed to discuss this matter even in the absence of respondent No. 3.
6.
We have heard the appellant who appeared in person and the counsel for the University at length.
The appellant has placed before us her photocopy of marks sheet which shows that she secured 24 marks in the theory paper and 11 marks in practical in Cartography Paper 1 and not 25 marks as stated by her in the petition.
With this backgrounds even if we accept the case of the appellant, at best she is entitled to the addition of 4 marks in her aggregate i.e. she will get 1041 marks out of 1600 after addition of 4 marks as she originally secured 1037/1600 marks.
Respondent No. 3 had originally secured 1045/1600 marks and after re-evaluation, even if her three marks are reduced, she will still get 1042/1600 marks.
As a result, the appellant would still not get the first position in the University and consequently the gold medal.
The case of the University is that as per the marks sheet and result, at best 2 marks can be deducted of respondent No. 3 and she would be entitled to get 1043/1600 marks.
In any case, the said respondent No. 3 maintains her first position irrespective of whose version out of the appellant and the respondents, the Court accepts.
The candidate who has secured 2nd position Ms. Rekha Ahlawat has not been impleaded as respondent in this petition and the appellant had only impleaded Miss Ranjit Kaur as respondent in the case.
In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot be given any relief.
Keeping in view our discussion above, we do not intend to discuss and decide the question with regard to the interpretation of Rule 9.2 of the Panjab University Calender Vol. III (Edition 1985) and we leave this question open.
In view of our discussion above, there is no merit in the appeal and the same is dismissed.
Parties to bear their own costs.