Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as Accountants in the Haryana Urban Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the Authority).
They complain that the action of the respondent-authority in not giving them the scale of Rs. 1,640-2,900 plus special pay till April 30, 1990 and that of Rs. 2,000-3,200 with effect from May 1, 1990 as has been given to other members of the cadre suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Is it so ?
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
In July, 1978, certain posts of Accounts Assistants in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500 were advertised by the Authority.
The candidates were required to possess the qualification of BCom.
in the first or second division with advance accountancy or auditing as an optional subject.
It was also prescribed that the candidates should have two years' experience in a large commercial establishment.
The petitioners computed.
They were selected and appointed.
With effect from April 1, 1979, the pay scale of the post of Accounts Assistant was revised and raised to Rs. 525-1050.
The petitioners were granted this pay scale.
3.
The next higher post in the Accounts wing of the respondent-authority was that of Accountant.
Till the year 1986, all posts of Accountants were filled up by appointment of persons who had qualified the Subordinate Accounts Service examination conducted by the Finance Department.
However, on May 12, 1986, the respondent-authority found that an avenue of promotion should be provided to the Accounts Assistants.
Accordingly, it decided that 6 posts of Section Officers which were hithertofore filled up by drawing persons from the Finance Department be redesignated as Accountants and filled by promotion from the cadre of Accounts Assistants.
The post of Section Officer was in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1,250.
The same scale was sanctioned for the redesignated post of Accountant.
By an order of the same date, 5 of the petitioners were promoted as Accountants.
In respect of the sixth petitioner, a separate order was passed.
4.
In July, 1987, the State Govt. constituted a committee to consider the revision of pay scales of various categories of employees working in different Corporations/Companies/Boards and Cooperative Institutions in the State.
This committee made recommendations which were accepted by the respondent- authority.
In pursuance to the decision of the authority, the Accountants were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 1,600-2,660 with effect from January 1, 1986.
As against this, the Section Officers who were appointed after qualifying the S.A.S.
examination through the agency of the Finance Department were placed in the higher scale of Rs. 1,640-2,900.
They were also given special pay of Rs. 100/- per mensem.
With effect from May 1, 1990, the pay scale of the Section Officers was further revised and raised to Rs. 2,000- 3,200.
The petitioners submitted a representation and claimed that they were entitled to be placed in the higher scale.
This was followed by reminders.
However, vide order dated December 26, 1991, the authority declined the petitioners' claim.
Consequently, they have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioners claim that the action of the respondent-authority in placing the petitioners in a lower scale of pay and in not granting them the pay scale as sanctioned for the posts of Section Officers is arbitrary, unfair and thus violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
The respondents contest this claim on a two-fold ground.
Firstly, it is urged that the petitioners cannot claim parity with the persons who have qualified the S.A.S.
examination.
Secondly, it has been averred that the nature of duties are different.
It has been pointed out that the Accountants posted in the Estate Offices ``carry out the commercial duties relating to the estates whereas the duties performed by SAS Divisional Accountants relate to PWD accounts and civil works and pre-audit of the civil work bills and expenditure.''
On these promises, the respondents maintain that the action of the authority is just and fair.
6.
The petitioners have filed a rejoinder and have produced a copy of an order showing that there is no distinction between the promotee-Accountants and those appointed by way of deputation from the Finance Department and that the posts held by them are inter-changeable.
From the document viz. the order dated December 26, 1991, it is sought to be pointed out that persons who had been promoted as Accountants from amongst the Accounts Assistants had been posted against various posts which according to the written statement filed by the respondent were meant to be held by the Section Officers alone.
7.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. Jaggia, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the petitioners perform the same duties as those who have passed the S.A.S.
examination.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioners have passed the BCom.
examination, which is a higher qualification than the S.A.S.
examination.
He submits that the action of the respondent is totally arbitrary and unfair and there is no basis on which the petitioners may, justifiably be accorded the differential treatment vis-a-vis the Section Officers.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has urged that the qualifications and duties performed by the persons who have qualified the S.A.S.
examination are different and as such, the action of the respondents is justified.
8.
It is the admitted case of the parties that on May 12, 1986, the authority had redesignated 6 posts of Section Officers as Accountants.
It was also decided to grant them the same scale of pay as had been sanctioned for the posts of Section Officers viz. Rs. 700-1,250.
The petitioners were promoted to the posts of Accountants and were placed in the scale of Rs. 700-1,250.
Once the petitioners and the Section Officers had been equated, what had happened to justify the differential treatment ?
No reasons, whatsoever, have been disclosed by the authority.
9.
The differential treatment is sought to be justified only on account of the fact that the persons deputed by the Finance Department have passed the S.A.S.
examination.
Is this a valid reason for differential treatment ?
10.
Normally, the employer can make a classification on the basis of academic qualifications or experience etc.
However, in the present case, the action does not appear to be justified.
Firstly, the respondent-authority has framed the Haryana Urban Development Authority Services Regulations, 1990.
These regulations were approved by the State Govt. vide its order dated August 17, 1989.
Rule 4 inter alia provides that the service shall comprise of the posts shown in Appendix `A'.
A perusal of Appendix `A' shows that the post of Accountant can be filled up by promotion of persons who have ``5 years' service as Accounts Assistant or S.A.S.
qualified.''
It is thus clear that the authority has considered 5 years' service as Accounts Assistant at par with the qualification of S.A.S.
examination.
Still further, it is the admitted position that for appointment as Accounts Assistant, a person has to possess the minimum qualification of BCom.
with 2 years' experience in accounts in a Govt/Semi-Govt Organisation.
It has been pointed out by Mr. Jaggia that even a Matriculate is eligible to appear in the S.A.S.
examination.
He further submits that various persons working as Section Officers with the respondent-authority are mere Matriculates.
Learned counsel for the respondent is not in a position to controvert this assertion.
In fact, in the rejoinder-affidavit filed by the petitioners, a specific assertion has been made that ``the petitioners are (not) in any way less qualified than a mere matriculate who has cleared the Subordinate Accounts Service Examination, conducted by the Finance Department/Accountant General.''
This statement of fact has not been controverted on behalf of the respondents.
Furthermore, nothing has been brought on record to show that the syllabus or the standard of the S.A.S.
examination is in any way higher than the BCom.
examination.
In this situation, it cannot be said that persons who have qualified the S.A.S.
examination are in any way better qualified than those who have passed the BCom.
examination conducted by a University.
Still further even under the rules, 5 years' service as Accounts Assistant appears to have been clearly equated with the passing of S.A.S.
examination.
Once that is so, the very basis of differential treatment seems to become non- existent.
11.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
Some of the petitioners, on the basis of their seniority as Accountants and total length of service with the respondent-authority were given the current duty charge of the next higher posts of Accounts Officers vide orders dated May 14, 1991 and December 4, 1991.
One Lajpat Rai who had passed the SAS Examination and is working as Accountant with the respondent-authority filed Civil Writ Petition No 2030 of 1992 challenging the order.
A two-fold contention was raised.
Firstly, it was claimed that a SAS Accountant working in the pay scale of Rs. 2,000- 3,200 should be considered as senior than the persons who were in the scale of only Rs. 1,600-2,660.
Secondly, it was urged that only those persons who had passed the S.A.S.
examination were eligible to be considered for appointment as Accounts Officers.
This claim was contested by the respondent-authority.
It was urged that ``both S.A.S.
qualified and those not so qualified Accountants constituted one cadre and the post of Accounts Officer was not to be filled by promotion...''.
The Bench upheld this contention and found that ``a perusal of the relevant Regulations Annexure R-1 filed with the written statement shows that there is a single cadre of Accountants comprising both S.A.S.
qualified as well as not so qualified persons.
The fact, therefore, remains that in spite of different scales of pay the Accountants of the two branches constitute one cadre.''
With this finding, the writ petition was dismissed vide order dated August 31, 1992.
Mr. Jaggia maintains that the respondent-authority has accepted this judgment and even a petition for special leave was not filed.
It thus appears that the pleaded case of the respondent-authority before this Court was that the persons with S.A.S.
qualification as well as the others who had not passed the said examination constituted one cadre of Accountants.
If that be so, there appears to be no basis for according a differential treatment especially when it is not clearly shown that passing of the S.A.S.
examination provides a higher qualification than the degree of BCom.
12.
In view of the above, there appears to be no basis for treating the petitioners differently from those who have passed the S.A.S.
examination.
The action of the respondent-authority in sanctioning different scales of pay or in rejecting the claim made by the petitioners cannot be sustained.
The impugned order by which the representation submitted by the petitioners was rejected is hereby quashed.
The respondent-authority is directed to grant the scale of Rs. 1,640-2,900 with special pay of Rs. 100/- per mensem to the petitioners with effect from the dates of their respective appointments as Accountants.
The petitioners shall further be entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 2,000-3,200 with effect from May 1, 1990.
The respondent- authority shall fix the pay of the petitioners in the scales of pay as aforesaid.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to arrears of pay with effect from a date 38 months prior to the date of filing of the writ petition.
The payment shall be made within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, the respondent-authority does not make the payment within the period of three months, the petitioners shall be entitled to the payment with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.