VK Gupta, J - In this petition Govt. Order No. 176-F of 1994 dated  20, Oct 1994 has been challenged by the petitioner as being ultra-vires the provisions of Excise Act 1958 (1901 AD) and the Jammu & Kashmir Liquor License and Sale Rules, 1984 issued vide notification SRO 679 dated 13121984.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Government has no power and jurisdiction to issue the impugned order because it runs counter to the letter and spirit of the Act and the Rules.
It is also contended that by issuing the impugned order the Government has usurped the power of Excise Commissioner.
According to Mr. Goni, the government lacked inherent jurisdiction, power and authority to issue the impugned order.
2.
For facility of reference it shall be profitable to reproduce the text of the impugned order which reads thus :-  ``GOVERNMENT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
Subject :- Issuance of Bar Licences.
Govt. Order No. 176-F of 1994.
Dated :- 20.10.1994.
In exercise of the powers conferred in Section 20 of Excise Act, 1958, it is hereby ordered that the authority for issuance of Bar/OFF Licences in the State will vest with the State Government in the Finance Department.
Any licence issued during the current financial year by authority other than the Finance Department shall have to be authenticated by the Finance Department.
To this extent any delegation given to the Excise Commissioner shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.
By order of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
Sd/- (Sushma Choudhary)  Commr./Secretary to Govt.  Finance Department."
3.
As is apparent, the order has been issued in the exercise of the powers vested in the Govt. under section 20 of the Excise Act.
It shall be desirable to notice the contents of the section for its proper appreciation.
Section 20 reads thus :-  ``20.
(1) Every licence or permit granted under this Act shall be granted - (a) on payment of such fees (if any), (b) for such period.
(c) Subject to such restrictions and on such conditions, and (d) shall be in such form and contain such particulars, as the Government may direct, either generally or in any particular instance, in this behalf.
(2) The Government may, by order, delegate all or any of its powers under sub-section (1) to the Commissioner subject to such conditions, if any, as be specified in the order."
4.
It appears that the petitioner is attempting to construe, rather confuse and mix-up the authority of the Government in such a manner so as to interpret 1984 Rules by indicating that once 1984 Rules were issued, the government lost its authority and control over the subject matter relating to grant etc. of the licences.
In other words, the argument is that once the authority was delegated to the Excise Commissioner under 1984 Rules, it could not be withdrawn by the Government.
5.
The argument is wholly misconceived and totally devoid of any merit.
The plenary power to grant licences under Section 20 of the Act has been exclusively vested in the Government by the Legislature.
It is only in sub- section (2) that the Government has been given the option, authority and discretion to delegate all or any of its powers to the Commissioner subject to such conditions as may be imposed, if any, in the order granting such delegation.
What is noteworthy, perhaps importantly, to observe is that the delegation to the Commissioner in terms of Section 20 of the Act has to be done by a plain simple executive order.
It is not required to be done by any statutory regulation or under the Rules to be framed under the Act.
Merely because at one point of time the Government delegated the powers by the medium of some statutory rules and regulations under the Act, it does not mean that for all times to come in future, the government was estopped from withdrawing the delegation.
An authority vested with plenary powers as also the right to delegate has always the inherent power to withdraw the delegation, subject of course to any conditions that may be existing or imposed in the statute itself regulating such delegation.
As has been noticed in section 20 of the Act, since the delegation has to be done by a simple executive order, the withdrawal of delegation can also be done by the issuance of a simple and plain executive order, without taking recourse to the mechanism provided for or prescribed in the case of statutory rules or regulations.
I am saying so because the expression ``order has not been defined anywhere in the Act and in the absence of such a definition, its plain ordinary meaning has to be taken to be applicable in the context in which it has been used in the section.
6.
It was entirely upto and for the State Govt. to either retain power to grant licences to itself or to delegate it to the Commissioner, as is provided in section 20 of the Act.
If at one point of time, depending upon the circumstances prevailing then, the Government thought that the Commissioner could be delegated this power, it took that decision of delegation.
If later on, at a subsequent stage, for the reasons best known to the Government, it thought that the power to grant licences should be withdrawn from the Commissioner and that the same should be exercised by the government itself, as is primarily vesting in it, no one can find any fault with this approach of the government.
By no strech of imagination can the order impugned be said to be suffering from any legal infirmity nor can it be assailed as being ultra-vires the Excise Act or the rules framed thereunder.
7.
There is another angle involved in the case.
Why should the petitioner be worried as to who exercises the power to grant licences under the Act, as long as the power is exercised fairly and in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
It is not for the petitioner to insist that the power should be exercised by a particular authority.
The petitioner can surely have the grievance and complaint when the authority, be it the government or the Commissioner, exercising the power does so un-fairly, arbitrarily or against the principles of natural justice or in violation of provisions of the Excise Act or the rules framed thereunder.
Whenever such a complaint comes to the court, the court will not hesitate to examine it and decide the issue on its merits.
8.
At this stage to assail the order merely because the government has withdrawn to itself its plenary power is neither permissible nor desirable.
9.
For what has been stated above, this petition has no merit and is dimissed.
Connected CMP shall stand disposed of.
Petition dismissed.