VK Jhanji, J (Oral).
- In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioners are seeking a direction to the respondents to give one increment from the date of appointment of the petitioners as Head Teacher/Centre Head Teachers at the stage of time scale next above their substantive pay drawn by them in respect of their old posts.
2.
In brief, the facts are that petitioners who are JB.T.
teachers were initially appointed in the substantive pay scale of Rs.480-880/-.
On their acquiring additional qualifications such as Giani, BA Prabhakar etc. over and above their initial qualifications of JB.T., they were given scale next higher to the scale of Rs.480-880/-.
Petitioners have been promoted as Head Teachers/Centre Head Teachers with effect from the date mentioned against their respective names in the chart given in para-2 of the writ petition.
The grievance of the petitioners is that on their promotion as Head Teachers/Centre Head Teachers, they have been given the duties of higher responsibility which involves carrying out the work of greater importance than the one attached to their permanent post.
It has further been averred in the petition that Director of Public Instructions (Primary) Punjab, vide his letter dated 3181982, has declared and certified that the post of Head Teacher in the grade of Rs510-940/- is of relative higher responsibility than the post of JB.T.
teacher in the grade of Rs.480-880/- and the post of Centre Head Teacher in the grade of Rs.570-1,080/- is of relative higher responsibility than the post of Head Teacher and therefore, the pay of the incumbents against the newly upgraded posts of Head Teachers/Centre Head Teachers is to be fixed in terms of provisions of Rule 44(a) (i) of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.I, Part-I Petitioners have further averred that they have been making various representations to the department concerned to give them one increment from the date of their appointment at the stage next above the substantive pay being drawn by them in the old post for having been promoted to the new post, but no decision on their representation is being given by the respondents.
3.
Respondents in their written statement are not admitting the claim of the petitioners for the grant of one advance increment on their promotion on the ground that petitioners are already drawing higher grade of Rs.570-1,080/- and Rs620-1,200/- of higher post than from their promotional posts.
According to the respondents, the employees who are already drawing higher grade cannot claim the benefit of a post of lower grade as per rules.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
It is not disputed that the duties of Head Teachers/Centre Head Teachers require the incumbents to exercise general control of the school and maintain discipline among the members of staff and the students in addition to their duties of working as a teacher in the school.
The post of Head Teacher and Centre Head Teacher, thus, assumes the role of a general supervisor and it becomes the responsibility and duty of said teacher to manage the day to day administration of the school.
This has been so accepted by the Director of Public Instructions (Primary) Punjab.
vide their letter dated 3181982, which for the facility of reference is reproduced hereunder :-  ``After having examined the duties and degrees of responsibilities attached to the posts of Head Teachers and Centre Head Teachers up-graded vide Pb.
Govt.
Memo.
No.26(2) 79-7-Ed-(2)-4282 of 10.12.81.
Copy of duties and sanction attached at Annexure `A' & `B', it is certified and declared under serial No.17 of Rule 151 of Pb.CSR Vol.I, Part I that the post of Head Teacher in the grade of Rs510-940/- i.e. of relative higher responsibilities than the post of JB.T.
teacher in the grade of Rs.480-880/- and the post of Centre Head Teacher in the Grade of Rs.570-1,080/- is of relative higher responsibility than the post of Head Teacher and, therefore, the pay of the incumbents against the aforesaid newly upgraded posts of Head Teacher and Centre Head Teacher is to be fixed in the terms of provisions of Rule 44.
(a)(i) of Pb.
C.S.R.
Vol.I, Part-1.
This issue in accordance with the advice contained in Punjab Govt(Edu-Dept) Memo No.26(2) 79/7-Ed-2/4384, 4559 dated 18882".
In view of duties of higher responsibility attached to the post of Head Teachers/Centre Head Teachers and as stated in letter dated 3181982, Annexure P-1, the pay of the incumbents against the post of Head Teacher/Centre Head Teacher has to be fixed as per Rule 44.
(a)(i) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, which is to the following effect :-  ``44.
The initial substantive pay of a Government employee who is appointed substantively to a post on a time scale of pay is regulated as follows :-  (a) If he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post, or would hold a lien on such a post had his lien not been suspended -  (i) When appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance (as interpreted for the purposes of rule 413) than those attaching to such permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post".
In some what similar circumstances, Rule 44 came up for consideration before IS.
Tiwana, J (as his Lordship then was) in Lekh Raj Khera v. State of Punjab, 1986(3) SLR-410.
In that case, the teachers were placed in Masters' grade with effect from the dates they acquired B.T./B.Ed degrees and were also promoted to the posts of Masters against the 25% quota of vacancies made available to them.
Since their appointment as Masters involved ``the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance" than their earlier posts of teachers, they were held entitled to one grade increment while fixing their initial pay in the promoted post.
The very objection taken by the respondents in this case, was also taken in that case, and his Lordship (IS.
Tiwana, J) repelled this by saying that ``I see no weight in the stand of the respondent authorities that once the petitioners had been granted the pay scale of Masters in pursuance of Government orders dated July 23, 1957 with effect from the dates of their acquiring the higher degrees, than with their later actual appointments as Masters there was no assumption of duties or responsibilities of great or importance by them.
These authorities appear to be confusing between `revision of grade of a particular post' with that of `appointment to a new post'.
This distinction between the two situations was rightly pointed out by the D.P.I in his circular Annexure P.1 when he expressed that grant of Masters' grade to the petitioners was `a case of grade revision and not of promotion.'
Further this is so very clear from the contents of the Government letter dated July 23, 1957 itself.
It relates to the subject ``Revision of scales of pay of low paid Government servants" (as noticed by the Supreme Court in Kirpal Singh Bhatia's case (supra).
It further reads that ``after carefully considering the recommendations made by Pay Revision Committee it has been decided that the existing scales of pay of certain categories of posts should, with effect from 1st May, 1957, be revised as shown therein".
It is thus abundantly clear that this revision of petitioner's pay scales or the grant of Masters grade to them by itself did not amount to any promotion to the posts of Masters or assumption of duties and responsibilities of greater importance by them.
These promotions were granted to them later.
It was at that stage, i.e. at the time of actual promotion as Masters that they became entitled to the benefit of Rule 44.
(a)(i) reproduced above.
The initial revision of petitioners' pay vide letter dated July 23, 1957 may be an act of benevolence on the part of the Government but now it cannot be allowed to take away the grace of it by declining to give the benefit of the above noted rule to them."
Counsel for the respondent has not been able to cite any judgment taking a contrary view than the one taken in Lekh Raj Khera's case (supra).
Accordingly, this writ petition shall stand allowed with no order as to costs.
Respondents are directed to release to the petitioners one increment from the date of their appointment as Head Teachers/Centre Head Teachers at the stage next above the substantive pay being drawn by the petitioners in the old post, within six months from the date of receipt of order of this Court.