Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner Krishna Malik has sought a direction from this Court that she be given admission in the MBBS and that the admissions of respondent Nos. 2 and 3 be quashed.
The facts of this case are as under :-  2.
As per the prospectus issued by the Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, for admission to the aforesaid course, reservation of seats had been provided to the children of deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks in the Defence Services in the Medical College Rohtak as also in the Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha.
The aforesaid prospectus also provided a scheme of priority for filling up the seats from this category in the two Institutions in the following order :  ``Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education Agroha (Hisar) (i) No of seats 35 seats ii) Distribution of seats Reserved 17 seats Open : 18 seats.
iii) Reservation of seats Out of 35 seats to be filled by the University, the distribution of 17 reserved seats is as under : (a) Reserved seats Category No. of seats xx xx xx xx (f)(ii) Children of deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks (if there are no such cases, children of ex-servicemen)  Note :  1.
The priority for filling up of seats under category (f) in Medical College Rohtak and MATMRE, Agroha and two seats for ex-servicemen in DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar will be in following order :-  Priority i) Killed in action 1 ii) Disabled in action and boarded out from the service 2 iii) Died while in service and death attributable to service 3 iv) Disabled in service and boarded out with disability attribution to service 4 v) Gallantary award/other award winners 5 Within the category under (v) above priority will be given in following order :-  (a) Param Vir Chakra  (b) Ashok Chakra  (c) Sarvottam Yudh Seva Medal  (d) Mahavir Chakra  (e) Kirti Chakra  (f) Uttam Yudh Seva Medal  (g) Vir Chakra  (h) Shourya Chakra  (i) Yudh Seva Medal  (j) Sena/Navsena/Vayusena Medal  (k) mention in dispatches.
vi) Other/Ex-Servicemen/Ex-para military personnel.''
The petitioner being the daughter of an Ex-serviceman submitted an application appending therewith various certificates showing that the father of the petitioner had suffered a disability that had been attributed to military service and had been boarded out on that account.
As per the averments made in the petition, this application was not even considered although there was no candidate in priority No. 1 and the case of the petitioner fell within priority No. 2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that though she was more meritorious, one Promila Phogat and respondent No. 2 were given admission instead.
Aggrieved thereby the present petition has been filed.
3.
Upon notice of the petition, a reply has been filed only on behalf of respondent No. 1.
The stand taken therein is that the petitioner had not come to the Court with clean hands as she had been appending different certificates at different times in order to support her claim to the admission in question.
It has been submitted that the case of the petitioner was rejected primarily on the ground that for admission to the MBBS course for the year 1993 she had given a certificate which was at variance with the certificate that she had filed with the application form for the year 1994 i.e. the selection impugned in the present petition.
Copies of the certificates filed earlier were also appended as Annexures R-I and R-II with the reply.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record and find that the present petition deserves to succeed.
At the very outset, Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, has pointed out that for admission in the year 1993 reservation was made for the children of Ex- servicemen but there was no system of priority which was introduced for the first time in the year 1994 and, as such, the certificates appended with the application form in the year 1994 had been procured to meet those changed requirements.
He has also urged that a comparison of Annexures R-I and R-II with the certificates filed in the present petition, that is, Annexures P-1 and P-4 in sum and substance were identical and there was no qualitative difference between the two.
There is palpable merit in the stand of the petitioner.
We have gone through the certificates carefully and find that the father of the petitioner had been boarded out as being disabled during military service and this seems to be the import of all the certificates that have been put on record either by the petitioner or by the respondents.
Mr. Malik's argument that the petitioner's case fell within priority No. 2 is, however, on the face of it untenable.
Priority No. 2 talks about ex- serviceman disabled in action and boarded out from the service on that account.
We take this priority to mean that an ex-serviceman to fall within this category must be found to have been disabled in action, that is, suffered injury while in battle or on active service or duty.
We are, however, of the view that the case of the petitioner falls within Priority No. 4 that is, disabled in service and boarded out with disability attributable to service, as would be clear from the certificate appended with the pleadings.
The petitioner was accordingly liable to be considered under this priority.
5.
Mr. ID Singla, learned counsel for respondent No. 3, has however urged that the case of his client fell within priority No. 3 as her father had died as a result of a disease attributable to military service.
He has urged that the father of respondent No. 3 was boarded out in the year 1944 on account of Tuberculosis and he died as a result thereof.
This argument is however without force.
It has been conceded before us that the father of respondent No. 3 though boarded out on 1171944 had died on 881978 i.e. 34 years after discharge and it cannot, therefore, be plausibly argued that he had died of a disease attributable to military service so as to bring this respondent's case within the priority claimed by her.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed and a direction is issued that the petitioner be adjusted forthwith against one of the seats falling in category (f).