VK Gupta, J - A very short point is involved for consideration and determination in these two petitions, which are disposed of by this common order.
2.
The petitioners in both the cases were candidates in the Entrance examination for BE in various Engineering courses.
Both the petitioners were selected for the courses, the petitioner Jeet Kumar in mining course (Code 06) and petitioner Ajay Kumar Sharma for Metalurgical course (Code 08); whereas petitioner Jeet Kumar had obtained 121 marks in the Entrance examination, petitioner Ajay Kumar Sharma had obtained 114 marks in the said examination.
The last candidate selected in the open merit category had 138 marks.
So far facts are not disputed by the parties.
The dispute now starts.
3.
The petitioners are challenging Notification No. BE/CAEE of 1994 dated 26th September, 1994, whereby the competent authority has cancelled their nomination in the aforesaid two courses and instead admitted two other persons, namely, Bhupinder Singh and Puneet Kohli for the said two courses.
The petitioners are aggrieved of the issuance of the aforesaid Notification and have challenged the same in this Court through the medium of these two petitions.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for parties and perused the record.
5.
It appears that the competent authority was misled into granting selection to the two petitioners in the two courses, perhaps because of the mis-reading and the mis-interpretation of the relevant clause in the information brochure regulating the admission/selection for the Engineering courses.
6.
The relevant clause in the information brochure pertaining to the preparation of merit lists is clause ``13" which reads, as under :  ``131.
For open merit and reserved category candidates the selection shall be made strictly on the basis of merit in the Entrance Examination as prescribed by the Government from time to time.
132.
In case of any subsequent vacancy/vacancies caused by whatsoever reason the same shall be filled from amongst the candidates of that particular category strictly according to merit.
In the event of non- availability of eligible candidate (s) in a reserved category the resultant vacancy shall go to the open merit category."
7.
On a plain reading of the clause 13, particularly clause 131, it becomes abundantly clear that for each and every category, whether it is the open merit category or a category belonging to reserved class, the selection of the candidates has to be made strictly on the basis of the merit in the Entrance Examination.
It clearly, therefore, follows that merit in the Entrance Examination is the only mode and method which is prescribed for making selection in the BE Course in various subjects.
what is the merit?
Mr. Bhardwaj has submitted that initially when the competent authority granted admission, it was right in following the principle in its mind that the merit must be subjectwise.
Mr. Bhardwaj is totally and absolutely wrong in his submission.
8.
What Mr. Bhardwaj wants the court to hold is that the selection should be made not on the basis of the overall merit of the candidates in the entrance examination, but that it should be made on the division of the candidates into classes relatable to the options given by them for particular subject.
In other words, his submission is that all the candidates who appeared in the entrance examination should be divided into classes subject-wise and then, based on their inter-se merit in each subject, they should be picked up for selection and granted admission.
The argument is wholly misconceived and totally fallacious.
A plain reading of clause 13-1 quoted above clearly and unequivocally, without any manner of doubt lays that the selection shall be made strictly on the basis of merit in the entrance examination.
9.
The stand taken by the competent authority in cancelling the admission of the petitioners on realising its mistake is wholly correct.
There is no doubt that the competent authority was initially mistaken in its view that the selection could have been made subject-wise.
It was wholly correct and justified in taking and adopting the latter view, correct one that the only prescribed mode and method of selection was by determining the inter-se merit of all the candidates in the entrance examination, not by dividing them into classes relatable to the subjects opted for by them, for the purposes of granting admission in the courses.
It is no doubt true that the allocation of subjects of the candidates, based on the options exercised by them has to be directly linked with obtaining merit overall in the entrance examination.
The selection cannot be made on the basis of the comparative or inter-se merit of candidates in any particular subject or with relation to any particular option given by them in that subject.10.
The petitions, therefore, have no merit and are dismissed.
Interim directions shall stand vacated forthwith.
Petition dismissed.