AS Nehra, J - Chandan Singh has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of mandamus/Certiorari directing the respondents not to retire the petitioner before completion of age of 58 years and for setting aside notices Annexures P/3 and P/4 to the writ petition.
2.
Briefly stated the facts of the case as mentioned in the writ petition are as follows :  3.
The petitioner was appointed on the post of Male Social Worker and he joined on 271962.
Petitioner was promoted to the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer on 961985 on ad hoc basis and was reverted back on 1781991 on the joining of a person who had been selected against a regular post by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
The petitioner worked on the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer for six years and earned `Very Good' and `Good' reports during these six years.
Petitioner was conveyed ACR.
for the year 1988-89 after 2-1/2 years on 6121991.
The annual report was mentioned as `Average'.
Petitioner filed a representation in the month of December 1991.
No reply was given to the representation of the petitioner by respondent No. 2.
For the year 1992-93 ACR of the petitioner was `Good' but against Column Nos. 3 and 4 `Average' was mentioned which was conveyed to the petitioner on 2581993.
Petitioner filed a representation in September 1993 against the remarks conveyed for the year 1992-93.
On the representation of the petitioner no decision was taken by the respondents.
Petitioner has further stated that the petitioner has earned 90% `Very Good' `Good' annual reports; that only one report of the petitioner is `Average' and, therefore, respondents have erred in law in retiring the petitioner pre-maturely.
4.
Written Statement on behalf of the respondents has been filed by the Joint Secretary-cum-Director, Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes Department, Haryana.
In para 2 of the written statement it is stated that as per Haryana Government instructions dated 1751989 last ten years record of the official is to be kept in view while deciding the cases relating to retention in Government service after attaining the age of 55 years.
It has been further stated in this para that the petitioner has obtained two `Very Good' reports, seven `Good' reports and one `Average' report.
In para 2 of the written statement has been further mentioned that although the reports for the year 1988-89 and 1992-93 were graded as ``Good' but these reports contain `Average' grading in various columns of the report and as such these reports cannot be taken as `Good' and that in addition to this, the petitioner was punished thrice for committing various acts of ommission and commission.
5.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that according to the instructions dated 1751989 of the Haryana Government, Annexure R1, while calculating the overall assessment of employee due weightage has to be given to the punishments awarded to the employee during the period under consideration and the same are not to be ignored while assessing overall suitability.
He has further contended that the punishment awarded to the petitioner has been reflected in his AC Rs. and in view of the punishment, the AC Rs. of the petitioner have been suitably down graded.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that out of the ten ACRs of the petitioner after having been down graded in view of the punishments two are `Very Good', seven `Good' and only one report is `Average' and that the average report cannot be taken as an adverse entry.
In support of his argument he has relied upon Faquir Chand Aggarwal v. State of Haryana and another, 1993 (2) Recent Services Judgments 507.
A Division Bench of this Court, in Faquir Chand's case has held that :-  ``Many persons in Government service are average officers but that does not mean that they lack in integrity.
However, if an officer lacks integrity, he is not just an average officer.
He is much below that.
Since overall assessment of the reporting authority was average one can safely conclude that he had not made up his mind regarding the integrity of the petitioner and wanted that the petitioner should be further watched to reach a final conclusion.
As noticed earlier, the remaining reports of the petitioner are good.
There is only one other report of average but that is not sufficient to premature retire the petitioner.
The object of screening at the age of 50 and then at the age of 55 is to chop off dead wood from the service and get rid of dishonest and really inefficient employees.
That serves the public interest.
The record of the petitioner for the 10 years preceding the orders of premature retirement does not justify the conclusion that the retention of the petitioner is not in public interest.''
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that the representations filed by the petitioner have not been considered and no order rejecting his representations has been conveyed to the petitioner.
The learned counsel further submitted that as the petitioner has specifically stated in paras 5 and 7 of the writ petition that he had made representations against the adverse remarks conveyed to him, therefore, the remarks conveyed qua the year 1988-89 and 1992-93 cannot be taken into consideration while retiring the petitioner pre-maturely.
In support of his argument he has relied upon Ravinder Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) SCT 788 : 1993(1) Recent Services Judgments 344  7.
Mr. PS Kadian, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has contended that it has been stated in the written statement that no representation against the adverse remarks was received in the Department.
Mr. Kadian has further contended that although the reports for the years 1988-89 and 1992-93 were graded as `Good' but these reports contained `Average' reading in various columns of the report and as such, these reports cannot be taken as `Good'.
He has further contended that the petitioner was punished thrice vide annexure R2, R3 and R4 for committing various acts of omission and commission and therefore, the impugned order of retiring the petitioner pre-maturely is legal and not liable to be quashed.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find force in the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
According to the instructions of the Government dated 1751989 Annexure R1 if an employee has been awarded the punishment for an act of omission or commission during a particular period, his ACRs of that year (i.e. the year for which the act of omission or commission took place) may be suitably down graded.
In view of the instructions, ACRs of the petitioner have been down graded suitably.
Even after down-grading the ACRs of the petitioner, the petitioner had earned two `Very Good', seven `Good' and one Average report.
Average report cannot be taken as an adverse entry.
The case of the petitioner is covered by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Faquir Chand Aggarwal's case (supra).
As noticed earlier petitioner has obtained two `Very Good' reports, seven `Good' reports and only one report of the petitioner is `Average' and that is not sufficient to prematurely retire the petitioner.
The object of screening at the age of 55 is to chop off dead wood from the service and get rid of dishonest and really inefficient employees.
That serves the public interest.
The record of the petitioner for the ten years preceding the order of pre- mature retirement does not justify the conclusion that the retention of the petitioner is not in public interest.
The impugned notices Annexures P-3 and P-4 and the order of the State Government by which the petitioner has been pre-maturely retired, cannot be sustained.
9.
Petitioner has specifically stated in his writ petition that he had made representations against these adverse remarks and that his representations have not been considered.
Though these averments have been denied in the written statement but we are not going to rely upon the averments made in the written statement.
A person who has been conveyed adverse remarks for the first time in his service, is not supposed to sit at home and he must make a representation qua his grievances.
We hold that the petitioner made representations as stated in paras 5 and 7 of the writ petition and these averments have been denied in the writ statement for extraneous consideration.
Since the representations of the petitioner have not been decided by respondent No. 2, therefore, these adverse remarks cannot be taken into consideration while passing the order of pre-mature retirement against the petitioner.
10.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexures P-3 and P-4 and the order by which the petitioner had been retired prematurely are set aside.
The petitioner shall be re-instated forthwith and shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.