RP Sethi, J (Oral) - Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
2.
Aggrieved by the order of the appellate authority appointing the petitioner against the post of Lecturer, he filed a Civil Writ Petition No. 1025 of 1988 in this Court praying for the issuance of appropriate direction to the appellants herein declaring him to be absorbed with the appellant-management to the post of Principal in the scale of Rs. 1200-1900/- with all consequential benefits.
He also prayed for the grant of arrears alongwith interest at the prevalent rates after quashing the Annexure P/6 attached with the writ petition.
The learned Single Judge vide the judgment impugned in this appeal set aside the impugned order and directed the appellants herein to absorb the respondent-writ petitioner as Principal retrospectively from the date of taking over of the charge by giving him all consequential benefits of arrears of pay, allowances and seniority etc.
The writ petitioner was held entitled to interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum on the arrears of pay and allowances.
The judgment has been assailed on the ground that the learned Single Judge has not appreciated the averments made by the appellants in their written statement.
It is submitted that in the gift deed of the taking over of the Guru Nanak College, Gurdaspur, dated 1171988 it had been specifically settled between the Government and the Management that the writ petitioner would be taken over as Senior Lecturer and not a Principal.
The writ petitioner who is stated to be Member of the Management-Committee was stated to be estopped from pleading otherwise or preferring claim in the form of the writ petition.
3.
The facts as stated in the writ petition reveal that the petitioner was appointed Principal, Guru Nanak College, Gurdaspur in the scale of Rs. 700-1100 vide Resolution No. 34 dated 27.5.1975 and his qualifications and appointment was approved by the Vice-Chancellor of the Guru Nanak Dev University vide order dated 3061975.
The writ petitioner was confirmed as Principal with effect from 3151976.
The Education Department of the Punjab Government vide memo dated 30.9.1982 annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P/4 sanctioned for the taking over of the four educational institutions including the institution of which the writ petitioner was Principal.
In the aforesaid memo it was mentioned that the staff which fulfils the qualifications was to be absorbed but they shall be treated as new entrants.
With regard to the Principal it was stated that he would be taken over as senior-most Lecturer and not as Principal after taking over of the management of the aforesaid institution.
The order of the Government is stated to have been approved by the Managing Committee in its meeting held on 1851983.
The writ petitioner immediately represented to the concerned authorities for the grant of appropriate relief by appointing him as Principal of the Institution.
As no appropriate action was taken by the appellant authorities, he filed the aforesaid writ petition which was disposed of by the Learned Single Judge in the manner as indicated hereinabove.
4.
The learned Single Judge considering the matter at length found that all persons who were employed in the aforesaid institution has been taken over in the State employment conferring them with all benefits which they were enjoying at the time of such takingover.
A distinction, was, however, made in the case of the Principal as the writ petitioner was.
The appellant-State could not justify their action of making discrimination amongst similarly situated employees of the same institution.
Being convinced that the action of the respondents was discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the Learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and issued appropriate directions as noted hereinabove.
5.
The learned counsel for the appellant has not been in a position to point out any infirmity in the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
We do not find any illegality or error of jurisdiction in the order of the learned Single Judge.
6.
Our attention has been drawn to a Division Bench Judgment of this Court rendered in C.W.P.
No. 2183 of 1991 on 1571992 Rajinder Kaur v. State of Punjab, which involved similar points of facts and law.
The Division Bench gave similar directions as were given by the learned Single Judge in the instant case.
The Special Leave Petition No. 14399 of 1992 filed against the order of the Division Bench was dismissed on 7.12.1992.
7.
There is no merit in this appeal which is hereby dismissed but under the peculiar facts and circumstances with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.