SM Rizvi, J - By medium of this petition, the order of respondent No. 3, the Deputy Sales Tax Commissioner Jammu, dated 8th August, 1990, terminating the services of the petitioner, under Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations, w.e.f.
6th February, 1990, has been challenged, inter alia, on the following grounds :-  "(a) That the impugned order dated 881990 terminating the services of the petitioner under Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations being essentially an order of removal from services, can be legally and validly passed only in accordance with the rules and procedure as established by law, requiring, inter alia, that no member of a Civil service of the State shall be dismissed or removed from service except after an enquiry in which he has been informed in writing of the charges against him and the grounds on which it is proposed to take disciplinary action and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges and after such enquiry if it is proposed to impose any major penalty, no such penalty be imposed until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation on the penalty proposed.
As such the impugned order dated 881990 suffers, on the face of it, from the vice of illegality and unconstitutionality and is accordingly liable to be quashed; (b) That Article 12 of the J&K Civil Service Regulations only specifies particular misconduct entailing major penalty of loss of appointment with certain exceptions but there is nothing in Article 128 CSR, authorising removal from service without observing the procedure as established by law and prescribed by the Constitution.
Consequently, even in the case of loss of appointment in terms of Article 128 CSR the procedure as established by law and envisaged by the Constitution has to be observed on the pain of invalidation of the action taken in break of the procedural safeguards.
The impugned order dated 881990 is, therefore, arbitrary and wholly unauthorised, and as such is liable to be quashed; (c) That the impugned order dated 881990 is also discountenanced by the law and the Constitution inasmuch as terminates and thus removes the petitioner from service retrospectively.
The impugned order dt. 881990 on this count as well is liable to be quashed; (d) That the treatment meted out to the petitioner by respondents 2 and 3 in the matter of services under the State is clearly arbitrary malicious and hostile inasmuch as the respondent No. 2 even on being urged by the respondent No. 1 to set right the wrong and remove the injustice, has failed without any cause on reason and obviously for oblige considerations to do the needful in vindication of Rule of Law.
The impugned order dt. 881990 in this view of the matter clearly offends the mandate of Article 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution as applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and as such liable to be quashed; (e) That the impugned order dated 881990 has the effect of nullifying the constitutional guarantees with which the services under the State are hinged and as a sequel thereto has resulted in grave miscarriage of justice and is, therefore, liable to be quashed; (f) That the impugned order has resulted into manifest failure of justice and in order to prevent the failure justice so occasioned from being perpetuated, the impugned order dt. 881990 merits to be quashed, in the interest of justice."
2.
The petitioner was serving as an orderly in the Sales Tax Department, Jammu, on substantive basis, when he applied for leave on medical grounds for a period of thirty days w.e.f.
6th February, 1990, which was recommended to be sanctioned in his favour by his immediate Officer, the Excise and Taxation Officer concerned.
Allegedly, he was relieved by the said ETO, from the date of application.
It is submitted that during !he course of his sickness, an extraordinary exigency cropped up in his family due to the sad and sudden demise of his uncle at Bagh, a place in the Pak Occupied Kashmir, and accordingly, the petitioner was required to accompany his parents to that place, in order to attend the mourning and to share the grief of the bereaved family.
Allegedly, he was caught in an extraordinary situation, and under the dictates of situation and circumstances beyond his control, was left with no time to complete the formalities in the department for proceeding to Pak Occupied Kashmir.
He, however, kept on seeking extensions of his leave period by submitting applications through his brother from Jammu.
3.
On his return from Pak Occupied Kashmir, the petitioner reported for duty in the office of respondent No. 3 where he came to know about the order impugned in this petition.
He preferred representation to the concerned Advisor to the Governor, in the form of appeal, against the said order, which however, was rejected.
4.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 3 which is not supported by an affidavit it is admitted that the petitioner had applied for leave for a period of thirty days w.e.f.
6.2.1990.
It is also admitted that the Excise and Taxation Officer concerned forwarded the petitioner's application to respondent No. 3.
It is, however, stated that the leave was not sanctioned as it was not supported by a medical certificate.
It is also admitted that at the expiry of 30 days, the petitioner submitted another application for extension of leave for thirty days more.
At the expiry of that period, admittedly, he submitted another application for extension of leave for one month more.
It is also admitted that the last application for extension of leave was received on 751990.
5.
It is further stated in the reply that the ETO concerned had asked the petitioner to submit a medical certificate in support of his application, but the said letter, sent under registered cover, was received back unserved as the petitioner was not available at his home address.
The respondent No. 3 again sent a letter to the petitioner at his home address to resume his duty within 10 days, which too could not served on him.
Lastly, a notice was published in the newspaper "Daily Excelsior" on 1161990 asking the petitioner to explain his position and to show cause as to why his services be not terminated under Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations.
Consequently, the order impugned was passed terminating the services of the petitioner.
6.
I have gone through and considered the written arguments submitted by the learned counsel for the parties.
The file has also been examined thoroughly.
7.
It may be stated at the very outset that the original file of this writ petition was misplaced in the Registry, and it was reported by the Additional Registrar that despite the best efforts of all concerned, it could not be traced out.
With the consent of the learned counsel for the parties the record of the file was ordered to be re-constructed, vide Court orders dated 1051993 and 2051993.
8.
The petitioner filed the relevant copies for the re-construction of record which were taken on record.
However, the copy of the counter having been filed by respondent No. 3 was without any affidavit.
The learned counsel for the respondents took some opportunities to get the affidavit of respondent No. 3 filed in support of the counter.
On 1.10.1993 he was given one more opportunity in this behalf.
Despite of all this, the affidavit has not been filed by respondent No. 3 in support of the counter.
No doubt, the reply of respondent No. 3 is there but without any affidavit by him.
This reply is legally un-tenable as it is not supported by the affidavit of the deponent.
There are some factual averments made in the reply and in order to testify their authenticity, the affidavit was required to be filed by the concerned respondent.
In absence of the affidavit, the respondents should have at least produced the documentary proof for such factual averments to be made believable and trustworthy.
Nothing of the sort has been done by them.
9.
The question is that after the file got misplaced, its record was ordered to be re-constructed.
The petitioner filed a copy of the writ petition alongwith copies of annexures supported by an affidavit.
He even filed a copy of the counter which was earlier filed by respondent No. 3.
The respondent No. 3 took several opportunities to sign the said counter.
Last of all, he appears to have signed it but without supporting it by his affidavit.
So, the position is that the averments made in the writ petition on an affidavit have remained un-rebutted.
The reply of respondent No. 3 without any affidavit, particularly to the factual averments is not sufficient to controvert the averments made in the writ petition on an affidavit.
10.
As regards the merits of the case, I think a short controversy is involved, as to whether under Articles 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations; the petitioner's services could be terminated without any inquiry.
11.
Admittedly, the petitioner is a Government servant and working substantively against a post of orderly in the Sales Tax Department, Jammu.
Admittedly, he applied for leave for thirty days w.e.f.
6.2.1990, which was recommended in his favour by his immediate officer, the concerned Excise and Taxation Officer.
Allegedly, the ETO relieved the petitioner after recommending his leave case.
While he was on leave, his uncle is reported to have died in Pak Occupied Kashmir and he was required to accompany his parents immediately.
The death was allegedly, sudden and the parents of the petitioner too had to leave instantaneously for the Pak Occupied Kashmir, the petitioner, therefore, could not complete the formalities for getting his leave sanctioned properly.
He, admittedly, applied for extension of his leave through his brother from time to time.
He was away for a total period of about six months only and had even applied lied for extension of leave from time to time.
Admittedly, he was not at his home when the respondent No. 3 sent letters to him for resumption of his duty.
The notice published in the newspaper "Daily Excelsior" also could not be communicated to him as he was not in Jammu, but had gone to the Pak Occupied Kashmir, Presumably, the "Daily Excelsior" has no circulation in the Pak Occupied Kashmir and, therefore, the petitioner had no knowledge of the notices given to him for resumption of his duty, either by registered post at his Jammu address or in the `Daily Excelsior' newspaper, published in Jammu.
Even if it is presumed as correct that a notice was given to the petitioner through a registered post at his Jammu address while he was in the Pak Occupied Kashmir and the same was also published in the Daily Excelsior Jammu, when he was not in Jammu, the question is as to whether the mere giving of notice to an allegedly absentee Government servant for resumption of his duty, which too was not admittedly served upon him, is sufficient to terminate his services without following the procedure is established by law.
Whether Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations contemplates the dismissal of a Government servant without an inquiry as to the alleged un-authorised absence.
12.
I have already decided a case of a similar nature entitled : Dr. Zaffar Mahdi v. State which has been upheld by a Division Bench of this Court also, wherein the law has been thoroughly discussed on the involved points referred to above.
It has been held that mere notice to a Government servant allegedly un-authorisedly absent is not sufficient to terminate his services, and Article 128 (supra) does not contemplate an order of dismissal without an inquiry into the alleged absence.
A Government servant enjoys protection of his service as enshrined in Article 311 of the Constitution of India and Section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.
Not only that, the procedure is given in the Jam Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 which is to be followed as a mandate of law before any punishment is imposed on any Government servant for any mis-conduct conduct.
No doubt, Article 128 (supra) envisages loss of appointment of a Government servant un-authorisedly absent, but the procedure as laid down in Appeal Rules referred to above is to be followed before passing an order.
In the Ranbir Penal Code, punishments for commission of offences are provided, but that does not mean that the same can be imposed without following the procedure as laid down in the Criminal Procedure Code.
13.
In this regard, the Government appears to have sought a legal opinion from its Law Department, about the correctness or otherwise of the order of the respondent No. 3 terminating the service of the petitioner without an inquiry, and the same is contained in Annexure "P/H" to the writ petition, which, for the sake of facility is reproduced below :  "GOVERNMENT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR FINANCE DEPARTMENT NO : DT-STS/488-91 DATED : 10.6.1992 To The Commissioner Sales Tax Jammu and Kashmir Government, Srinagar.
Sub : Recruitment to all sanctioned posts falling outside the purview of State Subordinate Service Recruitment Board.
Sir, Shri Qamar Ali had submitted a petition to re-join his duties which was forwarded to you under letter No. even dated 1981991 with the directions to examine treating the same as an appeal against the order of Deputy Commissioner Sales Tax (Administration) Jammu.
Vide your letter No. : P-STC/2052/Adm.
dated 5.3.92 you have informed Shri Qamar Ali that the petition cannot be treated as an appeal and that their is no reason to interfere with the orders of Dy.
Commissioner Sales Tax (Administration) Jammu.
The ex-employee submitted another petition before the Advisor (H) who desired to examine with reference to Rides.
The case has accordingly been examined in terms of J & K CS (OCA) Rules, 1956 and Law Department also consulted.
Termination of service for un authorised absence from duty is a major punishment and can be inflicted upon a member of the service only after following the procedure.
A formal charge-sheet has to be issued and after the reply or no reply, an inquiry officer is to be appointed.
In the absence of enquiry the order of termination is bad in law and cannot be sustained.
The stage for appointment of an IO is already over.
As such the appeal authority has to pass a appropriate order on the appeal which can includes quashing of impugned order merely for non-compliance of procedure.
I am accordingly directed to advise you to again examine the case accordingly and furnish a report about action taken to this department.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- SPECIAL SECY.
TO GOVERNMENT FINANCE DEPTT."
14.
The Law Department had given a correct opinion to the department that the termination of service for un-authorised absence from duty is a major punishment, and could not be inflicted upon a member of service without following the procedure as established by law.
A formal charge-sheet was required to be issued to the delinquent and after its service, or otherwise or after his reply or otherwise, the inquiry was to be conducted into the matter after appointing an Inquiry Officer for the purpose, in ex parte or otherwise.
15.
The respondent No. 3 has passed the order impugned without following the procedure as established by law.
He has only issued a notice to the petitioner, that too, was not admittedly served upon him.
He has mis- construed the important and extent of Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations.
The said article does not contemplate the dismissal/termination from services of a Government servant without inquiry.
No doubt, for un-authorised absence, a Government servant can be removed or dismissed from service, but only after he is given sufficient opportunity of being heard as envisaged in Article 311 of the Constitution of India and Section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir read with Section 33 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, Article 128 (supra) only specifies the punishment which can be imposed upon a Government servant for his unauthorised absence.
However, before imposing such punishment the Inquiry into the correctness or otherwise of his unauthorised absence is mandatory, as otherwise, such action would be arbitrary, unreasonable, unjust and without any guidelines, which is not sustainable at the touch-stone of the principles of natural justice.
The termination of services of a Government servant under Article 128 (supra) is essentially an order of removal from service, and such punishment can be imposed only in accordance with the rules and procedure as established by law, requiring, inter alia, that no member of a Civil Service of the State shall be dismissed or removed from service except after an injury in which he has been informed in writing of the charges against him and the grounds on which it is proposed to take disciplinary action, and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, in respect of those charges and after such inquiry if it is proposed to impose any major penalty, no such penalty be imposed until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed.
16.
Viewed thus, it is manifest that the order impugned has been passed without an inquiry into the alleged misconduct of the petitioner for his alleged unauthorised absence and a major punishment of removal from service imposed upon him in flagrant violation of law and the rules on the subject.
The import and extent of Article 128 of Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations has been offended by the respondent No. 3 while passing the said order after issuing a mere notice to the petitioner for resumption of his duty which too was not served upon him.
Undoubtedly, the treatment meted out to the petitioner by respondents 2 and 3 is clearly arbitrary, malicious and hostile, inasmuch as, the respondent No. 2 even on being urged by the respondent No. 1 to set right the wrong and remove the injustice, has failed without any reasonable cause or reason, and obviously for oblique considerations to do the needful in vindication of Rule of law.
The impugned order, therefore, clearly offends and is violative of the mandate of Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India, as applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Not only that, it has the effect of nullifying the constitutional guarantees with which the services under the State are hinged, and as a sequal thereto, has resulted in grave to miscarriage of justice to petitioner.
17.
In these circumstances of the case, I have no hesitation to issue a writ of certiorari quashing the impugned order dated 881990.
The said order is declared as un-constitutional, illegal and bad in law, and is hereby accordingly quashed.
Consequently, I also issue a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to treat the petitioner in continuous service with all consequential benefits including promotions.
He shall be paid all the emoluments as were due to him for the period for which he has remained out of service, pursuant to the erroneous order impugned.
He is also held entitled to costs assessed at Rs. 5,000/- to be paid by the respondents 2 and 3.
18.
The file shall be consigned to record after its due completion.
Petition allowed.