GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner who joined Municipal Service in the State of Haryana was promoted as Accountant by order dated 17.11.1987 passed by the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana.
On account of his personal problems the petitioner wanted his posting in Municipal Committee, Nuh and for this purpose he even agreed for his reversion from the post of Accountant.
Request made by the petitioner was acceded to by the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana who passed order dated 211991 (Annexure P.3) reverting the petitioner for a period of one year and posted him as clerk Municipal Committee, Nuh.
2.
Municipal Committee, Nuh passed resolution dated 2311991 for creation of a post of a Accountant and the petitioner made efforts with the departmental authorities to be accommodated against the said post of Accountant.
Having failed to persuade the authorities of the Directorate of the Local Bodies to accommodate him as Accountant in pursuance of resolution dated 2311991 of the Municipal Committee Nuh, the petitioner made a representation dated 2231993 (Annexure P-7) for being promoted in view of the conditions incorporated in the order Annexure P-3 and having failed to get order of re-promotion he approached this court by filing Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner for accommodation on the post of Accountant of which reference has been made in the resolution of the Municipal Committee, Nuh.
Respondents have pleaded that a new post in the service of the Municipal Committee could have come into existence only after proper sanction of the State Government and since the State Government had not given sanction to the resolution of the Municipal Committee, Nuh, the post of Accountant did not come into existence in Municipal Committee, Nuh.
According to the respondents, in the absence of validly sanctioned post, the petitioner had no right to be promoted/posted as Accountant in the Municipal Committee, Nuh.
4.
During the pendency of the Writ Petition an order dated 24.12.1993 came to be issued by the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana promoting the petitioner as Accountant.
In view of this development the only question which now survives for consideration is as to whether the Writ Petition should be declared as having become infructuous or the petitioner should be given relief by way of retrospective promotion as Accountant.
5.
In order to decide this issue I consider it appropriate to reproduce order Annexure P-3.
"DIRECTORATE OF LOCAL BODIES, HARYANA, CHANDIGARH.
ORDER Shri Harish Chand, Accountant, Municipal Committee, Safidon, is reverted from the post of Accountant for a period of one year on his request and consequent upon his reversion, he is posted on the post of clerk in Municipal Committee, Nuh.
Sd/-.Director, Local Bodies, Haryana.
Chandigarh Dated 2191.
Endst.
No. 2E-90/518, Dated 2191.
A copy is forwarded to the following for information and necessary action : 1.
Deputy Commissioner, Jind/Gurgaon.
2.
President, Municipal Committee, Safidon/Meham/Nuh.
3.
Shri Harish Chand, Accountant Ward No. 3, near Saini Chopal, Nuh (Gurgaon).
Sd/- Superintendent (Establishment) for Director, Local Bodies, Haryana.
Chandigarh."
6.
A perusal of this order shows that reversion of the petitioner from the post of Accountant was for a period of one year.
Thus it can be said that with the end of period of one year the petitioner did become entitled to be re-promoted as Accountant.
This was his legal right.
A corresponding legal obligation was imposed on respondent No. 2 to issue orders re-promoting the petitioner as Accountant with effect from 111992.
Clearly respondent No. 2 failed to discharge his corresponding obligation qua the right of the petitioner.
Therefore, an appropriate direction deserves to be given by this court to treat the petitioner in the cadre of Accountants in Municipal Service with effect from 111992.
This will, however, not entitle the petitioner to claim monetary benefit with effect from 111992 insofar as the post of Accountant is concerned.
A perusal of the record the case shows that the petitioner made representation on 2231993 for his re-promotion.
Therefore, ends of justice will be full met if the petitioner is allowed actual salary allowance on the post of Accountant with effect from 2231993 and is given notional benefit of his fixation of pay in the cadre of Accountants with effect from 111992.
7.
In the result this petition is disposed of with a direction to respondent No. 2 to pass necessary order within one month treating the petitioner as Accountant with effect from 111992.
The petitioner will get benefit of pay and allowances (actual) for the post of Accountant with effect from 23.3.1993 but his pay shall be notionally fixed in the pay scale of that post with effect from 111992.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.