SP Kurdukar, CJ.
(Oral) - Admitted.
Since the pleadings of the parties are complete, by consent the petition is placed on board and called out for hearing.
2.
Heard learned Counsel for the parties.
By this writ petition, the petitioner seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated July 13, 1994.
Annexure P-7, passed by respondent No. 2 cancelling petitioner's transfer.
3.
Petitioner is 47 years old woman and is Orthopaedically handicapped with 50% disability of both legs on account of Polio.
She has been working in the Public Works Department (B&R) Branch of the Punjab Government.
She got married sometimes in the year 1980 and her husband, who is Lecturer in the Government College, Faridkot, is also handicapped with minimum 40% disability of left arm.
Medical certificates of petitioner and her husband are placed on record as Annexures P-1 and P-2.
On compassionate grounds, it appears, respondent No. 2 vide his order dated June 30, 1994, Annexure P-5, transferred the petitioner from Ferozepur to Faridkot in the public interest as her husband is serving at Faridkot.
4.
This order later on came to be cancelled by respondent No. 2 vide order dated July 13, 1994, Annexure P-7.
It is this cancellation of transfer order which is subject matter of challenge in the present petition.
5.
We have gone through the pleadings of the parties.
Mr. GS Bhatia, learned Advocate for respondent No. 3, who has really gained by cancellation of order dated July 13, 1994 vehemently urged that the transfer is purely within the discretion and jurisdiction of the State Government and, therefore, it is not proper for the Court to interfere with the transfer orders.
He also urged that the case of third respondent is a couple case and if the desired relief is granted to the petitioner, respondent No. 3 will have to stay away from his wife and family members.
He further urged that it is the policy of the Government to accommodate serving couple at one place and consistent with this policy, respondent No. 3 and his wife were kept together.
6.
Learned counsel for the parties drew our attention to various policies framed by the State Government in this behalf and in our opinion, having regard to the physical condition of the petitioner and her husband, it would be more appropriate to put them at one place.
This would be consistent with the Government policy relating to the handicapped employees.
7.
Mr. Aggarwal, learned Addl.
Advocate General urged that the order of transfer dated June 30, 1994, was passed by respondent No. 2 when there was a ban on transfers of government employees and such transfers could be done by the Chief Minister only.
He, therefore, urged that the cancellation order dated July 13, 1994 is consistent with the Government Policy.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the cancellation order, dated July 13, 1994 will cause more harm to petitioner, who is a handicapped.
As against this, respondent No. 3 is not a handicapped person but certainly his case is that of couple case.
It may also be noted here that respondent No. 3 had been at Faridkot on the ground of couple case for over nearly 18 years.
Bearing in mind the facts and circumstances of the present case, we set aside the order dated July 13, 1994, Annexure P-7 and restore the order of transfer dated June 30, 1994.
We are conscious of the fact that ordinarily this Court should not interfere with the transfer orders but having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case, we deviate from the said principle.
Writ Petition to stand disposal of accordingly.
Writ Petition accordingly.