VK Bali, J (Oral) - Dr Harkirat Singh through present petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated June 25, 1991 (Annexure P-10) whereby tentative decision dated April 21, 1986 (Annexure P-5) was withdrawn and respondent Nos. 2 to 4 were held senior to him.
2.
Brief facts, on which the relief aforesaid rests, reveal that petitioner after qualifying MBBS examination from Government Medical College, Patiala, joined as PCMS (II) on February 16, 1963.
He thereafter, qualified Master of Surgery in the year 1972 and was shifted in teaching cadre.
He was posted as Senior Lecturer in Government Medical College, Amritsar in 1973.
He belongs to Backward Class but joined service in general category.
He was promoted to the post of Assistant Professor of Surgery in general category and had not claimed benefit of reservation of the time of aforesaid promotion.
It is pleaded that the State of Punjab issued instructions in 1974 whereby benefit of reservation, which was granted to the members of Backward Class at the initial appointment in service, was extended to promotions also.
The employees belonging to backward Class, thus, became entitled to benefits of reservation in promotion matters.
Petitioner furnished certificate to the effect that he belonged to Backward Class in the department on August 22, 1979.
On intimation of the fact aforesaid, it is pleaded, he became eligible for the benefits of reservation in further promotion.
A decision to this effect was taken by the Government.
Social Welfare Department vide their order dated February 1, 1980.
It is pleaded that the State of Punjab, in order to remove any doubt, reiterated its policy that the benefit of reservation was also available to those employees who belong to Backward Class but had not entered the service as such from the date they furnished such evidence in their departments.
3.
The post of Additional Professor (Surgery) fell vacant and it was, it is pleaded, to be treated as reserved point for Scheduled Caste.
As no Scheduled Caste candidate was eligible, in accordance with the policy of the Government, reserved point of Scheduled Caste was made available to Backward Class candidate and on that basis petitioner was promoted as Additional Professor on March 12, 1981.
He joined as Additional Professor at Government Medical College, Faridkot on March 14, 1981.
The service conditions of petitioner and respondent Nos. 2 to 4 are governed by Punjab Medical Education Service Rules (Class I) Rules, 1978.
As Assistant Professor is promoted as Additional Professor according to the Rules and the post of Professor is filled up by promotion from amongst the Additional Professors and if Additional Professor is not available, then from amongst the Assistant Professors with requisite experience under the Rules.
Later, however, the post of Additional Professor was abolished and it is pleaded that according to the gradation list as corrected upto July 1, 1989, petitioner is being treated as Professor w.e.f.
March 14, 1981.
4.
Respondent-Amarjit Singh, who also belongs to Backward Class, claimed the benefit of reservation by furnishing evidence with regard to his caste and it is in the wake of this fact that the dispute had to be resolved by the Social Welfare Department.
The said department decided that the certificate furnished by Dr. Amarjit Singh on November 21, 1979 was not in proper form and was, thus, not valid.
This matter was decided on August 1, 1984 by the said department.
However, petitioner was still being shown junior to respondent Nos. 2 to 4 in the gradation list.
It is in these circumstances that he claimed that regular vacancy of Professor (Surgery) which occurred on July 31, 1981 should have been filled up by promoting him as it was reserved point for Scheduled Caste and since no Scheduled Caste eligible incumbent was available, this post ought to have been made available to him on the basis of the policy that has been referred to above.
Meanwhile, respondent Nos. 2 to 4 also made representations and that being the situation, the Secretary to Government of Punjab provided an opportunity to every one of hearing.
The matter, however, kept pending for quite sometime constraining petitioner to make further representations imploring the Government to take final decision in the matter.
Thereafter, reminders were also sent.
Petitioner, in the wake of the circumstances aforesaid, approached respondent.
State for final decision in the matter vide his application dated July 19, 1991.
When no decision was still being taken, petitioner filed the present petition for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
It was during the currency of this writ that order dated July 25, 1991 was passed, thus, necessitating the petitioner to amend his petition so as to challenge the order aforesaid which was, obviously, not to his liking.
5.
On the pleadings that have been referred to above, Mr. Surjit Singh, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of petitioner submits that the Government is bound under the law to give effect to the instructions issued by it from time to time and deviation from the policies made by it is certainly justiciable in Court of law.
Reliance is placed on the instructions, Annexures R-2, P-2 and P4/A Para 2(1) of the Instructions, Annexure R-2, which has been relied upon reads thus :-  "A vacancy upon its being de-reserved on account of non-availability of a Scheduled Caste person be offered to a Backward Class person but the vacancy so de-reserved would be carried forward for the Scheduled Caste just as is done at present."
Annexure P-2 are the instructions of 1980 and the same envisage that benefits of reservation to the members of Scheduled Caste/Backward Classes are to be given from the date from which they have produced their proof of being Scheduled Caste/Backward Class.
Annexure 4/1 are the instructions of 1985 which stipulate that hat a person is entitled to the benefit of reservation against reserve point on or after the production of his proof of being backward to the department.
In view of the instructions, referred to above, the solitary plea of learned counsel for the petitioner is that inasmuch as the writ petitioner had submitted a certificate of his being member of Backward Class earlier in point of time than respondent No. 3, he has to be held senior to the said respondent.
For the proposition that the policies contained in the instructions aforesaid cannot be deviated, learned counsel relies on the Comptroller and Auditor General of India v. KS Jagannathan, 1987 SC 537.
6.
The cause of petitioner has been vehemently opposed and in the two sets of identical written statements that have been filed, it has been pleaded that petitioner has no claim for seniority above respondent Nos. 2 to 4.
As regard his claim of promotion as Professor on the basis of Government instructions regarding inter-changeability, it is made out that the benefit of inter- changeability is permissible on the basis of para 2(v) of the Punjab Government letter dated April 6, 1976 which reads as follows :-  "In the case of promotion, 2nd vacancy should be given to the members of Backward Class, if the roster has crossed 50 points.
Similarly, in the case of direct recruitment, 2nd vacancy should be given to the members of BC after roster has crossed 20 points and 3rd vacancy after the roster has crossed 40 points and so on."
It is pleaded that roster of Professor (Surgery) promotion quota, has reached upto 15 points only and has not crossed the prescribed number of points as per para 2(v) above.
Therefore, the claim of petitioner for giving him the benefit of interchangeability is not at all made out.
It is further pleaded that according to the running roster wherein a Backward Class candidate is entitled to 26th point, petitioner can also not be accommodated as even the said point has not reached in the cadre of Professor (Surgery).
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that there is no merit in the only point canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioner and, therefore, this petition must fail.
Even if it is assumed that the instructions, Annexures R-2, P-2 and P-4/A might be of the nature that the same are binding upon the Government, the petitioner is still not entitled to any relief for the reason that these instructions would apply only if the roster point meant for a Scheduled Caste/Backward Class member actuality comes.
Till such time such roster point reaches, no benefit of instructions or reservation can be claimed by the petitioner, who otherwise is, admittedly, junior.
8.
Finding no merit.
I dismiss this petition.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.