NC Jain, J. (Oral) - This petition has been filed by the petitioner for quashing the admission of respondent No. 3 Shatin Goyal, and for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to grant him admission against the reserved category of Scheduled Castes.
2.
Before appreciating the precise question involved in the writ petition, it is necessary to take into consideration some salient facts which have remained undisputed before me during the course of hearing.
The petitioner and one Gurjit Singh belong to Scheduled Caste Category and, therefore, come in the reserved category.
The last candidate is the aforesaid Gurjit Singh, who has been admitted to 1st Year of LL.B.
in the Department of laws and he obtained 7168 per cent marks.
He has been given admission in the morning class by treating him in reserved category.
It has not been disputed before me that if Gurjit Singh had been treated in general category, the petitioner would have been granted admission as he was the next candidate in the order of merit.
Another fact which deserves notice at this stage is that Shatin Goyal, respondent No. 3, is no longer studying in 1st Semester of Law as he has been allowed migration from Panjabi University, Patiala, to Panjab University in the Third Semester as a consequence of acceptance of his Civil Writ Petition No. 14388 of 1994 decided on 15111994.
In other words, if this Court accepts the interpretation of the counsel for the petitioner on the relevant clause of the prospectors, Gurjit Singh in that situation would stand included in General Category and the petitioner would get admission in the reserved category.
3.
The discussion of the afore mentioned factual position leads this Court to interpret the relevant clause of the prospectus for the year 1994-95 which is reproduced below :-  "Combined Merit List of 400 candidates of General Category for BL/LLB 1st Semester Morning and Evening Classes will be put up on the Department Notice Board at 600 pm THIS LIST WILL ALSO INCLUDE THOSE CANDIDATE WHO BELONG TO DIFFERENT RESERVED CATEGORIES AND FALL IN GENERAL MERIT.
THE NAMES OF RESERVED CATEGORY CANDIDATE INCLUDED IN THE GENERAL CATEGORY MERIT LIST SHALL NOT BE INCLUDED AND CONSIDERED FOR ADMISSION IN THE RESPECTIVE RESERVED CATEGORIES IF THEY ARE EARLIER OFFERED A SEAT IN THE GENERAL CATEGORY."
4.
The afore mentioned clause, in my considered view, envisages the drawing up of a combined merit list of 400 candidates for BL/LLB 1st Semester for morning and evening classes.
The further requirement of the clause is that the list of 400 candidates would also include those candidates who belong to different reserved categories but the only rider is that candidates should fall in the general merit.
The inclusion of candidates belonging to different reserved categories in the combined merit list appear to be mandatory on account of the use of the words `this list will also include'.
The second part of the clause clearly lays down that the names of the reserved category candidates included in the general category merit list would be included and considered for admission in their respective reserved category.
Non-consideration of candidates of reserved categories in their respective reserved categories is equally mandatory on account of the use of the words `shall not be included'.
However, in case candidates belonging to the reserved categories do not get admission in the combined merit list, they can always be considered for admission in the reserved category seats.
In other words, if the candidates belonging to the reserved categories are not offered seats in the general category, they would be entitled to consideration in their respective reserved categories.
No other interpretation, in my considered view, is possible.
5.
In view of the clause which has been so interpreted by me above, Gurjeet Singh obtaining higher marks than respondent No. 3 and being the last candidate in the merit list was entitled to be admitted in general category.
The respondents by treating him in the reserved category have violated the mandate of the clause which has been reproduced and interpreted as above.
By considering the admission of Gurjeet Singh to be in reserved category; the petitioner was denied the admission because on account of adjustment of Gurjeet Singh in reserved category, no seat was left which could be given to the petitioner.
In any case, the admission of the petitioner to the 1st year of LL.B.
would neither disturb Shatin Goyal, respondent No. 3, nor Gurjeet Singh, in view of the changed circumstances, namely, migration of respondent No. 3 to third semester.
Gurjeet Singh would also remain admitted in the morning class as it has been noticed above that Shatin Goyal stands migrated to third semester of LL.B.
6.
For the reasons recorded, above, the present writ petition is allowed.
The category of Gurjeet Singh is changed from Reserved Category to General Category, whereas the petitioner is granted admission in Reserved Category.
No costs.
Petition allowed.