AL Bahri, J - Vide this judgment five writ petitions No. 6318, 14471, 15082 of 1993, 5093 and 6380 of 1994 are being disposed of.
The impugned order is passed in Civil Writ Petition No 6318 of 1993.
2.
In these set of writ petitions, petitioners who are teachers/lecturers claim benefit to of leave concession, medical reimbursement of bills, medical allowance which they had earned even in the period of ad hoc service.
Now they have been regularised.
The claim is based on the decision of the apex Court in case reported in Rattan Lal v. State of Haryana, 1985(3) S.L.R.
546 and subsequent decision of this Court in CWP No. 17618 of 1991 titled Smt. Indu Bala and another v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(2) S.C.T.
108, decided on September 7, 1992.
Instructions issued by the State of Haryana, Annexure P-1, in the present case were commented upon that on the basis of such instructions the benefit could not be denied to the employees.
3.
On notice of motion, written statement has been filed by the official respondents, inter alia, asserting that the claim of the petitioners with respect to the arrears of medical reimbursement of bills or medical allowance would be time barred and cannot be allowed.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties we are of the view that merely on the ground of delay all the benefits of service accruing to the petitioners cannot be denied.
Some of the benefits the petitioners are to get at the time of retirement i.e. accumulation of leave etc. and some of the benefits are recurring i.e. medical allowance/medical reimbursement.
Hence-forth, such relief is being granted to the petitioners.
An objection is being raised with respect to arrears of medical allowance/medical re-imbursement.
There is force in this objection, qua this matter, the petitioners can get relief only with respect to three years and two months prior to filing of the present writ petitions.
The claim for earlier arrears stood barred by time and cannot be allowed.
These petitions are disposed of as above with the direction to the respondents to allow the arrears, if any, with respect to medical reimbrussment or medical allowance for a period of three years and two months prior to filing of the petition and to allow all other benefits in future.
Order accordingly.