VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 6911 of 1987 and 6811 of 1988 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
The facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 6911 of 1987, Harinder Pal Singh v. Board of Directors and others, as it is this case which has been argued.
2.
Petitioner, Harinder Pal Singh through present writ filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to recast the merit Est of selected candidates by placing him above respondent No. 4, who secured equal marks with him as it was petitioner who was senior in age and possessed higher qualifications and had, thus, precedence for appointment to the post under contention than respondent No. 4 - Ajai Pal Singh.
3.
Brief facts of the case reveal that Gurdaspur-Amritsar Kshetriya Gramin Vikas Bank, Gurdaspur issued an advertisement inviting applications for the post of Officer in general category in the grade of Rs. 925-1580/- which appeared in Punjabi Tribune dated February 25, 1985.
Petitioner, who was eligible and answered prerequisites, applied for the said post.
After doing his BA from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar in April 1982, he had also passed MA (History) from the same very University in August, 1984.
He appeared in the Test conducted by the respondents in October, 1985 and secured 92 marks.
Likewise, respondent No. 4 and one other also secured 92 marks.
Even though he was senior in age and was more qualified, it was respondent No. 4 who found place over and above him resulting into his non-appointment to the post under contention.
When Ajai Pal Singh, in consequence of his selection, was issued appointment letter in September, 1987, he made a representation to the General Manager, National Agriculture Bank & Rural Development, Sector-17, Chandigarh.
When, however, his demand for justice evoked no interest with the respondents whatsoever, he filed the present writ for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
4.
Learned counsel for petitioner contends that when two candidates have secured equal marks, they have to be placed in the ranking list according to their age.
Respondent No. 4 being younger, it is the petitioner who should have found place in the list of selected candidates and accordingly appointed.
This practice was violated, thus, resulting into injustice.
The action of the respondents is, thus styled to be arbitrary and unreasonable offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
The writ petition after receipt of reply of the respondents, was ordered to be admitted on January 20, 1988 and the motion Bench commanded the respondents to reserve one post for petitioner.
6.
Second writ bearing No. 6811 of 1988 was filed during the pendency of this writ petition on behalf Sukhminder Singh Kher and another.
As mentioned above, this writ petition has not been argued, but it is worthwhile to mention that the petitioners of that case were M.Sc.
(Agriculture) and B.Sc.
(Non-Medical).
They too had secured 92 marks in the test conducted by the respondent Bank and were more in age than that of Ajai Pal Singh.
7.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 through Chairman, DS Sawhney, Gurdaspur-Amritsar Kshetriya Gramin Vikas Bank, Gurdaspur, it has been pleaded that petitioner had done his graduation from Guru Nanak Dev University with 48% marks whereas respondent No. 4 had done graduation with 605% marks.
Inasmuch as the minimum qualification as laid down in the advertisement was graduation, respondent No. 4 was preferred as he was having better percentage of marks than that of petitioner.
It is further pleaded that when petitioner applied for the post, his result, of MA had since not been declared and, therefore, it could not be said that he had higher qualifications than that of respondent No. 4.
It is further pleaded that both, petitioner and respondent No. 4, were within the a age limit prescribed in the advertise in ment and, therefore, there was no question of giving any benefit to any person the basis of age.
8.
Before I proceed any further with the matter, it requires to be mentioned that during the course of arguments, Mr. Nijjar, learned Sr.
Counsel appearing on behalf of respondents sought adjournment to seek instructions if petitioner could be accommodated on the post particularly when one seat had been reserved for him by the motion Bench but he later informed the court that respondents were not willing to accommodate petitioner even though one post was lying vacant.
9.
While defending Civil Writ Petition No. 6811 of 1988, the stand of the respondent-Bank is entirely different.
It is pleaded in para 6 of the written statement that written test was given to all the candidates and the successful candidates were called for interview.
In the written test, both the petitioners secured 92 marks each.
Shri Ajai Pal Singh and Shri Harinder Pal Singh also got 92 marks each.
In view of overall merit of the candidates, a list was prepared in accordance with the marks obtained by the various candidates.
It was, however, observed that numerous candidates secured equal number of marks.
Therefore, to avoid arbitrariness and favouritism all the candidates securing same number of marks were listed according to their Roll Numbers.
It is for this reason that Ajay Pal Singh stood at serial No. 62 having Roll No. 1177, petitioner No. 2 was at serial No. 63 having Roll No. 1234, Harinder Pal Singh was at serial No. 64 having Roll No. 1611 and Sukhminder Singh petitioner was at serial No. 66 having Roll No. 1726.
It is apparent from the pleadings, as mentioned above, that the petitioners of this case were having more marks than that of Ajay Pal Singh even in the minimum qualification that was prescribed for eligibility, i.e., graduation.
It is for this precise reason that nothing with regard to in obtained by the petitioners in the graduation as also Ajay Pal Singh have been mentioned.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and examining records of the case, I am of the view that cause of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
Both, the petitioner and respondent No. 4 secured 92 marks even though respondent No. 4 had secured more marks in his graduation than that of petitioner, but it is the admitted position that he (petitioner) was more qualified advised as he had done MA, result of which had been declared before interview and selection.
He is also more in age than that of respondent No. 4.
From the defence, as has been projected in.
C.W.P.
No. 6811 of 1988, it, however, appears that the reason for ignoring the petitioner was not that he had secured less marks in graduation than that of Ajay Pal Singh, but it had happened because his Roll number was after that of Ajay Pal Singh.
This method of giving precedence to those, who had Roll Numbers before others, who too had secured same marks in the test, but were better qualified and more in age is totally arbitrary.
In the method of selection if precedence is to be given in this manner i.e. by preferring the one who has lesser Roll Number than those all who have higher Roll Numbers, merit in all probability would be ignored and that would be certainly violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Once a person more in age and having better qualification, who had not even secured lesser marks than all those who had lesser Roll Numbers, is available, there was no question for the respondents to have focussed their attention on a person, who had less qualification.
The action of the respondent in not ranking the petitioner above respondent No. 4 suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and, thus, violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, petition of Harinder Pal Singh is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to appoint him on the post that he applied for i.e. the Officer against vacant seat, which was ordered not to be filled by motion Bench, as noticed above.
Let this be done within two months from today.
No order as to costs.
12.
There is no need to issue any directions in writ No. 6811 of 1988 as it is only the case of petitioner, Harinder Pal Singh, which has been argued before this court.
Petition allowed.