GS Singhvi, J - Order dated 16.7.1993 (Annexure P-8) passed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana (respondent No. 2) is under challenge in this writ petition.
The petitioner has prayed for quashing of Annexure P-8 and has also prayed that the respondents be directed to grant all consequential benefits to which he becomes entitled as a result of quashing of the said order and also pay him all his dues for the period of suspension between 6.7.1989 to 30.4.1990.
A prayer has also been made for award of interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
2.
The petitioner, who has since retired from service, had joined service as Sub-Inspector in the Cooperative Department of the then State of Punjab.
He was promoted as Inspector (Audit) in April, 1981.
He was placed under suspension by order, dated 2761989 by respondent No. 2.
After having been kept under suspension for about ten months, he was reinstated by respondent No2 vide order, Annexure P-1, dated 941990.
On reinstatement, the petitioner prayed that he be granted full pay and allowances as well as increments for the period during which he had remained under suspension.
In response to one of such applications made by the petitioner, respondent No .2 called upon the petitioner to submit an application for grant of earned leave for the period of suspension.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 issued a warning to the petitioner vide letter, Annexure P-5, dated 22.1.1993 intimating him that he should submit an application for grant of earned leave for the period of suspension, failing which disciplinary action will be taken against him.
When the petitioner did not comply with direction, respondent No. 2 issued notice, dated 2341993 and called upon the petitioner to show cause as to why a minor punishment specified in Rule 4 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 be not imposed upon him.
The allegation levelled against the petitioner was that though he had been asked to submit an application for grant of earned leave in respect of the period of suspension, he had failed to submit such application.
Petitioner submitted his reply vide letter, dated 951993.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 passed the impugned order, dated 16.7.1993 and imposed a penalty of stoppage of two grade increments with cumulative effect on the petitioner.
3.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the impugned order of punishment on the ground of lack of jurisdiction by asserting that the punishment of stoppage of two grade increments with cumulative effect is a major punishment and such punishment could have been imposed on him only after full compliance of those provisions of 1987 Rules which contain the procedure for imposing a major punishment.
The petitioner has also questioned the legality of the action taken by the respondents for compelling him to submit an application for grant of earned leave in respect of the period of suspension by asserting that no such authority vested with the respondent No. 2.
4.
The case set up by the respondents is that an action had been initiated against the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 vide letter dated 30111984 of the Registrar.
The allegation levelled against the petitioner was that although the Audit Officer, Cooperative Societies, Kurukshetra had remitted a sum of Rs. 74310 Paise on account of pay for the month of June, 1983 and TA for November, 1981 in respect of one Pritam Singh, Clerk, the petitioner had neither handed over the said amount to Pritam Singh nor he remitted the amount to the Audit Officer and in this manner, he was guilty of misappropriation and even though the petitioner had been called upon to refund the amount, he ignored the directions issued by the higher authorities.
A penalty of censure was imposed upon the petitioner vide order, dated 1411987 (Annexure R-1) passed by respondent No. 2 Despite that the petitioner did not comply with the direction given to him for the refund of the amount.
Thereupon he was placed under suspension.
He was reinstated vide order, dated 9-4-1990 (Annexure P-1).
In order to regularise the period of suspension, the competent authority asked him to submit an application for grant of earned leave.
The petitioner did not comply with this direction and continued to challenge the issue of a charge- sheet to him and ultimately respondent No. 2 passed the order of punishment.
5.
First contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the impugned order of punishment suffers from lack of jurisdiction because respondent No. 2 had no authority to impose a major penalty on the petitioner under Rule 8 of 1987 Rules.
He argued that holding of a regular departmental enquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed for imposition of major penalties is a condition precedent before an order of major punishment can be passed and since that procedure was not complied with by the respondent No. 2, he had no jurisdiction to pass an order for withholding of two grade increments of the petitioner having permanent effect on the salary of the petitioner.
Learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, could not point out any provision of law authorising respondent No. 2 to pass such an order of punishment with compliance of the rules.
6.
In Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) : 1990(4) Judgment Today, 60, their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that a penalty of stoppage of annual grade increment with cumulative effect is a major penalty and such penalty can be awarded only after compliance with the procedure prescribed under the Rules.
The principle of law laid-down by the Supreme Court is fully applicable to the case of the petitioner and in my opinion, the impugned order is liable to be quashed only on the ground that respondent No. 2 did not comply with the procedure prescribed by the Rules of 1987 before he issued the impugned order.
7.
Second contention of the learned counsel is that respondent No. 2 had no authority to compel the petitioner to submit an application for earned leave for the purpose of regularisation of the period of suspension.
Learned Counsel argued that no chargesheet was served on the petitioner after issue of the order of suspension on 2761989 and since the said order was revoked on 941990 without any condition, the petitioner become entitled to the payment of full salary and respondent No. 2 was not justified in directing the petitioner to apply for earned leave.
Learned Deputy Advocate General (Haryana) argued that when the petitioner was reinstated, it was for respondent No. 2 to take appropriate decision about the treatment to be meted out to the period of suspension and respondent No. 2 did not commit any illegality by asking the petitioner to submit an application for earned leave.
In my opinion, ordinarily an employee who is placed under suspension and against whom no action is taken by the Disciplinary Authority and who is reinstated without any condition is entitled to all consequential benefits.
However, in exceptional cases, the Disciplinary Authority or the Competent Authority may not award him full wages.
In what type of cases the disciplinary authority will order denial of full pay and allowances need not be detailed out.
In my opinion, ends of justice would be served by directing the respondent No. 2 to take a fresh decision in matter after due consideration of all relevant factors.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed, order Annexure P-8 is declared illegal and it is hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
It is also ordered that he shall get interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum with effect from 1881993 on the arrears which will have to be paid to him in terms of this order.
For the period of suspension, the respondent No. 2 is directed to take a fresh decision on question as to what treatment should be meted out to the period of suspension of petitioner i.e. from 2761989 to 941990.
Such decision should be taken by the respondents within two months and the same be conveyed to the petitioner, who may avail appropriate remedy available to him, in case the order is adverse to him.
Petition partly allowed.