Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Shepherds working in the Animal/Sheep Husbandary Department, through their Association and its President, filed this writ petition in terms seeking parity in pay/salary with the Forest guards of Jammu and Kashmir State on the principles of 'equal pay equal work' and for special allowance and other service benefits peculiar to the nature of duties rendered by the Shepherds.
2.
It is averred that the petitioners/Shepherds were initially appointed in the time pay scale of Rs. 180-250 (un-revised).
The Forest Guards were also appointed in the same scale of pay.
Both Shepherds and Forest Guards were placed in the pay scale of 180-250 vide SRO 149 of 1972.
Petitioners got salary equivalent to Forest Guards in the said pay scale till 111982.
However, on revision of the pay scales in 1982, vide SRO 350 dated 2181982, the pay scale of 180-250 was revised to 390-500 in case of Shepherds and to 410-625 in case of forest guards.
The Forest Guards were given higher pay scale than the petitioners (Annexure-D).
Petitioners made representations, but of no avail.
There was another grade revision in the year 1987.
The pay scales of Shepherds and Forest Guards were revised from 390-500 to 745-1025 and from 410-625 to 800-1400 respectively.
Again representation was made.
However, it evoked again no response.
In 1992 another grade revision was ordered.
Vide SRO 75 dated 30.3.1992, Shepherds were placed in the grade of 775-1025, whereas, the Forest Guards have been placed in the grade of 950-1400.
Again the matter was represented before the Government.
The representations have remained pending and the Government has observed silence and remained a mute spectator.
3.
Petitioners grievance is that, though they are rendering the duties and performing the functions which are more dangerous, risky and onerous than those of Forest Guards, yet Forest Guards are given higher pay scales than the Shepherds.
4.
Notwithstanding, that the posts of Shepherds and Forest Guards were in the same category initially and carried same pay scales, and the nature of the duties of Shepherds and Forest Guards are identical and in some respects more arduous and onerous in case of Shepherds, than the Forest Guards, yet parity in the pay scale has not and is not being maintained.
5.
Having regard to the quantity, quality, and nature of work performed by Shephereds in comparison with the one done by Forest Guards, the Shepherds have been discriminated against and given lesser pay, even though the petitioners have been in any case rendering identical and same work as the Forest Guards.
In fact, the posts belong to common category for purpose of scale of pay notwithstanding that the posts are in two different department of J&K Govt.
There is no rationale behind fixing of higher pay in case of Forest Guards than Shepherds.
The Shepherds have been discriminated against in violation of constitutional provisions of Article 39 read with Articles 14 and 16.
6.
Respondents/State has opposed the sought relief and contested the petitioners case regarding parity.
The initial placement of Shepherds and Forest Guards in the un-revised grade of 180-250, till grade revision of 1982 is not denied.
The revision of grades of Shepherds and Forest Guards in 1987 and 1992, referred to in the petition is not denied.
However, it is pleaded that the equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Government and its expert body like Pay Commission, who alone are experts to judge the nature of duties and responsibilities of the posts from stand point of equation of pay.
7.
The Sheep Workers are stated to be a separate cadre constituted by the petitioners and that the revision of pay scales in 1992 in the State of Jammu and Kashmir has been made on grade to grade basis.
Forest guards have been given higher pay scales, because of their higher qualification and due to the nature of job and duty they are to render.
Petitioners are rendering six hours duty, (and not twenty four hours, as pleaded by the petitioners) and the Forest Guards on the other hand render twenty four hours duty.
No rights of the petitioners have been violated and petitioners' pay has been fixed in the light of the duties tendered (rendered ?).
The matter/case is hit by limitations as the petitioners have remained silent on the issue for more than a decade.
The matter has not been correctly placed before the Court by the petitioners.
8.
The rejoinder filed by the petitioners in two parts reiterates the very pleas which have been taken up in the petition, with the addition of supplying some clarifications to the duties rendered by Shepherd.
It is also contended that the State while discharging its duty cannot transgress constitutional limits embodied in Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution and other rules governing the terms and conditions of service of its employees and discriminate between employees and lose sight of the legal principles of equal pay equal work comprehensively covered by directive principles of State Policy enshrined in Article 39 of the Constitution road with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Petitioners case of parity in pay scales on the principles of equal pay for equal work is not justiciable.
Equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared as Fundamental right, but Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as construed in the context of preamble and Article 39(d), lays down that principle of equal pay for equal work, is one of the fundamental features of Constitution.
Article 39(d) ordains the State to direct its policy towards securing equal pay for equal work.
Even, if article 39(d) is in the Chapter of directive principles of State policy, but it is of fundamental essence as a constitutional goal.
For authoritative pronouncements on the subject, reference is made to AIR 1982 SC 879 and AIR 1988 SC 1504 while laying focus on and grading principles of 'equal pay equal work', a limb and facet of Directive principles, as integral part of our Constitution, it is pointed out in para 38 of the Judgment, reported as AIR 1997 SC 645 at page 668 :-  ".........The Directive Principles in our Constitution are fore- runners of the UNO Convention on Right to Development as inalienable human right and every person and all people are entitled to participate in, contribute to and enjoy economic, social, cultural and political development in which all human rights, fundamental freedoms would be fully realised.
It is the responsibility of the State as well as the individuals, singly and collectively, for the development taking into account the need fuller responsibility for the human rights, fundamental freedoms as well as the duties to the community which alone can ensure free and complete fulfilment of the human being.
They promote and protect an appropriate social and economic order in democracy for development.
The State should provide facilities and opportunities to ensure development and to eliminate all the obstacles to development by appropriate economic and social reforms so as to eradicate all social injustice.
These principles are imbedded, as stated earlier, as integral part of our Constitution in the Directive Principles.
Therefore, the Directive Principles now stand elevated to inalienable fundamental human rights.
Even they are justiciable by themselves."
For the contention of Government Advocate that parity of pay is primarily concern of Executive Government and expert bodies like the pay commission and not of the Courts, reference is made to the following portion of para 6 of the judgment of Apex Court in AIR 1982 SC 879 :-  ".....We concede that equation of posts and equation of pay are matters primarily for the Executive Government and expert bodies like the Pay Commission and not for Courts but we must hasten to say that where all things are equal that is, where all relevant considerations are the same, persons holding identical posts may not be treated differentially in the matter of their pay merely because they belong to different departments.
Of course, if officers of the same rank perform dissimilar functions and the powers, duties and responsibilities of the posts held by them vary, such officers may not be heard to complain of dissimilar pay merely because the posts are of the same rank and the nomenclature is the same."
In AIR 1991 SC 1176 vide para 6 of the judgment, while reiterating equal pay for equal work has been slated as Fundamental right in service jurisprudence, it has been laid down :-  "It has ceased to be a judge made law as it is the part of the constitutional philosophy which ensures a welfare socialistic pattern of a State providing equal opportunity to all and equal pay for equal work for similar placed employees of the State.
This Court has zealously enforced the fundamental right of equal pay for equal work in effectuating the constitutional goal of equality and social justice in a number of decisions.
See Randhir Singh v. Union of India, 1982(1) SCC 618 : AIR 1982 SC 879; Daily Rated Casual Labour Employed under P & T Department v. Union of India, 1988(1) SCC 122 : AIR 1987 SC 2342; Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, 1986(1) SCC 637, Surrinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD, 1986(1) SCC 639 : AIR 1986 SC 584; RD Gupta v. Lt.
Governor, Delhi Administration, AIR 1987 SC 2086 : 1987(4) SCC 505; Bhagan Dass v. State of Haryana, 1987(4) SCC 634 : AIR 1987 SC 2049, Jaipal v. State of Haryana, 1988(3) SCC 354 : AIR 1988 SC 1504; Dharwad District PWD Literate Daily Wage Employees Association v. State of Karnataka, 1990(2) SCC 396.
Therefore, the principle of equal pay for equal work even in an establishment which is an instrumentality of a State is applicable in its full vigour."
Similarly, in AIR 1986 SC 584, the Apex Court has frowned upon the argument that equal pay for equal work is an abstract doctrine and not capable of enforcement at law, in terms as below :-  "The Central Government, the State Government and likewise, all public sector undertakings are expected to function like model and enlightened employers and arguments such as those which were advanced before us that the principle of equal pay for equal work is an abstract doctrine which cannot be enforced in a court of law, should ill-come from the mouths of the State and State undertakings."
In LPA No. 112/94, titled State v. J&K Subordinate Judicial Process Servers' Welfare Association, 1997 S.L.J.
139, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Bhawani Singh (as His Lordship then was), spoke for the court as :-  "Before us, the comparison may be between process servers serving in the Judiciary and in the Excise Department of the State Government.
But crux of the matter is whether the duties and responsibilities of both the categories of employees are same and similar.
If so, they cannot be treated differently in the grant of pay scale.
Except for saying that these two categories of employees are working in two different departments is not enough.
Claim that duties and responsibilities of the petitioner are not similar to the Process Servers of the Excise Department has not been satisfactorily proved by production of dependable material and tabulation relating to various matters touching qualification, recruitment, duties and functions etc.
In the absence of such a material, the complaint of the petitioner that they have been deprived of the scale of pay arbitrarily, unreasonably, unequitably and unjustifiably has to be accepted."
While considering the question of discrimination in denying the parity and equation of pay inter se employees, the Apex Court in AIR 1991 SC 1137 at para 7, explicitly laid as under :-  "...It is not necessary to find out similarity by mathematics formula but there must be a reasonable similarity in the nature of work, performance of duties, the qualification and the quality of work performed by them.
It is permissible to have classification in services based on hierarchy of posts, pay scales, value of work and responsibility and experience.
The classification must, however, have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved."
Then again by elaborating law on the subject, it was held in AIR 1988 SC 1291, that the problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
In AIR 1988 SC Page 1504, it is observed :-  "The doctrine of equal work equal pay would apply on the premises of similar work, but it does not mean that there should be complete identity in all respects.
If the two classes of persons do same work under the same employer, with similar responsibility, under similar working conditions, the doctrine of "Equal work equal pay" would apply and it would not be open to the State to discriminate one class with the other in paying salary.
The State is under a Constitutional obligation to ensure that equal pay is paid for equal work".
Now coming to the facts and circumstances of the case, it will be seen that the core issue and the matrix of the problem is, notwithstanding employment of Shepherd and Forest Guard in Animal Husbandry Department and Forest Department, whether the duty and responsibility of both categories of these employees are similar ?
Whether the Shepherds and Forest Guards perform duties and dispense the work which bear reasonable similarity to each other.
The qualification, mode of recruitment, quality of work done, conditions in which and nature of work rendered, etc. are all matters to judge parity of work for purpose of pay parity in case of above two categories of employees.
Admittedly, the Shepherds in the Chief Husbandry department and Forest Guards in the Forest Department, were placed in the same pay scale and grade of Rs. 180-250 (unrevised as early as in April 1972).
The two categories of the employees continued in the same grade and pay scale till January, 1982.
It was only in August 1982 on the pay revision that the Shepherds grade was revised from 180-250 to 390-500 and that of Forest Guards from 180-250 to 410-625, and it was from this date that the pay disparity between the two categories of employees came into existence.
Despite representation of petitioners the pay dis-parity is alleged not to have been rectified or removed even in subsequent pay revisions ordered in 1987 and 1992.
The recruitment to non-gazetted Forest Services of the State is governed by the J&K Forest Services (Non-gazetted) Recruitment Rules, 1970 and recruitment to subordinate Sheep Husbandary Service of the State is regulated by J&K Sheep Husbandary (subordinate service) Recruitment Rules of 1974.
These rules reveal that method and mode of recruitment, qualification and eligibility for both services is almost similar.
Both category candidates must be middle pass and physically fit.
Even, physical fitness is provided by the rules governing the terms and conditions of service of the employees including Classification, Control and Appeal Rules as applicable to the employee of the State.
The method of recruitment of both categories of employees is similarly worded as by direct recruitment and promotion.
These common category posts carried same grade and pay till Jan 1982.
Now coming to the nature and quality of work performed and duties rendered by the Shepherds, it merits to be taken note of that the Shepherds are to tend and look-after sheep/goats in high altitude areas and have to move from place to place in higher regions.
It is Shepherds duty to rare, maintain and look after the sheep/goats round the year, no matter what the conditions are.
They have to take care of the flocks and administer medicines to the cattle heads.
The Sheep/goats are to be protected against all odds even at higher altitudes.
The duty performed is onerous and fraught with danger and risk to Shepherds own lives.
The Shepherds are recruited and engaged for raring the live stock of high quality breed, with some skilled background.
They are engaged in farms and even in distribution of these cattle heads to pvt. parties for increased in the sheep/goat population of the State, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Animal Husbandary/Sheep raising is an integral part of our economy with immense benefits to all concerned and in particular amelioration of lot of our rural populace.
Attending to the job of raring the live stock as per laid requirements of behavioural system is a whole time job.
Shepherds are not paid any special allowances, as is even conceded to by the Government Advocate.
On the other hand the Forest Guards have also to render duties in Forests and to look-after the trees in higher altitudes, but compared to Shepherds the duty performed by Forest guards is less dangerous and risky.
The forest guards render duty for the most during normal hours.
The Forest guards are even being paid Special allowance and uniforms.
The contention of the Respondents/State that the Shepherds cannot be compared with the Forest Guards in any manner, is wholly misplaced.
To say that Forest guards perform their duties for 24 hours and Shepherds for six hours, a day is travesty of truth.
Here reference to Annexure (R) to the rejoinder, is pertinent.
This annexure is a letter written by Director Sheep Husbandary to the Chief Secretary, on 2861996.
In this letter the Director respondent No. 3, after inviting attention of the Chief Secretary to salient features of the case of pay parity of Shepherds and Forest guards, records :-  "......In the Ist instance the post of petitioners and the post of Forest Guards were in the same category as both the caders were in common scale.
The nature of duties of the both cards (to be read as cadres) are indentical and in case of Shepherds it is made difficult and hazardless (to be read as hazardous).
By virtue of other divisions the petitioners were placed in the lower grade than those of Forest Guards which is quite discrimination to the Shepherding staff.
The petitioners have to look after Sheep/Goats in the High land pastures with high risks in dense forests and their lives are subject to attacks by the wide (to be read as wild) animals .........................................
It is submitted that the Shepherding staff has to work at High land pastures and farms round the clock, the grievance expressed in the writ petitioner (read as Writ petition) are justified and it is requested to kindly redress these grievances and their pay revised for which case is submitted strongly."
This communication of the Director Sheep Husbandary should be sufficient answer to the reply filed by Mr. Qadri, Sr. AAG, on an affidavit, sworn by an Under Secretary to Government in the Animal Sheep Husbandary Department.
If not more, there is reasonable similarity in the nature and quality of work performed and the duties rendered by 'Shepherds' and 'Forest Guards'.
The duties and responsibility of both categories of these employees bear remarkable similarity.
The working conditions are not also quite dissimilar.
The Shepherds are obviously discriminated in matter of their pay scales.
Though, both categories started as common category posts with identical grade and pay, the Shepherds have been discriminated against after pay revision of 1982, notwithstanding performance of onerous, odious and difficult jobs, in any case equal to those of forest guards.
The respondents have not substantiated their claim of dissimilarity of functions and duties of the two categories of employees by producing any material, documents, tabulated or other work having a bearing on the questions of nature and quality of their duties and responsibility, work performance, job requirement, qualification, recruitment, working conditions etc.
The little material and the document on record support the petitioners claim so-much-so, that respondent No. 3, Director has also supported the petitioners claim for parity or pay before the Government.
In these circumstances, the petitioners' complaint that they have been discriminated against and arbitrarily and unjustifiably deprived of the pay scale at par with Forest Guards, has to be logically accepted.
Separate, classification of Shepherds and Forests Guards in the matter of pay is improper and unreasonable.
It has no nexus to the object ostensibly sought to be achieved.
Obviously, disparity of pay between these two categories of posts has brought about discrimination within the meaning of Article 15.
The reasonable similarity in the nature and quality of work and performance of duties is discernible on record, though, the similarity may not be visible on application of a mathematical formula.
The total and complete identity in all respects is not even a requirement of law.
Applying the principle of similarity in work, responsibilities and duties, in my opinion, the Shepherds are entitled to pay parity with Forest guards by the application of doctrine of 'equal pay equal work'.
The State cannot discriminate the Shepherds as against Forest Guards in the matter of payment of salary and in providing equated grades.
AIR 1989 SC 2129, cited by the Govt. Advocate, is not applicable to this case.
It is quite distinguishable.
The Apex Court declined parity of pay scale to Daily wager on contract basis for posts of clerks with the regular clerks duly selected and appointed.
The clerks recruited in accordance with the prescribed rules on fulfilment of prescribed norms and eligibility, cannot be equated for parity of pay with clerks engaged as daily wagers employed on contract basis.
Obviously, they are two different classes and there is no discrimination within the meaning of Article 14 in respect of pay between these two category posts.
Those recruited and given jobs outside prescribed recruitment rules cannot be said to be same class with those recruited under prescribed rules.
Therefore, the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be invoked in such a case.
Another case cited by the respondents is 1981(1) SLR SC 364, for the proposition that the principle of equal pay for equal work, is not applicable in this case.
However, it is seen that the case cited applies all-together to different situation and set of facts.
In this case the Supreme Court had held, that in the field of rendering professional services, the principle of equal pay equal work is not applicable.
In the case, the Hon'ble Court declined to bring about parity of pay between medical officers holding the qualification of CGIM or the qualification of L.I.M.
or the qualification of DAM, though all these categories of medical officers holding the above qualification were put incharge of different dispensaries run by Zila Parishads in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
All three categories of Medical Officers were found distinct and separate from each other, so much so, that the category of this professional service answered the description of a separate class to negate the charge of discrimination.
For the aforesaid reasons, Writ of Mandamus, is issued to Respondents to pay the Petitioner Shepherds pay and grade equivalent to the pay and grade of Forest Guards in Jammu and Kashmir State with effect from the date the last pay revision was given effect to, so as to bring the case of Shepherds at par with the Forest guards with regard to parity or pay to fulfill its constitutional obligation of "equal pay equal work".
As parity of pay from 111982 would involve colossal burden on exchequer and thereby in public interests, the relief of parity of pay from 1182 is declined.
The respondents shall pay costs, quantified at Rs. 5,000/- to the petitioners.