Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order passed by the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak by which she has been declared ineligible for admission to the B.Ed.
course and her candidature for the examination has been cancelled.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
According to the Prospectus for admission to the B.Ed.
course for the year 1989-90, 15% of the seats were to be allotted to the outside candidates and 85% of the seats had to be filled up from amongst the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from one of the three universities in Haryana.
However, there was one exception.
In case a candidate had not passed the qualifying examination from one of the three universities of Haryana, he could still be considered against 85% of the seats if he produced of Haryana Domicile Certificate issued after August 31, 1988 by the competent authority.
3.
The petitioner applied for admission to the B.Ed.
course against one of the 85% seats.
Apparently, she had not passed the qualifying examination from one of the three universities in Haryana.
She, however, produced a Domicile Certificate dated August 28, 1989 issued by the City Magistrate, Rohtak, She was admitted by the College.
In due course, the papers were forwarded to the University.
On March 17, 1990, the University forwarded the certificate to the City Magistrate for verification.
On May 17, 1990, the City Magistrate reported that the petitioner was not a resident of village Kharawar and that she had "obtained her Haryana Domicile Certificate fraudulently."
(emphasis supplied).
Accordingly, the certificate was cancelled.
On receipt of this communication, the University vide its letter dated May 24, 1990 a photostat copy of which has been produced by the respondents, informed the Principal, KM College of Education, Bhiwani that the Domicile Certificate of the petitioner having been cancelled, she was ineligible for admission of the B.Ed.
course.
On receipt of this letter, the Principal sent a communication dated May 26, 1990 informing her that she had been declared ineligible for admission to the Course.
A copy of this letter has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-2.
Vide notification dated September 13, 1990 when the result of the examination was declared, the petition's candidature was shown to have been cancelled.
Aggrieved by the action of the University and the College in cancelling her candidature the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the University.
It has been inter alia averred that "all admissions to B.Ed.
course in the affiliated colleges are provisional and subject to confirmation by the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak."
It has been further averred that the petitioner was given provisional admission on the basis of the Haryana Domicile Certificate.
The certificate was found to have been obtained fraudulently and was consequently cancelled.
A result, the petitioner become ineligible for admission.
On this basis, the respondents seek to support the impugned action.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. HS Sangha, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised three contentions.
Firstly, the learned counsel submits that the reservation made by the respondents on the basis of domicile is ultra vires in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Pardeep Jain's case, reported as AIR 1984 SC1420.
Learned counsel further submits that the petitioner having been admitted to the B.Ed.
course, no action could have been taken against her after she had been permitted to take the examination.
Lastly, the learned counsel submitted that the action was violative of the principles of natural justice.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
As for the first contention, it may be mentioned that the petitioner had passed the qualifying examination from the Ajmer University.
15% seats had been reserved for candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from Universities outside Haryana and were not even the domiciles of the State [Haryana].
Apparently, the petitioner would have had to compete for admission for one of 15% of the seats.
Presumably, seeing that she was not likely to be admitted, the petitioner claimed that she was a domicile of Haryana and sought admission against one of the 85% seats.
Having taken advantage of the reservation, the petitioner is now trying to challenge it.
7.
In the context of the facts of the present case, the contention appears to be wholly misconceived.
However, in the circumstances of the case, it is not necessary to express any firm opinion on this matter.
8.
Mr. Sangha then contended that the petitioner having been admitted, her candidature could not be cancelled.
It is true that a candidate who is admitted to a course, not only incurs expenditure but even spends time and money.
It is, thus, necessary that the appropriate authority should carry out verification etc. of the certificates submitted by the candidate at the threshold.
However, this does not mean that if a candidate has got admission by misrepresentation of facts, or by producing wrong certificate/s which may have been obtained fraudulantly, the admission can never be cancelled.
Fraud vitiates every action.
A person who has entered the portals of an educational institution by producing a false certificate, has no right to stay there.
He having secured the entry on the basis of a fraud, his stay in the institution suffers from a disability.
The admission can be cancelled as soon as the fraud is detected.
This would be all the more so in case of admissions to professional institutions which entitle the qualified candidates to become Teachers, Doctors, Engineers, etc. if a person desirous of be becoming teacher, obtains admission on the strength of a false certificate which has been obtained fraudulently, it is in the larger interest of the nation that his career is cut short at the earliest.
He is not likely to set a good example for any one.
He cannot be trusted to train students to become good citizens of this country.
Imagine a candidate producing a forged certificate to show that he has passed the qualifying examination by securing a 1st Division.
Even if he gets admission on the basis of such a certificate, nothing prevents the appropriate authority from cancelling it as and when the mistake is detected, Even if he is lucky and manages to pass the examination, subject to the regulations of an institution, it should be open to the appropriate authority to cancel the Degree or Diploma that such a candidate may have obtained at the end of the course.
However, this subject is not being considered in detail in view of the fact that I am inclined to accept the third contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
9.
Mr. Sangha has contended that the action is violative of the principles of natural justice.
10.
It is the admitted position that the City Magistrate, Rohtak had issued the Certificate No. 6237 certifying that Miss Seema, daughter of Satnam Ram is a bona fide resident of Village & Post Office, Kharawar, Tehsil Rohtak.
It has been further mentioned that the domicile had been "verified by the Tehsildar/Naib Tehsildar, Rohtak."
Subsequently, on an enquiry having been made by the university, the same authority and in all probability, the same officer, observed that "Seema d/o Shri Satnam Ram is not resident of permanent resident of Village & PO Kharawar, Tehsil and District Rohtak and she has obtained her Haryana Domicile Certificate fraudulently.
Hence Haryana Domicile Certificate No. 6237, dated 2081989 issued to her is cancelled."
On the basis of this communication, the University declared the petitioner as ineligible and cancelled her candidature.
It is also the admitted position that neither the City Magistrate nor the University afforded any opportunity to the petitioner before either cancelling the certificate or declaring her ineligible for admission to the Course.
11.
It may be that the petitioner had obtained the certificate by mis- representation of facts.
It is equally possible that the certificate may have been issued after proper verification of the factual position and without any misrepresentation by the petitioner.
In such a situation, it was incumbent on the officer as also the University to have afforded the petitioner some opportunity of showing cause before coming to a finding that she had obtained the certificate fraudulently.
If such an opportunity had been given, the petitioner may have satisfied the authority concerned that she was actually a resident of Village & PO Kharawar or that the certificate issued to her was based on correct appreciation of facts.
Failure to grant her an opportunity in this behalf clearly deprived her of change to prove and establish the factual position.
One cannot also lose sight of the fact that it was the City Magistrate, Rohtak who had initially certified after receiving a report from the Tehsildar/Naib-Tehsildar, Rohtak that petitioner was domicile of the Haryana State.
Before arriving at a contrary finding, an opportunity was required to be given to the petitioner.
Even the University should had afforded the petitioner a due and reasonable opportunity to show cause.
The petitioner may have succeeded in satisfying the University that the second report given by the City Magistrate was not based on a correct appreciation of facts.
The order had serious civil consequences for the petitioner.
It meant loss of one year of academic career.
She had also spent money and energy.
No opportunity having been granted, the impugned action cannot be sustained.
12.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed.
The case is remitted to the University for fresh decision after giving the petitioner a reasonable opportunity.
The University shall put all the relevant material to the petitioner before arriving at any decision.
After hearing the petitioner, the University shall dispose of the matter by passing a speaking order.
Since, a considerable time has already elapsed, it would be in the fitness of things if the University decides the matter expeditiously.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date on which a certified copy of the order is supplied to the University.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.