Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners, who are working as Demonstrators in the Thapar Polytechnic at Patiala, pray for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the State of Punjab and the managing committee of the Polytechnic to upgrade them "as lecturers in Engineering.... and to place them" the scale of pay sanctioned for the post of a Lecturer from time to time.
They also pray for the payment of arrears along with interest.
2.
The respondents contest the claim of the petitioners.
It has been averred that vide order dated September 21, 1976, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, the State Government had accorded "sanction to the automatic revision of pay scales/allowances of the employees of the Private Technical Institutions in the State in order to bring them at par with the pay scales/allowances of their counterparts in the employment of the State Government..." whenever such revisions are announced by the State Government.
It has, however, been stated that this decision added as a sort of proviso and clarification does not imply that if and when the State Government restructures the cadre at any later stage, even the Private Institutions were bound to do so.
Accordingly, it has been claimed that even though the Government had sanctioned the conversion of posts of Demonstrators and Drawing Instructors into those of lecturers, the petitioners were not entitled to an automatic appointment as lecturers.
3.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the controversy has been settled by the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh Saini & others v. State of Punjab & others (CWP 7863 of 1993 decided on February 18, 1994).
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents concedes this but submits that the State Government is challenging the aforesaid decision before the Supreme Court.
4.
I have perused the judgment delivered by the Division Bench.
It has been held there that "once the pay parity had been granted by the State Government between the Instructors/Demonstrators working in the private institutions and the Government Polytechnics, this parity could not be disturbed merely because the posts in the Government Polytechnics were converted into those of Lecturers."
Accordingly, it has been held that "the reasons given by the Finance Department rejecting the case of the petitioners were totally irrelevant as merely because a revision of the staff structure in private polytechnics was to become a permanent liability of the State was no ground for ignoring the case of the petitioners."
5.
Sitting singly, I am bound by the decision of the Division Bench.
However, most respectfully and regrettably, I express my reservations about the view taken by the Division Bench.
6.
A person working in a private institution is not at par with one who is working in Government Institution.
Firstly, the method of recruitment is different.
While the State Government makes selection after proper advertisement through the Public Service Commission or a Selection Board, the Private Institutions have their own norms which may not be entirely at par with those followed by the Government.
Normally, the selection and appointment to a post in Government is more competitive than that in a private institution.
Furthermore, while there is security of tenure and the other conditions of service like leave, pension and gratuity etc. in Government service are guaranteed by Rules, the conditions of service provided by private institutions can differ.
The distinction is even recognised by the Constitution.
Articles 311 affords protection only to a person holding a 'Civil Post' and not to one who is working in a private organisation.
There is, thus, a clear differential between the two classes and the persons working in Private Institutions cannot as of right claim to be equal to those working in Government organisations.
The distinction has not yet been obliterated.
7.
With this background in view, one has to consider the effect of the order passed by the Government on September 21, 1976.
It was decided to grant parity in the pay scale to the employees of the Private Institutions with their "counterparts" in the employment of the State Government.
This only meant that persons working as Demonstrators in Private Institutions will be entitled to the same scale of pay as the 'Demonstrators' in Government Institutions.
It does not, however, automatically follow from the order of the Government that if the Government up-grades certain posts, there would be an automatic up-gradation of that category of posts even in private institutions.
Supposing, the Government for reasons of economy or otherwise decides to abolish certain posts, it would not automatically lead to a similar abolition in the private institutions.
Similarly, if the Government decides to create certain posts, it would not automatically oblige the institutions to create new posts.
Furthermore, it can equally well happened that the private institutions may, if they so choose, create certain posts which are different from those in the Government Polytechnics.
So long as they do not ask the Government for money, they would be entitled to do so.
Those working in the Government Institutions shall not be entitled to claim as of right that similar posts have to be provided to them.
One cannot also lose sight of the fact that there may be managements who are not willing to bear the additional burden created by up-gradation of posts.
They cannot be forced to do so.
In my view, there is a clear distinction between revision of pay scales and re-structuring of a cadre.
This distinction cannot and should not be obliterated by the process of judicial review and interpretation.
8.
The decision of the Government was to grant a limited parity which is confired to the matter of pay scales.
It did not provide for an absolute parity in every respect.
It does not raise the employees of private institutions to the level or status of Government employees.
Parity in the scale of pay does not imply anything also except that those holding like posts had to be paid alike.
9.
What is the position in the present case.
The Government chose to up-grade certain posts of Demonstrators to those of lecturers.
As a result, such of the Demonstrators as had the qualifications prescribed for the post of a Lecturer were to be appointed to the higher posts.
It did not mean that every Demonstrator was to be automatically treated as a Lecturer and placed in the scale of pay sanctioned for the post.
10.
However, as already stated above, I am bound by the decision of the Division Bench.
Consequently, I have no option but to follow it.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed in the same terms.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.