GS Singhvi, J - Swaran Singh, Mehal Singh Dhillon and Jasjit Singh Samundri who remained unsuccessful before a Single Bench of the Court have assailed the legality of the order dated December 6, 1984, passed by a learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 3395 of 1983, and have prayed that the order passed by the learned Single Judge be set aside.
2.
Brief facts of this case are as under :  Recruitment to the Punjab State Forest Service Class II posts used to be made in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Forest Service, Class II, Rules, 1941 (for short the Rules).
Rule 4(b) of the Rules specifies two sources of recruitment, namely, by direct recruitment and by promotion from amongst Forest Rangers.
Rule 8 of the Rules provides for confirmation while Rule 10 deals with seniority of the members of service.
Direct recruitment to.
the service was made by appointment of S/Shri Varindra Mohindra and Gurmeet Singh.
In the year 1972, the Government of Punjab decided to fill two posts by direct recruitment.
Requisition was sent to the Public Service Commission and on its recommendations S/Shri KK Modgil and Rajinder Singh were deputed for two years' training at the Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehradun.
Before this recruitment was made, S/Shri Gurdial Singh, Jaswant Singh, Dayal, Amarjit Singh, Bishan Chand, Attar Singh and Niranjan Singh were occupying the post in the service by virtue of their promotion from the post of Forest Rangers.
In the year 1973, S/Shri Bhag Singh, Ram Singh, Gurdip Singh, Rattan Chand and Tarsem Singh Sahota, who were at that time holding the post of Forest Rangers, were promoted to Class II post of State Service with a condition that they were liable to be reverted as Forest Rangers on the availability of the candidates selected by direct recruitment.
After the recruitment of 1972, the Government of Punjab once again sent requisition to the Punjab Public Service Commission and on its recommendations three petitioners were selected for being deputed for training at Dehradun.
On successful completion of training, they were appointed to the service on probation w.e.f.
March 19, 1976.
After completion of the period of probation, the petitioners became entitled to be treated as confirmed.
3.
When respondent Nos. 4 to 7 were posted as Divisional Forest Officers in preference to the petitioners, Swaran Singh, petitioner No. 1, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4328 of 1979 claiming that he had preferential claim for posting as Divisional Forest Officers.
Subsequently, petitioner Swaran Singh and two others filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3395 of 1983 and prayed for issue of a direction to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 not to regularise the services of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 in Punjab Forest Service Class II posts or to confirm them in the said service and not to promote them to the Indian Forest Service.
They also prayed for issue of a direction to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to consider them for promotion to the Indian Forest Service.
Petitioners pleaded that respondent Nos. 4 to 7 had been given promotion far in excess of the quota specified in rule 4(b) and, therefore, these respondents had no legal right to be treated as seniors to the petitioners and their services could not have been regularised in violation of the quota rules.
4.
Respondent Nos. 4 to 6 filed a short affidavit in the first instance on 381983 and then filed a detailed written statement.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed their separate written statement.
These respondents pleaded that there has been no violation of the quota rules and that promotion accorded to respondent Nos. 4 to 7 was perfectly in accordance with rule 4(b).
Respondents pleaded that petitioners have no right to claim seniority qua Gurdip Singh, Ram Singh, Rattan Chand and Tarsem Singh because even though initial promotions of these respondents were on ad hoc basis, they had become entitled to regular promotion against the posts in Class II service with the retirement/promotion of the existing incumbents.
5.
Learned Single Judge accepted the respondents that no violation of rule 4(b) had taken place by regularisation of the services of respondent Nos. 4 to 7.
The learned Single Judge held that earlier Civil Writ Petition No. 4337 of 1981 had been dismissed on May 18, 1983 and, therefore, the petitioners cannot claim seniority over respondent Nos. 4 to 7.
Rules 4, 8 and 10 of the Rules of 1941 read thus :  "4.
The service shall be recruited by the following methods :  a) by direct appointment,  b) by promotion of selected Forest Rangers :  Provided that the members of the Service recruited under clause (b) of this rule shall not exceed one-third of the total number of members of the service and the former Punjab Forest Service taken together at the time of recruitment and :  Provided further that Forest Ranger will not ordinarily be considered for promotion.
(1) until they have served as Forest Rangers for not less than 8 years, and  (2) after they have attained the age of 45 years; and  Provided further that all appointments to the service by promotion from the Subordinate Service shall be made by selection and no member of the Subordinate Service shall have any claim to such appointments as of right."
8.
(1) Members of the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years.
(2) If the work or conduct of any member during the period of probation is, in the opinion of Government, not satisfactory, it may dispense with his service if he has been recruited by direct appointment or may revert him to his former post in the Subordinate Service if he has been recruited by promotion.
(3) On the conclusion of the period of probation of any member of the service, Government may confirm such member in his appointment, or if his work or conduct has, in its opinion, not been satisfactory, it may dispense with his services if he has been recruited by direct appointment, or may revert him to his former post if he has been recruited by promotion or may extend his period of probation by such period as Government may think fit and thereafter pass such orders as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation :  Provided that the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years in any case."
10.
The seniority of members of the Service shall be determined by the dates of their appointment to the Services :  Provided that, if two or more members are appointed on the same.
(a) in the case of members, who have been appointed direct, an older member shall be senior to a younger member;  (b) In the case of members who are appointed by promotion from the Subordinate Service Seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in that service;  (c) a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member or members promoted from the Subordinate Service :  Provided further that if any officer appointed fails to qualify himself for a substantive permanent appointment within the prescribed period of probation, Government determine whether the date of his appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be postponed by a period not exceeding the period by which such officer's substantive permanent appointment is delayed beyond the prescribed period of probation."
6.
A look at rule 4 and particularly proviso to clause (1) shows that the number of Forest Rangers recruited to the service by promotion shall not exceed 1/3rd of total number of members of service at the time of recruitment.
Although this rule makes reference not only to the total number of the members of the service but also to the former Punjab Forest Service but in our opinion the learned Single Judge has rightly pointed out that members of erstwhile Punjab Forest Service were no more available for determining the strength of the appointee to the service by promotion.
Proviso to rule 4(b) is couched in negative language and what it provides is that promotion of Forest Rangers must not exceed 1/3rd of the total members of the service at the time of recruitment.
It does not refer to the number of posts hold by direct recruits.
Instead it speaks of total number of members of service.
Total number of posts in the service has been given out to be 13 as is evident from the averments made in the writ petition as well as the reply.
Thus out of total 13 posts, four Forest Rangers could have been promoted.
S/Shri Gurdial Singh, Jaswant Singh Dayal, Amarjit Singh and Bishan Chand were rightly promoted to Class II posts.
Initially S/Shri Varindra Mehendra and Gurmit Singh were appointed by direct recruitment.
Subsequently Shri KK Modgil and Shri Rajinder Singh were appointed by direct recruitment on March 5, 1974.
As on that day only four persons were holding posts against promotee quota.
Thus as on that date, rule 4(b) had not been breached.
Other promotees, namely, S/Shri Niranjan Singh, Attar Singh, Bhag Singh, Gurdip Singh, Ram Singh, Rattan Chand and Tarsem Singh Sihota were working on ad hoc basis.
Before the next direct recruitment took place, Shri Bishan Chand (promotee) was further promoted to Indian Forest Service w.e.f.
6.7.1974.
Shri Gurdial Singh retired on 141975, Shri Rattan Chand retired on 161976 and Shri Niranjan Singh retired on 151978.
Against these posts, respondent Nos. 4 to 7 were regularised in service.
On these dates no other promotee officer was a member of the service.
Therefore, against the thirteen posts in the service, four Forest Rangers could legitimately be promoted to Class II posts of the State Service.
In our opinion the learned Single Judge has correctly held that by giving regular promotion to respondent Nos. 4 to 7, no violation of rules has been committed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
We are also in agreement with the learned Single Judge that if interpretation sought to be placed by the appellants (writ petitioners) was to be accepted, the rule itself would become unworkable and would result in serious public mischief because in that event in the absence of a direct recruitment, nobody could be appointed by promotion.
7.
We are also of the opinion that once the writ petition No. 4337 of 1981 filed by petitioner Swaran Singh was dismissed by a learned Single Judge on May 18, 1993 and that decision of the learned Single Judge has become final, there could be little justification for accepting their contention regarding invalidity in the appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 7.
Once the Court has upheld the promotion of the respondents in previous writ petition, there could be little justification for declaring their promotion as illegal in the subsequent writ petition.
The claim made by the appellants will have to be treated as barred by the principle of res judicata.
8.
Finding of learned Single Judge on the contention of the petitioners that retrospective regularisation of the services of the respondents could not have been made does not call for any interference by us.
Learned Single Judge is correct in holding that when promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 was within the quota provided in rule 4(b) of the Rules, no illegality can be found in the retrospective promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 7.
In our considered opinion, there is no merit in the appeal and the same deserves to be dismissed.
Accordingly the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.