SP Kurdukar, CJ and HS Bedi, J - Writ petition admitted.
Pleadings of the parties are complete.
By consent writ petition placed on board and called out for hearing.
2.
By this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks a writ of certiorari to quash, Annexure P.3, particularly to the extent of right to withhold 1/3rd of provisional pension and a direction to release 100 per cent provisional pension and other retiral benefits in accordance with the rules and regulations.
The Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Food and Supplies, Department, vide order dated December 6, 1993, Annexure P.3, had accorded sanction under rule 9.17(a) read with rule 919(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II, to the grant of 2/3rd anticipatory pension to the petitioner-B.R.
Aggarwal 7, who was working as a District Food and Supplies Officer since retired.
On calculation, the Commissioner found that the petitioner would be entitled to the anticipatory pension of Rs. 832/- with effect from September 30,1992.
3.
Mr. Walia, the learned counsel appearing in support of the writ petition drew our attention to the rules and regulations governing the pensionary benefits to a government employee.
It is common premise that apart from pension, the petitioner would be entitled to gratuity amount and leave encashment benefit.
Vide Annexure P.3, the petitioner has been released only 2/3rd of the pension and the rest of the retiral benefits were withheld on the ground that departmental enquiry has been pending against the petitioner.
The departmental enquiry relates to the loss to the Government to the tune of Rs. 430 Lacs.
At the relevant time, when the loss was alleged to have been caused, the petitioner was working as a District Food and Supplies Officer at Karnal.
The enquiry although started in the year 1988, yet the same is still to be concluded.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner has been deprived of the retiral benefits.
4.
Mr. Walia, the learned counsel firstly urged that Annexure P.3 is not only contrary to the rules and regulations relating to the grant of pensionary benefits but the same is also totally opposed to the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab 1994(1) SCT 563 : 1993(4) S.L.R.
655, when Mr. Kadian, the learned D.A.G., Haryana, was confronted with this reported Full Bench decision; in particular head note (a) thereof, he had no argument to justify the withholding of 1/3rd pension to the petitioner.
We have gone through this Full Bench judgment and in our opinion, it clearly supports the petitioner's claim to the release of pension to him.
The respondents are accordingly directed to release full pension to the petitioner in view of the Full Bench decision of this Court in Dr. Ishar Singh's case (supra).
5.
Coming to the next submission relating to the grant of gratuity and leave encashment.
Mr. Walia, the learned counsel for the petitioner, drew our attention to the Government instructions dated December 9, 1985, Annexure PA.
He particularly drew our attention to the liability in case of a person, like the petitioner, which according to the learned counsel, would be only 5 per cent of the total loss.
Five per cent, of the total alleged loss works out to not more than Rs. 22,000/-.
In view of the Government instructions, we see no justifiable ground on which the respondents can withhold the gratuity amount and the leave encashment amount more than five per cent of the total loss.
We accordingly direct the respondents to follow their own instructions contained in Annexure P4 and release the gratuity amount and the leave encashment save and except five per cent which we have roughly worked out to Rs. 22,000/-.
Respondents to act in terms of the above order expeditiously and to refund the arrears of pension as well as the amount of gratuity and the leave encashment on or before August 31, 1994.
In the event the respondents fail to follow the above instructions, the petitioner will be entitled to recover the same with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
The respondents to complete the departmental proceedings as expeditiously as possible and preferably within six months.
Liberty to apply.
Writ Petition is accepted as indicated above.
Petition accepted.