Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This judgment shall dispose of CWP No. 8612 of 1991 (Satbir Singh and another v. Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board).
and CWP No. 8927 of 1991 (Ram Gopal and others v. Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board) as common questions of law and facts are involved in both the cases.
2.
For facility of reference, the facts are being taken from CWP No. 8612 of 1991.
The petitioners have prayed for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or directions directing the respondent-Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) to appoint them as Mandi Supervisors out of the waiting list prepared in the year 1990 against the advertisement published on 4111989 with further directions to the Board not to fill up the posts of Mandi Supervisors by fresh selection.
3.
The case as set up by the petitioners is that the Respondent-Board advertised various posts including the posts of Mandi Supervisors through advertisement which appeared in the Dainik Tribune dated 4111989.
In response thereto, the petitioners applied for the post of Mandi Supervisors.
The interview was conducted by the Selection Committee constituted by the Respondent-Board on 24111989.
Thereafter the Selection List/Waiting List was prepared and 4 candidates were placed on the main select list and the petitioners were placed at Sr. Nos. 1 and 2 of the Waiting List.
It is also the case of the petitioners that the candidates placed on the main select list were offered appointments and the petitioners being on the waiting list met the Chief Administrator a number of times for issuance of appointment letters against the vacancies which were available after appointment of the candidates on the main select list.
Petitioners have also averred that the Chief Administrator promised to issue appointment letters and the file was sent to the Commissioner and Secretary, Agriculture Department for seeking approval.
The petitioners also made representations on 20121990 (Annexures P-2 and P- 3), but the matter was kept pending.
In the meantime, another development took place that 5 unsuccessful candidates namely S/Shri Mange Ram and others challenged the selection of Mandi Supervisors made on 24111989 by way of CWP Nos. 1102, 1297, 2697, 5150 and 3073 of 1990 which were ultimately decided by Ashok Bhan J, vide judgment dated 2531991 in which the Respondent-Board gave an undertaking to accommodate the petitioners and give them appointment.
An extract of the judgment is given as under :-  "The learned Advocate General, Haryana argued that the decision of this case may effect thousands of employees who were selected and that the Board is prepared to accommodate the petitioners and give appointments to them.
Learned Advocate General gave an undertaking that the petitioners shall be appointed against the respective posts against which they had applied and were interviewed within one month from today."
On this undertaking of the learned Advocate General, Haryana, learned Counsel for the petitioners did not press the said writ petitions.
4.
However, while accepting the statement of the learned Advocate General, Haryana, the Single Judge further observed as under :-  "It may be clarified that this order shall not be treated as an instance for subsequent cases.
Candidates who had applied for the job alongwith the petitioners and not being aggrieved had not filed the writ petition would not be entitled to take benefit of this order to claim appointment to the job.
They shall not be entitled to prefer any claim on the basis of this order since nearly 15 months have already passed from the date of appointment of the selected candidates.
In view of the undertaking given by the Advocate General, Haryana which stands accepted by the learned Counsel for the petitioners, the present writ petition stands disposed of with no order as to costs."
5.
When the petitioners came to know of the decision rendered in the above mentioned writ petitions as per concession of the Respondent-Board, they alongwith three others moved a Review Application in those cases for being impleaded as party.
However, the request of the petitioners was declined.
Thereafter, the petitioners approached the Respondent-Board on 461991 for getting a similar treatment as was accorded to the individuals in whose favour the statement was made by the Board in the Court.
However, at that time, they came to know that the Board was conducting fresh interview and 13 posts of Mandi Supervisors were available with them and they were entitled for the same.
It is also the case of the petitioners that the posts against which fresh interviews were to be held, were available, even at the time when the petitioners and others were interviewed on the basis of advertisement dated 4111989.
According to the petitioners, this fact was admitted by the Respondent-Board vide Memo dated 5111990, copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
So, there was no idea in conducting fresh interview till the earlier waiting list was exhausted.
6.
The petitioners have further contended that the Respondent-Board is not offering the appointment to the petitioners despite availability of vacancies.
On the other hand, the candidates who were neither on the main select list nor on the waiting list have been offered appointments on the basis of writ petitions filed by them and the concession made by the Respondent-Board.
Hence the action of the Respondent-Board is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India.
7.
The Respondent-Board vehemently contested the claim of the petitioners and has raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the petitions deserve to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches as the advertisement was made in November, 1989 and the candidates selected were appointed in October, 1990 and certain persons who felt aggrieved for their non-selection, were granted relief by this Court in pursuance of the judgment dated 2531991 whereas the present writ petitions were filed in June, 1991.
7.
On merit, the Respondent-Board has contended that all the posts available at the time of advertisement/interview in 1989 stood filled in and nothing remained there.
So, the Waiting List prepared was deemed to be lapsed having been extinguished and the fresh interviews were being conducted qua the vacancies which became available after the earlier selection for which the petitioners have no claim.
Moreover, the validity period of the waiting list was over.
It is also the stand of the Respondent-Board that it was specifically mentioned in judgment dated 2531991 delivered by Ashok Bhan, J that the said judgment would not be precedent in future and no candidate could claim right to be appointed on the basis thereof and the action is sought to be justified on the ground that the petitioners have no locus standi to claim for the posts which are beyond the validity period of the Select List/Waiting List and the fresh posts were not covered by the earlier advertisement.
The stand of the petitioners qua the existence of vacancies has also been refuted by stating that fresh vacancies were created only in the year 1991.
It is also the stand of the Respondent-Board that merely being on Waiting List does not give an absolute right to the petitioners to be appointed.
8.
The Secretary, Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board filed an additional short affidavit on 2711992 and clarified the position regarding validity period of the Select List/Waiting List and availability of vacancies.
He also gave the date of preparation of Select List/Waiting List to be 18.1.1990.
9.
I have perused the paper-book and material on record minutely and considered the arguments advanced by the learned Counsel for the parties at the Bar.
10.
Undisputedly, the petitioners in both the writ petitions were on the Waiting List prepared on 18.1.1990 on the basis of advertisement dated 4111989.
After the offer of appointment to the candidates on the main Select List as is borne out from Annexure P-1 which has not been disputed by the Respondent-Board and the specific averment of the petitioners in para 2 of the writ petition has also not been disputed by the Respondent-Board, the petitioners, who were on the Waiting List were to be considered.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioners in writ petitions which have been disposed of by Ashok Bhan, J on 2531991 were neither on the main Select List nor on the Waiting List and they have also been offered appointments after the order dated 2531991 i.e. much after the period of expirty of Select List/Waiting List.
The claim of the petitioners is being resisted only on the ground of delay and laches of getting judicial verdict in the matter and presumably finding themselves in difficulty, the respondent made a concessional statement to offer appointment to those persons who had no right to be appointed and it is apparent from the copy of the judgment produced before me that Respondent-Board did not bring clear factual position to the knowledge of learned Judge while making concessional statement that there were candidates who were on the waiting list who had better and preferential claim than the petitioners in the said cases.
Had this fact been brought to the notice of learned Judge, the position would have been different.
As such, I am of the considered view that in order to avoid judicial verdict, the Respondent-Board committed another illegality while offering the appointment of its own to the candidates who were nowhere.
Equally meritless is the contention of the Board that all the vacancies which were advertised on 4111989 stood filled in and there was no post to accommodate the petitioners.
If the Respondent-Board be non-suited on the ground of delay and laches.
11.
Similarly, there is no force on the contention of the Respondent-Board that the petitioners, who were on the waiting list had no right to be appointed against the vacancies which were not covered by the advertisement.
In addition, they argued that merely being on Select List, does not confer an indefealsible right on the petitioners to seek appointment.
The petitioners have placed on record the document dated 5111990, copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, written by the Chief Administrator, Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board to the Commissioner and Secretary in which it has been categorically admitted that in addition to 9 posts of Mandi Supervisors which were advertised and filled, 13 newly created posts were till available, out of which 4 posts were created vide order dated 4101989 and 9 posts were lying vacant since 1971989.
This document has not been disputed by the respondents nor anything in supersession therefor modifying the said letter had been brought on record.
Hence, it has to be taken that in addition to earlier 9 posts which were the subject matter of advertisement dated 4111989, 13 newly created posts were also available at the time of advertisement dated 4111989 and it is not understandable as to why these posts were not included by the respondent-Board in the advertisement.
This fact shows that vacancies were available and the validity period of the waiting list being one year from 18.1.1990, candidates, who were on the waiting list were entitled to be offered the said vacancies.
Therefore, there is no force in the stand of the respondent-Board that there on post left after offering the appointment to the 9 candidates who were on the main Select List prepared on 18.1.1990 on the basis of interview dated 24111989.
12.
Now coming to the stand of the respondent-Board, from their own conduct, the selection and appointments made by the respondent-Board on the basis of interview dated 24111989 were challenged by the unsuccessful candidates and with a fear of getting judicial verdict in the matter and presumably finding themselves in difficulty, the respondent made a concessional statement to offer appointment to those persons who had no right to be appointed and it is apparent from the copy of the judgment produced before me that the respondent-Board did not bring clear, factual position to the knowledge of learned Judge while making concessional statement that there were candidates who were on the waiting list who had better and preferential claim than the petitioners in the said cases.
Had this fact been brought to the notice of learned Judge, the position would have been different.
As such, I am of the considered view that in order to avoid judicial verdict, the respondent-Board committed another illegality while offering the appointment of its own to the candidates who were nowhere.
Equally meritless is the contention of the Board that all the vacancies which were advertised on 4111989 stood filled in and there was no post to accommodate the petitioners.
If the respondent-Board could accommodate unsuccessful candidates who were nowhere and that too after the expiry of a period of more than one year from the date of preparation of the earlier select list, there was no reason for denying appointment to the petitioners.
Hence, there is no justification for the respondent-Board to deny on equal and fair treatment to the petitioners in these cases, who are better placed than those who were nowhere.
It is also relevant to add that all the petitioners are in order of merit on the waiting list i.e. at Sr. Nos. 1 and 2 (petitioners in writ petition No. 8612 of 1991) and at Sr. Nos. 4, 5 and 6 (petitioners in writ petition No. 8927 of 1991).
The respondent-Board cannot be allowed to perpetuate the illegality and cannot be allowed to deprive the rightful claim of the person who are better placed.
In my opinion, had the Board been well advised, the matter should have been got adjudicated upon on merit or the rights of the persons who were better placed should have been kept in view while making the concessional statement.
Hence, denial of appointment to the petitioners is not legally sustainable.
13.
The Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion had directed five seats of Mandi Supervisors to be kept reserved till further orders (2 seats in CWP No. 8612 of 1991 and 3 seats in CWP No. 8927 of 1991).
14.
For the reasons stated above, both the writ petitions No. 8612 of 1991 and 8927 of 1991 are allowed and the respondents are directed to offer appointment to the petitioners as Mandi Supervisors against the posts which were ordered to be kept reserved at the time of issuing notice of motion in both the said cases.
These directions shall be complied with within a period of two months from the receipt of copy of this judgment.
15.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.