NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner has sought issuance of a writ of certiorari seeking quashing of order dated 2891987, Annexure P-1, vide which his disability pension was ordered to be discontinued as well as order Annexure P-5 dated 27.10.1992 dismissing his appeal with a further prayer that Regulation No. 185 and 185-A of the Pension Regulation Act of Army, 1961 (Part 1) be declared ultra vires of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was recruited in the Army on 31.5.1963 on the post of Signman.
At the time of his initial recruitment he was not suffering from any disease or ailment.
He served the army for a period of about four years and was ultimately discharged on account of the medical report holding that the petitioner is suffering from Schizophrenia Reaction.
In terms of Regulation 185-A he was awarded temporary disability pension since his disability was held to be 50%.
As per averments made in the petition, petitioner had been getting the disability pension till the passing of the order Annexure P-1 which is assailed being wholly illegal and unjust as per facts narrated in the writ petition.
3.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have put in appearance and filed written statement controverting the various averments made in the petition.
It has been averred by the respondents that the petitioner was discharged from service as he was found to be suffering from disease-Schizophrenia Reaction.
It is the report of the Commanding Officer which put the respondents on guard and so the petitioner was examined by the doctors who opined that the petitioner's illness was characterised by apathy, arrogance, visual and auditory hallucinations and a complete lack of insight and thus was considered unfit for further military service.
The petitioner was brought before the Medical Board which recommended to place him under category EEE.
Accordingly, he was invalidated out of service w.e.f.
21.7.1967 under Army Rule 13 III (iii).
According to the respondents, petitioner's disability was neither found attributable to nor aggravated by military service; rather it was found that "the individual is suffering from constitutional disorder which manifest during service in the pre-disposed individual."
Since disability was assessed at 50% so he was granted pension as permissible under the Rules which the petitioner had been drawing till its discontinuance vide Annexure P-1.
Justifying the Rule 185-A which envisages periodical check up in case of temporary disability it was stated that the same is just and appropriate.
In fact, Regulations 185 and 185-A are beneficial in nature and it takes care of persons who have been found unfit to render military service though their disability is not attributable to the military service.
Thus it was prayed that the writ petition is devoid of merit and the same be dismissed.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has primarily challenged the provision of Regulation 185-A terming the same to be ultra vires to the Constitution of India as the same envisages periodical re-examination of the person who was discharged earlier on account of disability from the army service.
According to the counsel, this provision with regard to the re-examination of the person to assess his disability is per se arbitrary and unreasonable.
In support of this assertion the counsel urged that in view of the fresh assessment of the disability of the petitioner, he has been deprived of his only means of livelihood as at this stage he is not likely to get any gainful employment elsewhere.
5.
Counsel for the respondent made reference to the report of the Commanding Officer which reads as, "talks incoherently and arrogantly.
He is quarrelsome, behaviour is indifferent.
He ran away from the Unit on 2nd April but was apprehended and has been behaving peculiarly since then," and so was treated by Captain SK Budhiraja, AMC Psychiatrist who opined that this is a case of Schizophrenia Reaction.
According to the doctor, the petitioner was unfit for further military service.
He recommended category EEE.
Accordingly, the patient was brought before the invaliding Medical Board and so was discharged w.e.f.
21.7.1967.
Counsel for the respondents specifically denied the assertion of the petitioner that his disability was attributable to Military service.
Rather, as per invaliding Medical Board, it was found that the petitioner's disability is neither attributable nor aggravated by military service and so the same had no connection with the service.
Since it was found that the disease is on account of constitutional disorder, the medical advisor finally assessed the medical disability at 50% and so granted disability pension as per Regulations.
Justifying the rationale behind Regulations 185 and 185-A of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, it was stated that whereas Regulation 185 deals with a case when disability is incapable of improvement.
Regulation 185A deals with a case when disability is capable of improvement.
The disability pension is in the nature of an award.
The rate of disability pension is in proportion to the degree of disability.
Regulation 185A envisages periodic check up to find out whether there has been any improvement in the patient.
This being the position, no fault can be found with the assessment of the Medical Board with regard to the present disability of the petitioner which has been assessed to be less than 20%.
Since the rules do not permit grant of pension in case where the disability is less than 20%, the order discontinuing the temporary disability pension is just and proper.
Support was also sought from the decision of this Court in case Spy.
Zora Singh v. Union of India, 1994(1) S.C.T.
734 (CWP No. 2848 of 1993) decided on 991993.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant rules referred to during the course of arguments.
Facts are not in dispute.
The petitioner joined Army service in the year 1963 and was discharged in July, 1967, as he was suffering from Schizophrenia Reaction which disease, as per doctor, was attributable to his constitutional disorder and not connected or aggravated by military service.
Since the disability was found to be 50% he was awarded disability pension which he had been drawing till the passing of the order discontinuing the same.
The controversy in dispute revolves around Regulation 185-A which provides periodic check up of the person by the Medical Board so as to find out that the degree of disability has lessened or increased.
Regulation 185-A of the Pension Regulations of the Army, 1961, reads as under :-  "185-A : If the disability is accepted as attributable to military service but regarded as capable of improvement, award may normally be made for a period of 3 years from the date from which a disability pension is admissible or in a case where a disability pension was in issue for a specified period, from the date of expiry of the previous award provided that in cases where the duration of the disability at the accepted degree of disablement is considered to be less than 3 years, the period of an award calculated with reference to the date of the last Medical Board shall not exceed the period of duration of the disability at that degree.
(b) An award may, however, be made in any individual case for such longer or shorter period as may be prescribed by the President either generally or in respect of a particular disability.
(c) If the disability is accepted as aggravated by military service, the duration of an award shall be determined with due regard to the relevant provision in the Entitlement Rules vide Appendix-II."
7.
In terms of the above Regulation, the petitioner's disability which was assessed at 50% from 1967 to 1st of August, 1969, was found to have lessened when the petitioner was examined by the Medical Board at 40% as per chart given in para 4 of the written statement and thereafter from May, 1973 to March, 1987, the petitioner's disability was assessed at 20%.
There is no controversy between the parties that during this period i.e. from 22.7.1966 to 2231987 petitioner was being paid disability pension as per his disability found by the Medical Board.
Till then the petitioner did not make any grievance of this beneficial provision in the Regulation.
It is on account for reassessment of disability by the Medical Board on 2331987 which assessed his disability to be between 15 to 19% which has given a cause to assail this action as well as unjustness of this provision.
Except for reiterating with some amount of vehemence that Rule 185-A is ultra vires the Constitution of India, counsel for the petitioner failed to substantiate the same by any cogent reasoning.
On careful examination of the provision noticed above, we also do not find any legitimate ground to declare the same to be ultra vires the Constitution of India.
In fact, the provision appears to be beneficial in nature.
The petitioner throughout had been taking benefit of this provision without raising an eye brow.
A bare perusal of the chart giving in detail the disability pension to the petitioner reveals that the same was at the rate of Rs. 33/- per month upto the year of 1969 and thereafter at the rate of Rs. 29/- per month upto 1973 and at the rate of Rs. 25/- per month upto 1986 and finally at the rate of Rs. 90/- per month for the period from December, 1986 to March 22, 1987 which can hardly be an amount to sustain oneself as was sought to be projected by the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner had been surviving on this paltry amount of pension alone.
In any case, it was in the nature of an award which was to be periodically re-evaluated.
Since the temporary disability had lessened during the years, the respondent's action discontinuing the pension which was being awarded to the petitioner can neither be termed as arbitrary or unjust.
8.
We also find no merit in the plea of the counsel that since the petitioner had become average and so cannot be gainfully employed in any other service his case for awarding of the disability pension ought to have been considered favourably by the authorities.
The petitioner left the army service when he was hardly 24 years of age.
At the time of his discharge he was awarded a sum of Rs. 33/- per month which can hardly be taken as sufficient for survival.
In all probability, he had been earning his livelihood during these years.
In any case, this can hardly be a ground to award disability pension to a person who has ceased to be entitled to as per Regulations in view of the report of the Medical Board.
Thus, we find no merit in any of the contentions raised by the petitioner.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.