NK Sodhi, J - What is challenged in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is the circular dated July 14, 1988 whereby the Haryana Government had granted Professor's grade of Rs. 4500-7300 to the Principals or Government and non-Government Colleges who had put in a total service of twenty-five years on the ground that the same is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution as it puts premium on length of service at the cost of merit.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Lecturer in English on February 1, 1963 in Jat College, Rohtak.
He was then appointed Principal of Haryana War Heroes Memorial College, Gohana in August, 1968.
This Institution was taken over by the Haryana Government in August, 1980 and, thereafter, he was shifted-appointed Principal of Government College, Gohana with effect from 12.2.1981.
He retired as Principal of Government College, Jind in April, 1991.
His name appears at Sr. No. 11 in the gradation list of Haryana Education Service Class-I Officers (College Cadre) as it stood on January 1, 1987.
3.
The University Grants Commission revised the pay scales of teachers of Universities and Colleges with effect from January 1, 1986 and the State of Haryana accepting the recommendations of the Commission revised the pay scales of Lecturers and Principals.
The Principals were granted the scale of Rs. 3700-5700.
He was further provided that the post of a Principal would be kept in the Professor's grade only in those Colleges which fulfilled the conditions mentioned in the letter granting the revised scales.
The State Government also provided that only those Principals would qualify for the Professor's grade who had atleast 20 years of total teaching experience.
By the impugned circular letter of July 14, 1987 the condition of twenty years of service to get the Professor's grade was altered and the requisite teaching experience was increased to 25 years and the said grade was granted to such Principals with effect from January 1, 1986.
The petitioner completed his twenty-five years of teaching experience on 121988 and was given the Professor's grade with effect from this date.
He has now challenged the impugned circular letter on the sole ground that the condition of 25 years of teaching experience for earning Professor's grade is arbitrary and violates Article 14 as it has the effect of giving higher scale of pay to a junior who may have completed 25 years of teaching experience but denies this grade to a senior who may not have the requisite service.
It was also contended that this inflexible provision puts a premium on experience as against merit.
The argument is that meritorious Lecturers who are selected as Principals with lessor experience would be at a disadvantageous position as compared to those who may complete the twenty-five years experience in routine.
I find force in this submission.
4.
It is not disputed that the Principals of Government Colleges are members of the Haryana Education (College Cadre) Group-A Service and are governed by the Haryana Education College Cadre Group-A Service Rules, 1986 (for short, 'the Rules').
Recruitment to the service in case of Principals is governed by Rule 9(1)(b) of the Rules which reads as under :  (1) Recruitment to the service shall be made :  (a) xx xx xx  (b) in case of Deputy Director Colleges/Principals, -  (i) 25% by direct recruitment, and (ii) 75% by promotion from amongst the College Lecturers; or  (c) xx xx xx xxx xx xx xx"  According to sub-rule 2 of Rule 9 all appointments to the posts by promotion are made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall have any right for promotion merely on the basis of seniority.
It will be seen that 25% of the posts of Principals are filled by direct recruitment and the remaining by promotion from amongst the College Lecturers.
According to Appendix B read with Rule 7 of the Rules a Lecturer with 8 years, teaching experience in a College affiliated to a University or any other institution is eligible to be appointed Principal of a Government College by direct recruitment provided he possesses the other qualifications mentioned in the Appendix.
Similarly, a Lecturer with ten years of teaching experience is also eligible to be promoted as Principal of a College.
How the impugned provision of twenty-five years of teaching experience for getting Professor's grade can operate arbitrarily can best be illustrated by taking on example.
For instance, a lecturer with eight years teaching experience and possessing the other qualifications mentioned in Appendix B to the Rules competes for the post of a Principal by way of direct recruitment and gets selected against another who is in service with twenty-five years of teaching experience.
If the lecturer with 25 years experience who could not be selected by way of direct recruitment is later promoted as Principal in his turn would obviously rank junior to that Principal who got selected by way of direct recruitment as seniority is determined under the Rules from the date of continuous service on the post.
Thus, the person having completed and failed in direct recruitment would get the Professor's grade from the date of his promotion as he has 25 years of teaching experience whereas the meritorious lecturer who got selected after eight years of teaching experience will have to wait for 17 years to get the same although he is senior in the cadre as Principal.
This is obviously anomalous, arbitrary, unfair and unjust and it has so happened in the present case.
The petitioner was appointed as a Principal on February 12, 1981 by direct recruitment when he joined Government service and ranks senior to one Shri JP Aggarwal who was promoted as Principal on December 27, 1981.
The petitioner is at Sr. No. 11 of the gradation list whereas the said Shri JP Aggarwal is at Sr. No. 14.
In terms of the impugned circular letter, Shri JP Aggarwal who was junior to the petitioner was given the Professor's grade with effect from January 1, 1986 as he had the requisite 25 years of teaching experience while the petitioner who ranks senior to him as Principal was given this grade only with effect from February 1, 1988 the date on which he completed 25 years.
The blanket provision of giving the Professor's grade based on this kind of criteria obviously results in the junior Principal getting higher scale of pay than the senior.
This is ex facie arbitrary and violates the equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
No reasonable rationale for creating such as anomalous situation where a junior Principal gets a higher grade than a senior is discernible from the impugned circular nor has any been pointed out on behalf of the State in this regard.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Andhra Pradesh and others v. G Sreenivasa Rao & others, 1989(1) RSJ 519 have observed that "Ordinarily grant of higher pay to a junior would ex facie be arbitrary but if there are justifiable grounds in doing so the seniors cannot invoke the equality doctrine."
In other words, a senior may in some eventualities get lower pay than the juniors provided the differentia is based on intelligible criteria and has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved which is missing in the present case.
Experience by itself can in some cases be a good ground for classifying persons to give a higher grade provided it does not result in the junior drawing a higher pay scale than the senior.
For instance, certain percentage of the senior members of a cadre drawing a higher selection grade would be perfectly justified and so junior would be allowed to claim that he being a member of the same cadre and doing the same work is also entitled to higher selection grade.
This type of classification, based as it is, on experience would be valid and has been upheld by the Apex Court in State of Uttar Pradesh v. JP Chaurasia, 1989(1) S.C.C.
121 but the circular impugned in the present case though making experience as a base for the grant of Professor's grade to the Principals leads to a situation where a Junior can draw a higher grade than the senior without any justification.
5.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to give to the petitioner the Professor's grade with effect from the date any of his juniors was given that grade.
Since the petitioner has retired from service, the respondents are further directed to calculate the amount due to the petitioner and pay the same to him within 3 months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.