Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners are members of the Punjab State Civil Service (Judicial Bench).
They inter alia pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus "directing the respondents to grant the benefit of military service in accordance with" the provisions contained in the Punjab Government National Emergency Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the 1965 Rules).
They, consequently, claim that they are senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 70.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners joined the Armed Forces of the Union during the operation of proclamation of Emergency made by the President on October 26, 1962.
They were discharged/retired in the year 1979.
During the course of their service, they qualified the LL.B examination through correspondence.
On December 26, 1981, the Punjab Public Service Commission advertised 35 posts in the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
The applications had to be submitted by February 11, 1982.
The petitioners applied for these posts.
They qualified the written examination held in October, 1982.
They were finally selected.
While petitioner No. 1 was appointed on October 10, 1983, the remaining two petitioners were appointed on March 2, 1984.
About three years after their recruitment, the petitioners submitted three separate representations for the grant of benefit of the service rendered by them during the 'emergency' for the purposes of seniority and pay.
These representations were rejected and decision was conveyed to the petitioners through three separate letters dated August 9, 1988.
They again submitted separate representations dated September 5, 1988 which were rejected vide order dated February 2, 1989.
Aggrieved by the rejection of their representations, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
3.
The petitioners aver that Proclamation regarding Emergency had been issued on two occasions.
Firstly, in pursuance to the Chinese Aggression, National Emergency had been proclaimed on October 26, 1962.
This proclamation had remained in force till January 6, 1968.
Secondly, after war with Pakistan, National Emergency was declared on December 3, 1975 which remained in force till March 27, 1976.
The petitioners claim that in spite of the fact that the 1965 Rules had been repealed by the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-Servicemen Rules, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the 1982 Rules), the benefits of military service rendered during the operation of the proclamation of emergency, regarding the fixation of their seniority and pay which had accrued to them under the 1965 Rules are protected by the saving clause contained in Rule 9(3) and, thus, their representations have been wrongly rejected by the respondents.
They further aver that similar benefits have been granted to various other officers like Mr. AS Sodhi etc. and as such, the action of the respondents in denying these benefits to the petitioners is wholly illegal.
It has also been averred that while advertising posts on December 20, 1981, the last date for submission of applications was fixed as February 11, 1982.
The 1982 Rules were promulgated with effect from February 12, 1982.
According to the petitioners, "the choosing of the last date regarding the submission of applications clearly indicates that the intention of the authorities was that 1982 Rules are not applied in the case of the posts advertised."
On these premises, the petitioners pray for the quashing of the order rejecting their representations and for the issue of an appropriate writ and direction to the respondents to treat them as senior in the service to the private respondents.
They also claim the benefits regarding pay and arrears of salary.
4.
When the writ petition was originally filed, the persons over whom the petitioners claim seniority had not been impleaded as parties.
On July 23, 1992, at the time of the hearing of the case, a prayer for permission to amend the writ petition was made.
The prayer was allowed.
Consequently, the writ petition was amended and respondent Nos. 3 to 70 were impleaded as parties.
Notice of the writ petition was issued to them.
Thereafter, a written statement was filed by respondent No. 53 only.
No written statement has been filed in spite of the grant of various opportunities by the State of Punjab.
5.
In the written statement filed by respondent No. 53, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioners having joined service in the years 1983-84, are governed by the 1982 Rules and can claim no benefit under the 1965 Rules.
The respondent avers that in the advertisement issued on January 26, 1981, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-16 with the writ petition, no post had been reserved for Ex-Servicemen.
The 1982 Rules, contained a provision for reservation of 15% of the post to be filled by direct appointment.
Even relaxation in the matter of age for recruitment had been provided for.
The respondent points out that after the promulgation of the 1982 Rules, the Commission had issued a Corrigendum and notified that 15% posts had been reserved for Ex-Servicemen.
The applications had to be submitted by ex-servicemen to the District & Sessions Judges on or before June 7, 1982.
The petitioners had accordingly, applied.
According to the respondent, the petitioners having been appointed against the vacancies reserved under the 1982 Rules cannot claim any benefits under the 1965 Rules.
Furthermore, it has also been averred that even under the 1965 Rules, the petitioners were not entitled to the grant of benefits claimed by them.
The respondent avers that the representations of the petitioners have been rightly rejected.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioners has raised the following contentions :-  (i) The petitioners having served in one or the other wing of the Armed Forces of the Union during the 'emergency', had a vested right under the 1965 Rules which have been protected by the saving clause contained in Rule 9(3) of 1982 Rules.
Consequently, notwithstanding the repeal, the petitioners are entitled to the benefits claimed by them.
(ii) The Rules in force on the date of the advertisement of the posts gave a vested right to the petitioners.
According to the learned counsel, the respondents had designedly fixed February 11, 1982 as the last date for the submission of applications.
The intention was to protect the rights of the Ex-Servicemen.
The rules having not been promulgated retrospectively, the 1982 rules can be applied only to posts advertised after February 12, 1982.
(iii) Action is barred by the principle of 'promissory estoppel.'
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners had been controverted by learned counsel for the respondents.
Before proceedings to consider the respective contentions, relevant provisions of the Rules may be briefly noticed.
The 1965 Rules were notified on July 13, 1965.
Rule 2 defines military service as under :  "2.
Definition :- For the purposes of these rules, the expression 'Military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including service as a warrant officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962 or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
Rule 4 provides for the grant of benefits regarding increments, seniority and pension, which reads as under :-  "4.
Increments, seniority and pension - Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under :-  (i) Increments :- The period spent by a person on military service after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in rules 39, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority :- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii) Pension :- The period of military service mentioned in clause (I) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :-  (1) The person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question.
(2) Any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government.
(3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Govt. shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in the exceptional cases under the orders of the Governments."
7.
On February 12, 1982, the Rules called 'The Punjab Recruitment of Ex- Servicemen, Rules, 1982' were promulgated.
These rules have been amended on various occasions.
However, since these amendments were made after the present writ petition had been filed only the provisions as originally promulgated are being noticed.
In Rule 2(c), the word 'Ex-Serviceman' has been defined to mean a person who joined "any rank, whether as a combatant or as a non-combatant on or after 1st day of November 1962 in the Armed Forces of the Union excluding ....".
Rule 3 made these rules applicable to all State Civil Services except the Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service and the Punjab Superior Judicial Service.
Rule 4 provided for reservation of 15 % of the vacancies to be filled in by direct recruitment for Ex-Servicemen.
Rule 6 inter alia provided that no person shall be eligible for appointment against a reserved vacancy unless his age at the time of joining the Armed Forces of the Union was within the age limits prescribed by the Government for direct appointment to such a vacancy in the relevant service rules.
However, provision for relaxation of the maximum age limit was also made.
Rule 8 provides that the pay of an Ex-Serviceman appointed against a reserved vacancy shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II.
Rules 9 and 10 read as under :-  "9.
General- (1) In matters not specifically provided for in these rules, a person appointed against a reserved vacancy shall be governed by the concerned Service Rules.
(2) All concerned Service Rules shall be subject to the provisions of these rules and the said rules shall be construed accordingly.
(3) Nothing in these rules shall be construed as depriving any person to whom these rules apply of any right which had accrued to him under the rules, notifications or orders in force immediately before the commencement of these rules.
10.
Repeal :- The following rules are hereby repealed :  (1) The Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules 1965;  (2) The Demobilised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968;  (3) The Demobilised Indian Armed Forces personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab Civil Services) (Executive Branch) Rules, 1972; and  (4) The Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel (Determination of Eligibility for Promotion) Rules, 1977."
8.
On a perusal of the 1965 Rules, it is apparent that the Military Service rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency made on October 26, 1962 counts for increments, seniority and pension under Rule 4.
However, this right in the very nature of things is contingent upon appointment to a post or service under the State.
Till a person who has been released from the Army or Air Force is actually appointed to a post or service under the State.
The right under Rule 4 remains inchoate.
It is only on appointment to a post under the State that the contingency for enforcing the right and claiming the benefits under Rule 4 can arise.
It is the admitted position that after their release from the Air Force/Army, petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 had been enrolled as Advocates in the year 1979 and they joined a Civil Service only in the years 1983/84.
Prior to their joining the Civil Service (Judicial Branch), the 1965 Rules were repealed.
As a result, Rule 4 was not on the Statute Book on the date the petitioners had joined the Service.
Can they still claim the benefit under the 1965 Rules ?
Mr. Randhawa contends that rule 9(3) protects the rights which had accrued to the petitioners under the 1965 Rules.
9.
'Accrue', according to Webster's Third New International Dictionary means "to come into existence as an enforceable claim ..... vested as a right".
According to Black's Law Dictionary, (Sixth Edition) 'Accrued' inter alia means "due and payable; vested; acquired; matured".
Thus, it can be said that an accrued right means a right that has matured.
10.
In the present case, the petitioners had no vested right to claim benefit of military service in the matter of pay or seniority before their appointment to a post.
The right, if at all any, would have accrued or matured only on their appointment to a post/Service.
Till the petitioners were appointed to a Service, no right could be said to have accrued to them.
As already observed, it was a contingent right which had to remain inchoate till the actual appointment had been made.
And before the right could have actually matured, the rules conferring the right had been repealed.
The right became non-existent.
11.
The question arises as to what was actually saved by Rule 9(3) ?
The answer is simple.
The rule saved the right of an Ex-Serviceman who had rendered military service during the period 'the proclamation of Emergency made by the President on October 26, 1962 was in force' and had been appointed to a post or Service under the State prior to October 12, 1982.
Even if the Government had passed no order giving him the benefits admissible under Rule 4, the right to get those benefits had matured and was protected by Rule 9(3).
12.
In view of the above, the first contention raised on behalf of the petitioners cannot be accepted.
It is, consequently, rejected.
13.
Mr. Randhawa then contended that the Rules in force on the date of the advertisement of the posts gave a vested right to the petitioners.
According to the learned counsel, the respondents had designedly fixed February 11, 1982 as the last date for the submission of applications.
The intention was to protect the rights of the Ex-Servicemen.
The rules having not been promulgated retrospectively, the 1982 rules can be applied only to posts advertised after February 12, 1982.
14.
Even this contention is misconceived.
It is true that when posts are advertised, every candidate who applies is entitled to be considered in accordance with the criterion prescribed in the advertisement or the rules in force on that date.
As observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in N T Devin v. Karanataka Public Service Commission and others, JT 1991(5) SC 282 : 1992(2) SCT 578 (SC) "Generally, a candidate has right to be considered in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in the advertisement in his right crystallises on the date of publication of advertisement.
However, he has no absolute right in the matter.
If the recruitment rules are amended retrospectively during the pendency of selection, in that event, selection must be held in accordance with the amended rules."
In every case, the legislative intent has to be gathered from the relevant provisions.
15.
What is the factual position in the present case ?
The Public Service Commission had issued the advertisement on December 26, 1981.
The applications had to be submitted by February 11, 1982.
On February 12, 1982, the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-Servicemen Rules, 1982 were promulgated.
In accordance with the provisions of Rule 4 of the 1982 Rules, 15% of the vacancies had to be reserved for being filled in any recruitment of Ex-Servicemen.
As a result, the Commission issued a Corrigendum notifying that out of 35 posts, 15% posts are reserved for Ex-Servicemen and invited applications from such 'Ex-Servicemen' by June 7, 1982.
The petitioners claiming themselves to be Ex-Servicemen submitted their applications.
These facts have been clearly stated in the written statement filed by respondent No. 53.
Still further, it is apparent from the written statement that Civil Writ Petition No. 2047 of 1984 had been filed by Mittar Sain Goyal, challenging the appointment of the petitioners.
This case (CWP 2047 of 1984) was heard and decided by DV Sehgal, J on November 18, 1986.
The petitioners had relied on the provisions of the 1982 Rules to contend that they were Ex-Servicemen as defined in Rule 2(c) and were eligible for the benefit of age relaxation mentioned in Rule 6.
This contention was accepted and their appointments were upheld.
In view of this position, the submission made on behalf of the petitioners that the Commission had designedly fixed February 11, 1982 as the last date or that they had a vested right in terms of the advertisement is wholly misconceived.
If at all, the petitioners can be accused of having withheld relevant facts from this Court while filing the writ petition.
They have, it appears, designedly kept back relevant information which was within their knowledge.
The petitioners are judicial officers.
Higher Standards are expected of them.
They seem to have belied this legitimate expectation.
16.
A perusal of the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 2047 of 1984 which is reported as 1987 (1) SLR 284. shows that the petitioners were appointed against the vacancies reserved for Ex-Servicemen.
They were given the benefit of age relaxation under the 1982 Rules.
Their rights can only be determined under these Rules.
The 1965 Rules having been repealed, the petitioners are not entitled to any benefit under Rule 4.
17.
It was then contended that the action of the respondents is barred by the equitable principle of Promissory Estoppel.
Even this contention is wholly misconceived.
Firstly, there can be no estoppel against Legislature.
It is settled that power under Article 309 is legislative.
The rules having been promulgated in exercise of power under the proviso to Article 309 and the validity of the rules having not been questioned, the plea of estoppel cannot be sustained.
Secondly, the petitioners have themselves taken benefit under the 1982 Rules.
They have no legitimate reason to contend that repeal of the 1965 Rules by the 1982 rules is barred by the principle of Promissory Estoppel.
The contention is, consequently, rejected.
18.
During the course of arguments, Mr. Randhawa had also contended that the petitioners were entitled to the grant of benefits not only for the period of military service rendered during the period when proclamation issued on October 26, 1962 was in force but also for the period during which the proclamation issued on December 3, 1971 was in force.
This contention has only to be noticed to be rejected.
Firstly, as already observed, the petitioners had no vested rights under the 1965 Rules.
Secondly, even under the 1965 Rules, military service has been defined as the service rendered during the period when proclamation issued on October 26, 1962 was in force.
Clearly, the proclamation issued on December 3, 1971 is not included.
Accordingly, the claim made by the petitioners in this regard is wholly untenable.
19.
Mr. DV Sharma, who also put in appearance on behalf of the petitioners, contended that the acceptance of the contention raised on behalf of the respondents would create a classification within the category of Ex-Servicemen which would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
This contention is wholly without merit.
The 1965 Rules were promulgated during the period when proclamation of Emergency was in force.
They had remained in force for a period of almost 17 years.
Thereafter, the Rules of 1982 were promulgated.
Provision for reservation of vacancies was made.
However, some of the benefits as admissible under the 1965 Rules ceased to be available to those who were recruited to a Service after the promulgation of the 1982 Rules.
The persons recruited prior to the promulgation of the 1982 Rules form a class distinct from those recruited after the promulgation of the Rules.
Nothing has been brought on record to show that the action suffers from any invidious discrimination.
Consequently, the plea cannot be accepted.
20.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.