Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - Civil Writ Petition No. 6524 of 1992 (Madan Gopal Marya v. The State of Haryana and others) and Civil Writ Petition No. 10773 of 1992 (Nathu Ram v. The State of Haryana & others) are being disposed of by a common judgment as the proposition of law canvassed in these writ petitions is identical.
In order to sort out the controversy, the facts have been taken from CWP No. 6524 of 1992.
2.
The petitioners in both the writ petitions were candidates for the post of Assistant Food Supplies Officer advertised by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
In the merit list of 28 candidates prepared by the Board, the petitioners were placed at Sr. No. 12 and 22 respectively.
The Director, Food & Supplies, Haryana, respondent No. 2 issued appointment letters to 11 candidates.
In the month of February, 1983, more candidates, who were lower in merit to the petitioners, were given appointments out of the select list.
Ramesh Singh, respondent No. 3, who was at serial No. 25 in the merit list and was selected as general category candidate, was accommodated against Ex-Servicemen dependents category.
In the year 1985-86, three more appointments of Assistant Food & Supplies Officers, were made.
Narinder Singh, respondent No. 4, who was lower in merit having been placed at Sr. No. 19 of the merit list, was also appointed.
This is how the petitioners invoked the jurisdiction of this Court by filing the writ petitions.
Precisely, the grievance of the petitioners is that they were higher in the merit list prepared by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and despite that they have been discriminated in the matter of appointment; Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 who were lower in merit have been given appointments.
The action of the official respondents in not giving appointments to the petitioners as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, has been termed as mala fide, arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice.
3.
Petitioner had filed C.W.P.
No. 17847 of 1991 (Madan Gopal Marya v. State of Haryana) and the same was disposed of by a Division Bench on 3121991 with the direction to the respondents to consider and decide the representation of the petitioner by passing a speaking order in accordance with law.
Though the respondents should have given appointment letter to the petitioner following the ratio of the decision rendered in CWP 3504 of 1988 Azad Singh v. State of Haryana & Ors., 1991(2) S.C.T.
520 on 2631991 but no appointment letter to the petitioner was issued.
The counsel contended that respondent Nos. 3 and 4 have been wrongly shown in the General Category, whereas they belonged to the Backward class.
Denial of appointment to the petitioner is violative of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia mentioned that vide letter dated May 6, 1987 the Subordinate Services Selection Board advised that Ramesh Singh, respondent No. 3, whose name appeared at Sr. No. 25 in the said selection list, be treated as a candidate belonging to the Ex-Servicemen category with retrospective effect.
As such Ramesh Singh became retrospectively eligible for appointment as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
4.
The learned Additional Advocate General has contended that the ratio of the decisions referred to above cannot be applied as the petitioners have claimed promotion at a belated stage.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
6.
Admittedly, in the merit list forwarded by the Board vide its letter dated August 16, 1982, the petitioners' names appear at Sr. Nos. 12 and 22, whereas respondent Nos. 3 & 4 figure at serial No. 25 and 19.
In the merit list, there is no indication that respondent Nos. 3 & 4 belonged to the category of the dependents of the Ex. Servicemen.
If in the combined merit list, the names of these two respondents appear below that of the petitioners, it is not understandable as to how they could be preferred to the petitioner while making offer of appointment to the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers.
In CWP No. 3504 of 1988 in which Ramesh Singh (respondent No. 3 in the present case) was also impleaded as respondent.
This Court while disposing of the writ petition, had observed that the explanation furnished by the State that these vacancies were converted into reserved category was not at all convincing.
It appeared that it was only an after thought in order to accommodate the said respondents, who were junior to the petitioners in the merit list prepared by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Apparently, the petitioners as mentioned earlier in both the writ petitions, were higher in merit.
As such they had preferential right to be appointed as such.
In this view of the matter, both the writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners for appointment as Assistant Food & Supplies Officer from the date their junior i.e. respondent Nos. 3 & 4 were appointed.
However, it is made clear that the petitioners shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary as they had not worked on the post.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.