Harjit Singh Bedi, J - This set of letters patent appeals are directed against the judgment of the learned single Judge dated 14th February, 1986 dismissing the writ petitions.
2.
The facts of the case relevant to the disposal of this appeal and the connected cases are that the appellants were registered as medical practitioners with the Bihar State Council of Ayurvedic and Unani Medicines Patna, set up under the Bihar Development of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine Act, 1951 (hereinafter called the 'Bihar Act'), and had subsequently been practising as registered medical practitioners at Panipat in the State of Haryana.
In order to enable the Bihar Council to keep track of their whereabouts, they intimated their Panipat addresses to it so that the necessary change could be effected in the register of the Council.
The change was duly noted by the Bihar Council and a communication to that effect was received by appellant No. 2 vide Annexure P1 dated 9th August, 1980.
It appears that the appellants also applied to the Haryana Board of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicines for being registered with the said Board but they were informed by the Registrar through Annexure P-2 that they could not have their names registered in Haryana nor could they practise therein as they had been registered with the Bihar Council and there was no provision in the Punjab Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Act, 1963 (hereinafter called the 'Punjab Act') which was applicable to the State of Haryana enabling them to do so.
This action of the respondents compelled the appellants to approach this Court praying for a writ directing them not to restrain the petitioners in the State of Haryana as they were duly qualified and registered for practise.
In response to the writ petition, separate written statements were filed and the objections taken were that as the appellants did not possess the qualifications prescribed under the Punjab Act or the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (for short the 'Central Act') they could not be registered under either of those acts and as such could not practise in the State of Haryana.
It was further contended that the appellants' enlistment for registration under the Bihar Council did not qualify them to carry on their practise in the State of Haryana.
The learned Single Judge after examining the various provisions of law and accepting the stand of the respondents held that the appellants were entitled to practise only in the State of Bihar as they had been registered with the Bihar Council, and accordingly dismissed the writ petitions.
The limited controversy that now remains is to the correctness or otherwise of this finding as it is the conceded case of the parties that the appellants do not possess the qualifications for being registered either under Section 15 of the Punjab Act or under Sections 23 to 25 of the Central Council Act.
In this connection, our pointed attention have been foccused by Mr. RS Mittal, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants on Section 17 of the Central Act to support his view that the registration with the Bihar Council ipso facto enabled the appellants to practise in the State of Haryana.
Mr. Balram Gupta, who has also appeared for some of the appellants in the connected matters, has urged that the fundamental right to practise any trade or profession had been conferred on an individual by Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution and the only impediment on that right was imposed by Sub-Article (6) thereof whereby reasonable restrictions could be put on that right in the public interest and accordingly if the appellants were held entitled and qualified to practise in one State no public interest stood jeopardised if they were allowed to practise in Haryana.
3.
Mr. HS Gill, learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondents, has argued in support of the judgment of the learned single Judge.
In reply to Mr. Balram Gupta's argument the stand taken is that each State was entitled to lay down and prescribe qualifications which it thought were necessary in order to qualify a person to practise as a registered medical practitioner and a person registered with the Bihar Council could not claim that he had a fundamental right to practise is the State of Haryana in spite of the fact that he did not fulfil the qualifications for being registered under the Punjab Act.
In this connection he has brought to our notice the qualifications prescribed for registration under the Bihar Act, the Punjab Act and the Central Act to support his plea that the qualifications under the latter two enactments were far more stringent and envisaged a deeper and more elaborate knowledge of the Indian System of Medicine.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
Section 17 of the Central Act provides as under :-  Rights of persons possessing qualifications, included in Second, Third and Fourth Schedules to be enrolled : (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any medical qualification included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedules shall be sufficient qualification for enrolment on any State Register of Indian Medicine.
(2) Save as provided in Section 28, no person other than a practitioner of Indian Medicine who possesses a recognised medical qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Central Register of Indian Medicine.
(a) shall hold office as Vaid, Sidha, Hakim or Physician or any other office (by whatever designation called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority; (b) shall practise Indian Medicine in any State; (c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioner; (d) shall be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under Section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter relating to Indian medicine.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall affect.
(a) the right of a practitioner of Indian Medicine enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine to practise Indian Medicine in any State merely on the ground that, on the commencement of this Act he does not possess a recognised medical qualification; (b) the privileges (including the right to practise any system of medicine) conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Indian medicine for the time being in force in any State on a practitioner of Indian medicine enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine; (c) the right of a person to practise Indian medicine in a State in which, on the commencement of this Act, a State Register of Indian Medicine is not maintained if, on such commencement, he has been practising Indian medicine for not less than five years.
(d) ............... xx................. xx...............x (4) .............. xxx................ xx................xx As already conceded the appellants did not possess the qualifications required for registration under sub-section (1) of Section 17 but Mr. Mittal has relied primarily on sub-clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 17 in support of his contention.
It is clear to us that sub-section (3) of Section 17 in the context in which it has been used means that in order to take a benefit thereunder what has to be seen is that the persons claiming registration or a right to practise must be enrolled on a State Register on the commencement of the Central Act as would be evident from the words underlined.
It has been brought to our notice that Section 17 itself was made enforceable vide a notification of the Central Government issued on 1101976 whereas all the appellants came into practise even under the Bihar Act long after that date.
It is also clear to us that the scheme of the Punjab Act and the Central Act appears to be that a person who has registered under the Central Act is allowed to practise throughout the country whereas a person who has registered under a State Act such as the Bihar Act or under the Punjab Act alone would be entitled to practise only in that respective State.
It is also apparent as has been held by the learned single Judge, that if the meaning sought to be put on Section 17 of the Central Act was accepted, the very purpose of providing qualifications for registration under the Central Act given in Sections 23 and 25 thereof would be frustrated.
5.
The argument of Mr. Balram Gupta with respect to his right to practise conferred by Article 19(1)(g) is also to no avail.
We have gone through the qualifications laid down for registration under the Punjab Act, the Central Act and the Bihar Act.
Section 15 read with Schedule 1 of the Punjab Act deals with the question of registration and the necessary qualifications for this purpose.
A reading thereof would indicate that before registration can be granted to an applicant he must possess a degree or a diploma from any Ayurvedic or Unani College recognised by the Faculty with at least four years' course within Punjab or outside or a degree in the Ayurvedic or Unani Systems of Medicine of any University established by law in India; provided that person who has already qualified from any Ayurvedic or Unani College or Institution prior to the commencement of the Act in a course or duration less than four years shall also be entitled to registration.
It has also been provided that if the final examination on the basis of which a person is seeking registration is held by the faculty or by any affiliated college or from any Ayurvedic or Unani Institution in or outside Punjab recognised by the faculty, registration can still be granted.
Likewise, the Central Act in Sections 14 to 17 read alongwith Second, Third and Fourth Schedules thereof also provide for the necessary qualifications for registration and indicate the requirement of an elaborate period of study.
The qualifications, however, prescribed for registration under the Bihar Act are far more liberal.
Sections 22 to 26 read with the schedules to this Act provide as under :  "Persons who are entitled to have their names entered in the register of registered practitioners :-  (1) Every Vaidya or Hakim who holds Degree, Diploma or Certificate of any recognised Ayurvedic or Unani College or School within the State or a degree in the Ayurvedic or Unani system of medicine or surgery or midwifery conferred by any University established by law in India.
(2) Every Vaidya or Hakim who has passed the final examination held by the Faculty or by any institution affiliated to the faculty.
(3) Every Vaidya or Hakim who in the opinion of the Council possesses sufficient knowledge and skill requisite for the efficient practise of medicine, surgery or midwifery and enjoys a certain amount of eminence in the medical science who fulfils the conditions imposed by regulations made by the Council as to length of practise.
(4) Every Vaidya who has passed the Ayurvedacharya examination of the Sanskrit Association Bihar.
(5) Every practitioner or class of practitioners whom the Council with the previous approval of the State Government considers fit for registration under this Act."
It will be seen from a comparative reading of the qualifications prescribed and alluded to above that whereas the Punjab and the Central Act lay down an elaborate system and provide higher qualifications for registration, the qualifications under the Bihar Act are far inferior and much discretion has been vested in the Bihar Council to allow or refuse to register any person who might come forward to it.
We are therefore of the view that the right to practise in the State of Haryana was subject to the necessary qualifications laid down under the Punjab Act or under the Central Act and the mere fact that the appellants had been registered with the Bihar Council under the Bihar Act would not entitle them to practise their profession in this State.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in the appeals and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.