SD Agarwala, C.J.
- The petitioner has inter alia prayed for the quashing of the order passed by the Board in the meeting held on October 16, 1989 (Annexure P-8), the show cause notice calling upon the petitioner to explain as to why his seniority be not changed ( a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-9) and the seniority list issued by the Board on May 29, 1992.
2.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.
So far as the challenge to the decision of the Board ( a copy of which has been produced as Annexure-8) is concerned, the matter is concluded by our judgment in LPA No. 1613 of 1991, decided on August 4, 1993.
We are further informed that a petition for Special Leave No. (C) 13782 of 1993 was dismissed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court on September 10, 1993.
In this situation, the challenge cannot be sustained.
4.
The second grievance of the petitioner relates to the show-cause notice regarding the fixation of his seniority.
A copy of this notice has been produced as Annexure P-9 with the writ petition.
Admittedly, the petitioner had filed a reply to the show cause notice.
Thereafter on May 29, 1992, the Haryana State Electricity Board issued the seniority list.
An extract from this list has been produced as Annexure P-11 with the writ petition.
However, at the hearing of this case, learned counsel for the petitioner had produced a complete copy of the order.
It is placed on record as Mark 'A'.
In para 2, it has been categorically stated that "the reply to the show cause notices served upon the affected officers has been considered and rejected."
In this situation, the challenge to the show cause notice is wholly misconceived.
Even otherwise, this Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, does not normally entertain a writ petition against a show cause notice.
The notice merely affords an opportunity to the officer concerned to show cause against the proposed action.
It is for the officer to put the relevant facts before the concerned authority.
A challenge to the notice even before the final order is passed cannot normally be entertained unless it is shown to be violative of a provision of law or wholly without jurisdiction.
5.
The petitioner has also challenged the seniority list issued by the Board on May 29, 1992.
He has prayed for the quashing of this list.
Persons, whose names are borne on this list and over whom he claims seniority, have not been impleaded as parties.
In their absence, the matter cannot be effectively decided.
All of them are necessary parties.
No relief can be granted to the petitioner in their absence.
It is no doubt correct that Mr. GC Mittal has been impleaded as Respondent No. 2.
He is not the only person against whom the petitioner claims a relief.
Others who are likely to be affected have not been impleaded as parties.
Mr. Mittal does not represent the interests of those persons.
In such a situation, the challenge to the seniority list cannot be entertained.
We, accordingly, decline to go into the matter in this writ petition.
6.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.