NK Sodhi, J - The dispute herein relates to admissions to the 5 seats reserved for the residents of villages who gave either land or building to the State Government for setting up and running the Government Primary Teachers Training Institutes at different villages in the State of Haryana.
These institutes are conducting a 2-year course of Diploma in Education popularly known as D.Ed.
and one such institute was set up at Morni Tehsil Panchkula District Ambala (for short, 'the Institute').
2.
There were in all 105 seats in the D.Ed.
course at the Institute 5 out of which were reserved for the residents of village/villages who donated their land or building for setting up this Institute.
The Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh while reserving 5 seats for such residents issued a corrigendum to the advertisements already published inviting applications for the seats in the Institute.
This corrigendum which is relevant for our purposes reads as under :-  "Department of Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh.
(CORRIGENDUM) Five seats above the already advertised seats regarding DEd(I) course have been decided to be kept reserved for the residents of village which give either land or building to the Government for running the Institutes for D.Ed.
(I) as published in numerous newspapers dated 1861992, 19.6.1992, 2081992 and 2261992.
3.
Permanent residents of the following villages, where District Education Centres/Elementary Teachers Training Institutes are situated and which come under the aforesaid scheme, may apply for these seats, alongwith domicile certificates to be issued by Local Sub Divisional Magistrate (Civil).
1.
Adampur (Hissar); 2.
Koel (Kaithal); 3.
Odan (Sirsa); 4.
Biswan Mill (Sonipat); 5.
Morni Hills (Ambala); Other conditions regarding interview shall be according to earlier advertisements dated 1861992, 19.6.1992, 20.6.1992 and 2261992.
Applications should reach the Institute by 7th September, 1992.
After this, no application shall be entertained.
Sd/- Manju Gupta, IAS, Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh."
The appellant applied for admission against one of these 5 reserved seats being a resident of village Bhoj Jabayal.
There were other applicants as well who staked their claims for admission to these reserved seats.
The claim of the appellant was negatived on the ground that he did not belong to village Morni i.e. Morni Hills as he was permanent resident of village Sherla Bhoj Jabayal and consequently, he was not eligible.
He filed civil writ petition 14968 of 1992 in this Court challenging the action of the respondents on the ground that there was no village by the name of Morni which was only a part of village Bhoj Jabayal being one of its hamlets.
When the writ petition was admitted the appellant was allowed provisional admission subject to the final decisions of this Court in the said petition.
He has completed one year of the course.
The writ petition having been dismissed by the learned single Judge the appellant has filed the present appeal.
4.
The only point in dispute before us is as to whether Morni is a hamlet of village Bhoj Jabayal and therefore, a part of it or is it a separate village in sub tehsil Morni Hills.
The written statement filed in the writ petition was not very clear on this point and when this appeal came up for hearing before us on 12101993 we directed the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Panchkula to file a supplementary affidavit to make the position clear.
In pursuance of our direction, the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Panchkula has filed an affidavit dated October 26, 1993 stating therein that as per the revenue records, Bhoj Jabayal is a village bearing Hadbast No. 324 and that Morni is not a separate village but is a part of village Bhoj Jabayal.
5.
Having heard counsel for the parties at length, we are of the opinion that the appeal deserves to succeed and that the appellant is entitled to admission to the D.Ed.
Course in the Institutes.
Morni Hills a vast hilly area is a sub tehsil of Tehsil Kalka now Panchkula in the District of Ambala.
There is no village by the name of Morni but it being one of the hamlets of village Bhoj Jabayal in sub tehsil Morni Hills is a part of the said village Hadbast number of which is 324.
It is common case of the parties that the residents of Morni which is a hamlet of village Bhoj Jabayal and a part thereof had donated their land on which the Institute has been set up and has been functioning since the year 1989.
The corrigendum issued by the Director Secondary Education Haryana is not happily worded and a reference thereto makes it clear that what was intended was that permanent residents of Morni (not Morni Hills as stated therein) were entitled to apply for the reserved seats.
As already observed, Morni is not a separate village by itself but a part of village Bhoj Jabayal.
It is not disputed that this village has about 18 hamlets including Sherla and Morni.
The appellant who is admittedly a resident of Sherla which is one of the hamlets of village Bhoj Jabayal was, therefore, entitled to be considered for admission against the reserved seats being a resident of the said village.
In this view of the matter, the respondents were not justified in refusing to consider his claim for admission.
It is admitted case of the parties before us that 3 of the candidates admitted to the course against the 5 reserved seats are lower in merit than the appellant.
Consequently, we allow the appeal, set aside the order of the learned Single Judge and direct the respondents to regularise the admission of the appellant to the course and allow him to complete the same.
There is no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.