RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Writ petitioner, Mrs. Usha Rani, who was working as a Punjabi Stenographer Instructor in the Government Industrial Training School for Women, Nabha, was transferred to Government Industrial Training School for Women, Patiala vide order dated 18th July, 1990.
Later on, vide order dated 5th September, 1990, the petitioner was transferred back to Nabha; whereas one Shrimati Umarjit Kaur was transferred from Nabha to Patiala.
The latter order transferring the petitioner back to Nabha from Patiala was made the subject- matter of challenge in the writ petition.
The Motion Bench on 17th September, 1990, directed that the arrangement as ordered on 18th July, 1990 shall continue.
While admitting the writ petition on 5th November, 1990, the stay already granted was ordered to continue.
2.
This application has been moved by Smt. Umarjit Kaur, Respondent No. 4, for vacating the stay order granted by this Court, referred to above.
3.
With the consent of the counsel for the parties, I have heard them on merits in the main case and I proceed to dispose of the same.
4.
The main ground of attack against the impugned order was that the same had been passed at the instance and on the recommendations of Shri Charanjit Singh Walia, who was then a Member of Parliament from the Constituency.
Further, according to the petitioner the impugned order was not sustainable being against the policy of the Government as both the petitioner and her husband were posted at Patiala and they had to be posted at the same station as far as possible.
5.
The impugned order was passed as far back as 5th September, 1990.
More than three years have elapsed since then and by virtue of the stay order granted by this Court, the petitioner was to continue at Patiala.
In the Misc.
Application, it has been averred that the husband of the petitioner has since been dismissed from service and Shri Charanjit Singh Walia is no more the Member of Parliament from that Constituency.
I am of the opinion that the Government has inherent right to transfer an employee from one place to another depending upon the exigencies of the service, especially after an employee has stayed at a particular station for a sufficient long period.
In this view of the matter, I consider that at this stage, the writ petition has really become infructuous in the sense that by virtue of the stay order, the petitioner has stayed at Patiala for the last more than three years.
6.
Consequently, I dismiss the writ petition, with no order as to costs.
However, it is clarified that by the dismissal of the writ petition, the order dated 5th September, 1990 (Annexure P-2), is not revived, meaning thereby that it does not imply that Smt. Umarjit Kaur stands transferred to Patiala and the petitioner stands transferred to Nabha.
I leave it open to the appropriate Authority to pass fresh orders, if they so desire, transferring the petitioner and Respondent No. 4.
This observation may not be taken as if the petitioner or Respondent No. 4 must be transferred.
Petition dismissed.