Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are aggrieved by the action of the respondent-University in not treating them as eligible to appear in BA Part-I examination held in April, 1993.
In pursuance to the directions given by the motion Bench vide orders dated March 30, 1993 the petitioners have admittedly taken the examination.
Were they legally entitled to appear in this examination or was the action of the respondents in conformity with law?
2.
Before adverting to the facts, it may be mentioned that the case had initially come up for hearing on November 17, 1993.
During the course of the recording of the judgment, learned counsel for the respondent-University had prayed for a short adjournment to give the particulars of the dates etc. On which different examinations were held.
The case was adjourned.
Different affidavits have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the latest affidavit filed on January 6, 1994 along with Civil Miscellaneous application No. 225 of 1994, the exact position with regard to the time at which different examinations were held, has been given.
Consequently, the factual position as given in this affidavit alone needs to be noticed.
3.
A perusal of this affidavit shows that the Gyani examination, which was scheduled to be held in June, 1991, had actually commenced in August, 1991.
The result of this examination was declared on January 30, 1992.
The next examination, which was scheduled to be held in December 1991, had actually commenced in April 1992.
The result of this examination was declared on September 26, 1992.
The examination which was actually scheduled to be held in June, 1992 was started on November 13, 1992 and the result was declared on January 14, 1993.
The December 1992 examination commenced on May 13, 1993.
The result of this examination was declared on August 30, 1993.
In this affidavit, it has been further averred that the examination forms had been submitted by the petitioners for the December, 1992 examination on different dates and that they had not applied for admission to the examination which was scheduled to be held in June, 1992.
It has also been averred that the examination could not be held as per schedule due to the disturbed conditions in the Punjab State as also because the number of candidates taking the examination had increased manifold.
4.
The sequence of events, as delineated above clearly shows that the University had not held the different examinations in accordance with the provisions of the Statutes.
A perusal of the above-mentioned affidavit clearly shows that the examination which should have been held in June, 1991 had actually commenced in August 1991 and the result was declared in January, 1992.
Admittedly, the students who had failed in the examination could not avail of the chance of appearing in the supplementary examination which was to be held in December, 1991.
The examination which should have been held in December, 1991 had actually commenced in April 1992.
Thereafter, the examination which should have taken place in June 1992 was actually held in November 1992 and the examination which should have been commenced in December 1992 had actually been held in May 1993.
Clearly, the University did not follow the prescribed schedule.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners had in fact appeared in the examination held in May 1993.
This was the examination which should have been held in December 1992.
5.
In this situation, the short question that arises is - should the petitioners be made to suffer for no fault of theirs and can the University be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong ?
6.
Mr. Batta contends that in view of the provisions of Ordinance 6, a candidate is eligible to appear in the BA Part I examination only when he "has passed Matriculation examination .......... and Honours Examination in Oriental Classical Language (s) or MIL (Modern Indian Language) from this University or any examination recognised as equivalent thereto ..........." He submits that since the petitioners had not passed the Gyani examination in April 1993, they were not eligible to appear in the BA Part I examination.
On the other hand, Ms. Harpreet Dhillon contends that according to the provisions of Ordinance 1, the Gyani examination has to be "held twice a year in the months of June and December or on such other dates during the year as may be fixed by the academic council."
She submits that since the University had itself failed to hold the examination in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance 1, it cannot make the petitioners lose one academic year.
7.
A perusal of Ordinance 1 shows that the Gyani examination has to be held twice a year.
Normally, this examination should be held in the months of June and December.
However, it is permissible for the academic council to fix dates for the examination.
However, it is specifically provided that such dates have to be "during the year."
On a perusal of the affidavit filed by the Registrar of the University, it is absolutely clear that right since the year 1991, the examinations have not been held in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance 1.
To illustrate, the exam.
which should have been held in December 1992, was actually held in May 1993.
The result was declared on August 30, 1993.
If this examination had been actually held in December 1992 and the result had been declared prior to the commencement of the BA Part I examination in April 1993, the petitioners would have been eligible to appear in the examination.
This was not done.
Consequently, it is apparent that the University had failed to perform its statutory duty in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances governing the conduct of the examinations.
8.
It is the admitted position that the first examination in a year is called the annual examination.
Those who fail and get a compartment or re-appear etc. have a right to appear in the supplementary examination.
When a student is given a chance to appear in the annual as well as the supplementary examination in a year and he fails to pass, the rigour of Ordinance 6 should apply.
However, in a case where the University itself fails to hold the examination in accordance with its Ordinances and takes an unduly long time even in the declaration of the result, it would be totally unfair and inequitable to make the candidates lose a precious year of their academic career.
This is precisely the position in this case.
If the contention of Mr. Batta is accepted, the petitioners would lose their right to take the examination held in April 1993 and the University would be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong.
It is true that Courts are slow to interfere in academic matters.
It is also true that power under Article 226 has to be exercised with utmost restraint so that academic standards are not lowered.
However, in a case where the University has admittedly failed to perform its statutory duties in accordance with the Ordinances, the refusal to interfere, would clearly result in failure of justice.
9.
Mr. Batta has referred to the decision of this Court in Meenakshi Kapila's case 1993(2) PLR 174.
In this case, the examinations had been held in accordance with the rules.
The candidates had failed to pass the examination.
In such a situation, the action of the University in holding that the candidates were ineligible to appear in BA Part I was up held by this Court.
Such is not the position in this case.
Herein, the petitioners have actually passed the compartment examination.
The only flaw is that the examination was held in May 1993 and the result was declared in August 1993.
For this, they were not to blame.
10.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioners cannot be made to suffer for the delay on the part of the University in holding the examination.
It is further clear that in pursuance to the orders passed by the motion Bench, the petitioners have already taken the BA Part I examination held in the year 1993.
According to Mr. Batta, the result of this examination has not been compiled by the University in spite of the fact that a period of almost nine months had elapsed.
The respondents are directed to declare the result of this examination within two weeks after the date of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
11.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to their costs, which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.