SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns the order of the State Government of December 15, 1987, dismissing Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy of the PCMS Class II from service.
2.
A reference to the record shows that while posted as Medical Officer at the Rural Family Planing Unit Ramdas, District Amritsar, Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was placed under suspension by the order of the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department of July 23, 1975.
Later, on February 3, 1976, a charge-sheet containing three charges was served upon him.
Two of these charges pertained to his alleged absence from duty in July 1975, during floods and the disregard of instructions in carrying out flood relief operations while the third pertained to the supply of medico- legal report of one Khazan Singh.
3.
While under suspension, Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was served with a second chargesheet on August 14, 1978.
Two of these charges pertained to his doing private practice at Moga while the third was regarding evading attendance in the Court of Executive Magistrate at Amritsar.
According to Harbhajan Singh Greasy, this charge-sheet was never served upon him.
4.
Be that as it may, the respondent Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy appeared before the Enquiry Officer where it is said that he denied the charges framed against him but it is also said that he admitted to have started private practice at Moga, as the Government had failed to give him any subsistence allowance as he was entitled to under the rules.
No such statement is, however, available on the record though there is a reference to it, in the report of the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer eventually submitted his report on May 31, 1979 and it is said that on August 7, 1979, notice was sent to Dr. Harbhajan Singh calling upon him to show cause why he should not be dismissed but no reply to it was given.
Harbhajan Singh Greasy on his part denies the receipt of any such show-cause notice.
It appears that thereafter sometime in June, 1982 a decision was taken by the State Goverment to dismiss Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy from service and the matter was consequently referred to Punjab Public Service Commission on August 11, 1982, where it remained pending till November, 1987 Dr Harbhajan Singh Greasy on his part made several representations to the respondent-State to finalise the matter against him.
Eventually on March 18, 1986, the State Goverment reinstated Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy but without prejudice to the disciplinary action that may be taken against him.
It was to challenge this order, namely, the continuation of disciplinary action that Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy moved this Court in its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It was during the pendency of this writ petition that the order of December 15, 1987, dismissing Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was passed.
The writ petition was, consequently, thereafter amended to challenge this order of dismissal, the operation of which was stayed during the pendency of the writ petition.
Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy eventually retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on March 31, 1991.
5.
The striking feature of the issue raised here is clearly the in ordinate delay that occurred at every stage, inasmuch as that Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was suspended in July, 1975 and a charge-sheet was served upon him in February, 1976 and a second one, it is said, on August 7, 1979 but it was only in 1979 that he was called upon to appear before the Enquiry Officer.
Next, the notice calling upon him to show cause why he be not dismissed from service is said to have been sent to him in August 1979 but it was not until June 1982 that the Government decided to dismiss him and then referred the matter to Punjab Public Service Commission, where it remained pending till November 1987.
It is pertinent to note that Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy has not, in any manner, been imputed any responsibility for delay, for these extra-ordinary laches that occurred and there is no explanation forthcoming from the State Government or the Public Service Commission to account for them.
The learned Single Judge was, in these circumstances, clearly correct in observing, "Taking disciplinary action after a lapse of a long time, apart from having demoralising effect on a government servant also gives rise to the feeling that the disciplinary proceedings are prolonged just to keep government servant under suspension and humilitiates him and to keep the sword of Democles hanging over his head."
6.
Turning to the enquiry report, which has been reproduced in extenso in the judgment of the learned single Judge, it will be seen that the onus has been placed upon Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy, whereas it was really for the State to prove the charges against him.
What is more, no evidence was led to establish any of the charges against him.
The charge was said to have been proved by a letter of Civil Surgeon to the Director of Health Services.
The Civil Surgeon was not put in the witness box and made available for cross-examination.
Further, no evidence is forthcoming to show that the second charge-sheet was served upon Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy.
The enquiry held against Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was also not in accordance with the procedure prescribed inasmuch as there is nothing to show that any list of documents and witnesses was supplied to the delinquent nor were any witnesses examined by the Enquiry Officer.
Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy was also not asked as to whether he wanted to lead any evidence.
7.
Finally, the Enquiry Officer, in his report discussed only two charges but went on to say that all the charges had been proved.
This would tend to denote an apparent non-application of mind to the issue before him.
It also deserves mention, as pointed out earlier, that though the Enquiry Officer adverts to Dr. Harbhajan Singh Greasy having admitted to have been doing private practice at Moga, no such statement is forthcoming on record.
Such being the circumstances, no exception can, indeed, be taken to the judgment of the learned single Judge which is accordingly hereby upheld and affirmed and this appeal dismissed with costs.
Counsel's fee Rs. 500/-.