VK Bali, J - Gurdev Singh, through present writ filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to issue further posting orders to him without any further delay as also to regularise his service on the post of Irrigation Booking Clerk/Canal Patwari.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner was recruited as Irrigation Booking Clerk (hereinafter mentioned as I.B.C.)
on ad hoc basis on August 3, 1982.
He served the department from August 6, 1982 to January 28, 1984.
He was given a break of only one or two days.
However, from January 31, 1984 to May 8, 1986 concededly he worked again and the total period for which, he thus worked, comes to 3 years and 9 months.
According to the case of petitioner, he was transferred to canal Lining Circle, Bhatinda on March 31, 1984 and he served there upto May 8, 1986 when he was spoted by the Superintending Engineer, Canal Lining Circle, Bhatinda and directed to report to the Chief Engineer, Tubewell, Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh for getting further posting orders.
It is further pleaded that when he reported to the Chief Engineer, he was not given further posting orders.
It is in the wake of order aforesaid that he prays that he be given posting orders.
When several representations made by petitioner brought no tenable results, he got issued a notice through his counsel copy whereof has been annexed as Annexure P-3.
It is further pleaded that he passed the examination for Canal Patwar conducted by the department in the months of November-December 1985 and February, 1986 vide Annexure P-4.
In the said examination, a number of candidates had appeared but the department illegally and arbitrarily declared the results of few persons on April 10, 1986.
When remaining persons approached this court by way of Civil Writ Petition a direction was issued to declare the results of all the persons within one month and it was in consequence thereof only that the result of petitioner was declared.
The respondents in the meanwhile absorbed number of persons on the post of I.B.C./Canal Patwari who were declared surplus by the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation and it is specifically pleaded that those persons had not passed the Canal Patwar Examination.
It is from the facts aforesaid that the second prayer is made so as to absorb petitioner in service on regular basis.
3.
The matter has been contested and in the written statement that has been filed by respondents, it has been pleaded that the appointment of Canal Patwari is regulated under the Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Patwari State Services, Class III, Rules, 1955 and under Rule 11 of the Rules aforesaid every accepted candidate patwari shall have to pass canal patwar Examination after canal patwar training for a period not less than three months under Zilladar's section.
The accepted candidate cannot take the examination until and unless a certificate is given by the Zilladar that he had acquired the practical knowledge of the work of Patwari and he had successfully completed his training.
Every accepted candidate patwari shall be posted to a Zilladar's section to be trained for a period of not less than three months in the practical duties of Canal Patwari and shall have to pass parts (iv) (v), (vi) and (vii) of the Patwar Examination detailed in Appendix 'B' since petitioner had neither received canal patwari training in Zilladar's section nor had passed the Canal Patwar Examination which is a pre-requisite for appointment even as an apprentice Patwari under the Rules, so his appointment in stop-gap arrangement for a period of three months did not entitle him for regular appointment.
Insofar as the petitioner having taken Canal Patwari Examination as also declaration of his result in consequence of the writ petition filed in this Court, are concerned, the same have not been denied.
It has also been admitted that due to reduction of posts of I.B.C.
in the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation in the year 1986, as many as 105 retrenched Patwaris were allocated to the Irrigation Department to give them appointments as I.B.C.
against existing vacancies.
The Government had taken decision at the highest level to absorb them and in pursuance of the policy decision of the Government 47 retrenched Patwaris of Punjab State Tubewell Corporation, who had not passed the Canal Patwar Examination, were appointed purely on ad hoc basis with, of course, a condition that they would have to past the said examination within a period of six months.
In their case the provisions of Rule 11, as have been noticed above, were relaxed.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, I am of the considered view that the cause of petitioner insofar as at least second prayer is concerned has merit and therefore, this petition must succeed.
Vide orders dated April 10, 1986 (Annexure P-2) petitioner was spared and asked to report to the Chief Engineer, Tubewell Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh, with a view to get his further posting orders.
He was not posted to a different place but was spare being surplus and this plea is also reflected from the stand taken in the written statement.
That being so, I am unable to agree with the contention of learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner that petitioner was still continuing in service and the respondents were thus, duty bound to give posting orders.
However, it is admitted position that 47 persons from a different department having been retrenched were accommodated in the department where petitioner was working.
It is further conceded position that those 47 persons had not passed the patwar examination and in their case the provisions of Rule 11 were relaxed but the petitioner was, however, shown the door on the ground that he had not passed the Canal Patwar Examination and had not clothed himself with the pre-requiste qualification as mentioned in Rule 11 aforesaid.
This, in my view, has resulted into discrimination.
The persons from a different department, who were in no way better than petitioner, were favoured even though they had not passed Patwar examination as compared to petitioners who had passed the same and was already working in the department.
Shunting him out and adjusting others is arbitrary as well.
5.
In view of what has been said above, it is ordered that petitioner shall be deemed to have been in service ever since he came to occupy the post of Irrigation Booking Clerk/Canal Patwari and as and when the services of 47 persons, who were taken from a different department, are regularised, petitioner shall also be regularised in service.
However, in case 47 persons are not being regularised for lack of their qualifications having not passed the Canal Patwar Examination, then on that count, of course, petitioner will not be treated alike and would be regularised in service.
Petitioner is also held entitled to all consequential benefits.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.