NK Sodhi, J - Whether language teachers working in the Government Vocational Education Institutes are entitled to the same pay scale as admissible to the lecturers in the Senior Secondary Schools in the State of Haryana on the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' in the short question that arises for consideration in this appeal filed under Clause - X of the Letters Patent.
2.
Brief facts giving rise to this appeal may first be noticed.
Respondents 1 and 2 are working as language teachers in the Government Vocational Education Institutes (for short, "the Institute") at Mudlana, District Sonepat and Seenk in the District of Karnal, respectively.
They are drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 1,400-2,600/- and claim parity in the matter of pay scale with lecturers in the school cadre working in the senior secondary schools in the State of Haryana who are paid salary in the scale of Rs. 2,000-3,500/- It is alleged that they possess equivalent, if not better, academic qualifications and perform the same type of duties and functions.
It is claimed that their job requirements are similar to those of lecturers in the school cadre.
It is further alleged that the State of Haryana is the employer of both sets of employees and their working hours being the same, there is no reason why they should not be given the same pay scale as that of the lecturers in the school cadre.
When their claim was not accepted by the State Government, they approached this Court by filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for the necessary relief.
3.
The State Government while controverting the claim of the respondents herein took the stand that the two sets of employees belong to different departments and that the minimum qualifications required for appointment as lecturers in the school cadre and a language teacher in any institute being different, the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' was not attracted.
Comparative table of the minimum qualifications required to be possessed by the two sets of employees as referred to in the written statement filed by the appellant State is as follows :-  Lecturers in the School Cadre, Language Teacher in the Vocational Education Institutes, Master's Degree in 2nd Division with 50% marks in the relevant subject., (i) Language Teachers (Hindi) BA B.Ed.
with Hindi as one of teaching subjects in B.Ed.
with a Master's Degree.
(ii) Language Teachers (English) BA B.Ed.
with English as one of the Teaching subjects in B.Ed with a Master's Degree.
The learned single Judge after hearing the parties and going through their pleadings came to the conclusion that the minimum qualifications of language teachers teaching in the Institutes and those of the lecturers in the school cadre were the same and that they taught students of the same level of classes and syllabus of studies was also the same.
It was, therefore, held that the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' was applicable and the writ petition was consequently allowed.
This order of the learned Judge has been challenged by the State of Haryana in the present appeal.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length and have also gone through the judgment of the learned Judge.
No meaningful argument could be advanced by the learned State counsel in support of his contention that the respondents who were working as language teachers in the Institutes were not entitled to the same pay scale as those of the school lecturers who were admittedly placed in the scale of Rs. 2,000-3,500/-.
He placed reliance on the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, AIR 1989 SC 19, Tarsem Lal Gautam v. State Bank of Patiala, AIR 1989 SC 30 and Union of India v. The Secretary, Madras Civil Audit and Accounts Association, 1992(1) SCT 419 (SC) : JT 1992(1) SC 586.
A bare look at the comparative table of qualifications prescribed for the two sets of employees makes it clear that the qualifications of language teachers in the Institutes are in no way less than those required to be possessed by the lecturers in the school cadre.
Rather, the language teachers have to obtain a degree in bachelor or Education along with a Master's Degree in the relevant subject.
It could not be disputed that the two sets of teachers are teaching the same level of classes i.e. 10 + 2 education system though in different streams of education and that the syllabus of studies is also the same.
Admittedly after matric students could go to an Institute and obtain a diploma after two years in any technical trade and thereafter join BA/B.Com.
Part I class in the same manner in which students who had passed 10 + 2 pattern of education could join such classes.
It is also clear from the letter dated September 18, 1985 from the Director of Industrial Training and Vocational Education Department, Haryana that the students are taught according to the Syllabus meant for 10 + 2 + 3 system under the Senior Secondary Classes.
The Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak and the Kurukshetra University have recognised the 10 + 2 pattern of education in Vocational Scheme conducted by the Institutes as equivalent to the 10 + 2 pattern of education for purpose of admission to B.A/B.com.
Part-I Classes.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the learned single Judge was right in holding that the job requirements of the two sets of teachers are the same inasmuch as they impart education to students of classes of the same equivalence and there seems to be no difference in the nature of their duties and functions.
Consequently, we hold that the language teachers in the Institutes perform duties similar to those performed by the lecturers in the school cadre and are, therefore, entitled to same scale of pay.
The decisions relied upon by the State Counsel are on different facts and are of no help to the appellant.
In the result, there is no merit in the appeal and it stands dismissed with no order as to costs.