VK Bali, J - Shweta Singla, through present petition filed by her under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India, seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant her admission under the reserved category of physically handicapped persons in MSc.
(Home Science) in Government Home Science College, Chandigarh.
The facts on which the relief aforesaid rests, need to be mentioned even though briefly.
2.
Petitioner is a physically handicapped person.
She was given admission in B.Sc.
(Home Science) under the reserved category meant for physically handicapped persons.
It is pleaded that she had a brilliant academic career as she secured 6125% marks in the +2 examination.
Thereafter, she sought admission in the respondent-College in B.Sc.
(Home Science) in the year 1990.
As mentioned above, she had applied against the seats reserved for the physically handicapped persons.
There was 1% reservation of seats for the physically handicapped persons.
In all, there were 60 seats in the B.Sc.
(Science), out of which one was reserved for physically handicapped persons.
She passed B.Sc.
examination by securing first division i.e. 62% marks.
Thereafter, she applied for admission in MSc (Home Science) in the respondent college which is stated to be of two years Post Graduate Degree Course.
The respondent-College provided MSc.
degree in three specialities, namely, Clothing and Textile, Food and Nutrition and Child Development.
The eligibility for seeking admission in MSc (Home Science) is that a candidate should have passed B.Sc (Home Science) from Panjab University with at least 50% aggregate marks.
Petitioner, it is stated fulfilled the eligibility criteria.
There were in all thirty seats in MSc (Home Science) Part-I, having ten seats as in each speciality, as mentioned above.
The reservation of seats fro Post Graduate Diplomas and MSc classes in Home Science, Part-I is provided in the prospectus issued by the respondents, relevant extract of which runs thus :-  "(i) 70% seats are reserved for the candidates passing their lower examination from Panjab University, Chandigarh.
(ii) 3% (only one seat out of 30 seats for all the three MSc) is reserved for the candidates passing their lower examination from the Agri.
University.
(iii) 27% seats are reserved for the candidates from other Universities as per notification of the Director, Public Instructions, Chandigarh, Administration vide memo IPI-US C-5 18,81.
After forming these pools it has been decided to provide/prescribe reservation in seats for various categories of students in each pool as under :-  (1) xx xx xx  (2) xx xx xx  (3) xx xx xx  3.
Reservation of physically handicapped one per cent seats in each pool would be filled from amongst the physically handicapped candidates."
The perusal of the prospectus, relevant part of which has been extracted above, would manifest that 1% of seats in each pool would be filled up from amongst the physically handicapped candidates.
Petitioner's case for admission was not, however, considered against the reserved category of physically handicapped persons.
Having failed, thus, to secure admission, she has approached this court by way of present writ petition for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that in spite of the reservation provided, no seat is being offered on the ground that seats are only 30 and that 1% of the 30 seats would come to be less than half.
It is further contended that no roster point has been fixed and as such the provision regarding reservation has been made nugatory.
4.
The case of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2, it has been pleaded that petitioner could not be granted admission to MSc.
classes against reservation as one per cent of 21 seats in all the three disciplines of MSc Class, which is meant for the students who passed the lower examination from the institutions of Chandigarh as it comes to only 021% which is below 05.
It is further pleaded that there was no such condition laid down in the Regulation as laid down in the College Prospectus that the respondent was to grant admission to handicapped persons in MSc.
Part-I in case no student was granted admission for the last three years.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this court is of the considered view that the points projected by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the petitioner, have substance and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
Unmistakably reservation for physically handicapped persons has been provided.
It is true that the reservation is only 1% of the total seats available.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that this 1% reservation means in each of the three specialities, however, is not correct but even if 1% of thirty seats comes to be less than half of a seat, if no admission is granted on the basis of the reservation so provided in the prospectus, clause of reservation with regard to physically handicapped persons would be of no meaning and consequence.
If the stand of respondents is accepted, then it has to be presumed that they knew before providing reservation for physically handicapped that at no given time there would ever be admission of a person falling under the said category.
By, however, providing reservation in the prospectus, the respondents cannot be imputed such an intention.
At the most, it can be assumed that admission of physically handicapped persons was to be made once in three years but even that was never done as the assertion of petitioner that no admission of physically handicapped person has been made for the last three years, has not been disputed.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, in the circumstances aforesaid, rightly contends that if the stand of respondents is accepted, reservation that was specifically provided in the prospectus for physically handicapped persons, would become nugatory.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to admit the petitioner in MSc (Home Science).
Although, petitioner has given preference for getting admission in the discipline, speciality of Clothing and Textile, yet during the course of arguments learned counsel has confined the relief to admission as such, be it in any of three disciplines offered by the respondents.
It is thus, directed that respondents would admit petitioner in any of the disciplines that can be offered to her as per their choice.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.