RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner had joined as an Assistant Line-man with the respondent-Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the "Board") on 16.6.1958.
Thereafter he was promoted as Lineman and then as a Junior Engineer.
As per the averments made in the petition, the petitioner while posted at Shahpur Kandi proceeded on medical leave from 30.1.1990 to 17.2.1990.
He again fell sick on 15.5.1990 and proceeded on leave for 4 days to take rest as per advice of a Doctor.
A telegram for extension of leave was sent on 2151990 followed by regular applications for that purpose.
The petitioner was being asked by the authorities to join the duty or to send medical certificate in token of illness.
A revised leave application was sent alongwith the medical certificate and the petitioner later on also applied for extension of leave on medical ground.
As per the averments made in the written statement the leave was not sanctioned.
2.
The petitioner opted to seek premature retirement and as per Regulations of the Board, to which reference will be made hereinafter, the petitioner sent 3 months' notice on 5111990 requesting that he should be prematurely retired on the expiry of 3 months w.e.f.
521991 and further his pension, gratuity and other retiral benefits under the Regulations be released to him.
It is further averred that he also sent further application for leave on 15.12.1990 through registered post.
He also submitted his pension papers.
It has further been stated that on 211991 the petitioner received a letter from the Director, Plant & Design of the Board at Shahpur Kandi to complete his pension papers and further vide letter dated 1511991 the Executive Engineer of the Board at Shahpur Kandi asked the petitioner to attend his office in connection with completion of his pension papers.
However, a telegram was sent to the petitioner on 1231991 by the Executive Engineer that leave had not been sanctioned and the petitioner was being treated wilfully absent and was directed to report to the Director, Personnel, PSEB Patiala for further orders.
Copy of this telegram has been attached as Annexure P/17 with the writ petition.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition challenging the order contained in the telegram regarding his non-sanctioning of the leave treating him wilfully absent.
3.
The primary relief claimed in the writ petition is that in fact the petitioner stood prematurely retired after 3 months of the service of the notice dated 5111990 w.e.f.
521991 and the question of his being treated wilfully absent etc. would not arise.
4.
At this stage, relevant Regulation of the Punjab State Electricity Board Services (Premature Retirement) Regulations, 1982 may be noticed :-  "3(1) (a) xx xx xxx  (b) xx xx xx  (2) Any Board employee may, after giving atleast three months' previous notice in writing to the appropriate authority retire from service on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified in the notice : Provided that no employee under suspension shall retire from service except with the specific approval of the appropriate authority.
(a) At any time after a Board employee has completed twenty years of qualifying service, he may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appropriate authority, retire from service.
(b) The notice of voluntary retirement given under this sub-regulation shall require acceptance by the appropriate authority.
(c) Where the appropriate authority does not refuse to grant the permission for retirement before the expiry of the period specified in the said notice, the retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry of the said period.
(4) The employee, who has elected to retire under Sub-Regulation (2) or Sub-Regulation (3) and has given the necessary notice to that effect to the appropriate authority, shall be precluded from withdrawing his notice except with the specific approval of the appropriate authority :  Provided that the request for withdrawal shall be made before the intended date of his retirement.
Note-1 :- A notice of less than three months may also be accepted by the appropriate authority in deserving cases, with the occurrence of the Board.
Note-2 :- If an employee retires under Sub-Regulation (2) or (3) above while he is on leave not due, without returning to duty, the retirement shall take effect from the date of commencement of the leave not due and the leave salary paid in respect of such leave shall be recovered as provided in regulation 854(d) of the P.S.E.B., M.S.R., 1972 Vol.
I Part.
I."
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that no refusal to grant permission for retirement was made or issued to the petitioner prior to the expiry of 3 months notice i.e. up to 521991 and under Regulation 3(2)(c) the petitioner would be deemed to have retired w.e.f.
521991.
This ground has been specifically taken in paragraph 12(iii) of the writ petition.
In support of his submission, learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Sham Lal v. Union Territory, Chandigarh & Ors., 1977 PLR 421.
The reply of the respondent to this round is that since the petitioner was absent from duty without leave and since clearness certificate was not received and also huge amounts were due against him, he could not be retired prematurely.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that in view of the provisions of Regulation 3(2)(c), if no orders are passed refusing to grant premature retirement within a specified period in the notice for premature retirements then the employee will be deemed to have retired on the expiry of the period mentioned in the notice.
In Sham Lal's case (supra) Division Bench was interpreting similarly worded provision and it was held that if a plan is submitted by a person for sanction and the sanction is not declined within a specified period under the Regulations, then the plan would be deemed to have been sanctioned.
In the present case, it was open to the respondents to have refused the permission for premature retirement on the basis that the petitioner was absent from duty or for any other similar reason, but having passed no orders to that effect within the period mentioned in the notice for premature retirement Regulations 3(2) (c) would come into play and the petitioner would be deemed to have retired w.e.f.
521991.
7.
A departmental enquiry was sought to be launched against the petitioner by serving him a charge-sheet dated 441991 (which according to the petitioner has been ante-dated), regarding his alleged absence without sanction of leave.
Enquiry proceedings were stayed by this Court.
8.
In view of the findings recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner stood prematurely retired from service w.e.f.
521991 and would be entitled to all benefits accruing from his retirement.
Let the case regarding the retiral benefits like pension, gratuity etc. be finalised within 3 months of the receipt of copy of this order and the payment of arrears of pension and other retiral benefits found due to the petitioner be released within one month thereafter.
I make no order as to costs.
9.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that I am not opining one way or the other regarding validity of the enquiry initiated against the petitioner during the pendency of the writ petition.
The respondents are at liberty to go ahead with the enquiry and it will be open to the petitioner to raise all objections regarding the initiation or continuation of the enquiry and it will be for the respondents to decide any such objections that may be raised.
Petition allowed.