DS Sinha, J - List has been revised.
No one is present to press this petition.
2.
By means of this petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks to challenge the order dated 14th February, 1992, Annexure 'I' to the Petition), whereby his services have been terminated.
3.
A perusal of the impugned order reveal that the petitioner is a temporary constable and is subject to the provisions of the UP Temporary Government Servants (Termination of Service) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter called the Rules).
It further transpires that his services have been terminated in terms of the provisions of the aforesaid Rules which provide for the termination of the services of a Government servant in temporary service at any time by notice in writing given either by the Government servant to the appointing authority or by the appointing authority to the Government servant.
4.
The impugned order is an order of termination simpliciter, passed under the statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary Government servants and does not appear to have been passed by way of punishment.
5.
In its decision rendered in State of UP and another v. Kaushal Kishore Shukla, reported in 1991(1) SLR 606 (SC) : 1991(1)SCT 760 (SC), the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held as follows :  "A temporary Govt. servant has no right to hold that post, his services are liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of temporary Government servants ......"  6.
In view of the fact that the petitioner is a temporary constable and has no right to hold that post, his services are liable to be terminated by giving him one month's notice without assigning any reason either under the terms of the contract providing for such termination or under the relevant statutory rules regulating the terms and conditions of his services.
The impugned order is valid and does not suffer from any such infirmity which may justify interference by this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
The petition lacks merit and is, therefore, dismissed summarily.
Petition dismissed.