Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - In this writ petition filed by Ashok Bazaz, Legal Assistant, Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, prayer has been made for quashing order of the State Government dated 7111988 vide which intimation to the respondent was sent that the order of his appointment dated 1151984 was stayed.
Copy of the impugned order is Annexure P-15 to the writ petition and copy of the appointment letter of the petitioner is Annexure P-6 to the petition.
2.
The question for consideration which has cropped in this writ petition is whether the State Government after a lapse of about 4-1/2 years could stay the appointment of the petitioner without affording him any opportunity, particularly when it found that the petitioner had successfully completed the period of probation.
3.
The facts of the case which are borne out from the file are that the Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar on 21.12.1983 submitted proposal for the creation of post of Legal Assistant to look after the Court work.
The proposal for creation of a post was approved by the Commissioner of the Corporation.
In pursuance of the recommendation, a post of Legal Assistant was created by passing resolution No. 1401 of 1984.
The petitioner is a Law Graduate and has obtained Master's degree in Political Science, besides a degree of Post Graduate Diploma in Organisations and Procedures.
He submitted an application which was forwarded to the Director, Local Government for action.
The Corporation recommended the case of the petitioner for appointment as Legal Assistant.
The case for appointment of the petitioner as Legal Assistant was considered at different levels.
The State Goverment had put certain queries which were duly answered.
The State Government by an order dated 1731984 accorded approval to the appointment of the petitioner as Legal Assistant.
4.
On 25.6.1987 the petitioner was asked to work as Office Superintendent and prior to this the petitioner was put in charge of Law Section of the Corporation.
Thereafter, the petitioner while performing the duties of Superintendent, made a request that he be appointed as Assistant Secretary of the Corporation.
However, this request was filed.
Petitioner made another representation in this respect.
The petitioner was assigned functions of Secretary-cum-Legal Assistant and there was no objection to the agreement from the side of the Government or Director Local Bodies, Punjab.
The State Government only questioned the propriety of giving higher responsibility on the ground that the post of Superintendent fell within the Corporation Service created under Section 71 of the Corporation Act and the appointing authority in this regard was the State Government.
The Corporation examined the matter appointed out that because of non-availability of competent officers, it had become necessary to appoint the petitioner as Superintendent and a recommendation was made that the petitioner may be allowed to work as such (copy Annexure P-13 to the petition).
To petitioner's great dismay, though his case was recommended for assigning him higher responsibility, the State Government vide order dated 7111988 (Annexure P-15) stayed the operation of the earlier order dated 1151984 (Annexure P-6) vide which the petitioner was appointed as Legal Assistant.
The petitioner submitted representation which was forwarded by the Director, Local Bodies.
The petitioner had specifically taken the plea that there is no provision for staying the implementation of the order which has been duly implemented.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned action of the respondents staying the implementation of the earlier order of appointment as Legal Assistant.
5.
The challenge to the impugned order is that there is provisions to stay the operation of the order which has already been implemented.
The counsel contends that through the State Government had issued directions but the same were not complied with because the order stood implemented.
Counsel highlighted the action of the respondents in staying operation of the earlier order which stood already implemented.
6.
The Advocate General, Punjab appearing with Mr. MK Garg, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, defended the action of the State.
7.
I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
8.
The admitted position which emerges is that the petitioner was given direct appointment.
He possessed necessary qualifications for the post of Legal Assistant and was allowed earlier to work as Assistant Criminal Case Conductor, Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar.
It has been specifically mentioned in letter dated 30.1.1984 copy of which is Annexure P-3 to the petition where the only qualification for Legal Assistant mentioned is a Law Graduate.
The post of Legal Assistant is mentioned at serial No. 19 in the Appendix 'A' of the Rules known as Punjab Municipal Corporation Service (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
Rule 9 of the Rules reads :  1) A person appointed to a service shall be on probation for a period of two years, if appointed by direct recruitment.
The petitioner was appointed on 1151984.
The impugned order was passed on 7111988.
In this view of the matter, it is seen that the petitioner at the time of impugned order had rendered more than four years service as Legal Assistant.
From the perusal of the paper-book, it is clear that this Court had stayed the operation of the impugned order, but no attempt was made to get the stay order vacated.
It is surprising to note that in the impugned order, Annexure P-15, it has been stated that the petitioner's appointment is not in accordance with the Rules, therefore, his appointment as legal Assistant is stayed and the petitioner may be given the work of Legal Assistant in his own pay scale, if need be.
A fair conclusion can be derived that in view of the work load, the post of Legal Assistant was required and if has not been shown how the appointment of the petitioner as Legal Assistant was not in accordance with the Rules.
The other glaring omission is that without affording any opportunity, the Government had stayed the operation of the impugned order which is clearly violative of the principles of natural justice.
9.
It will also be significant to note that order of appointment of the petitioner dated 1151984 stood implemented.
The petitioner had also performed the duties of Secretary.
The principle of law is that one the order has been implemented that cannot be stayed after a lapse of 4 years, more so, when the petitioner had also completed the period of probation.
It is not the case of the State Government that the petitioner was not eligible for appointment to the post of Legal Assistant.
10.
In view of this, I have reached the conclusion that the action of the State Government in staying the operation of the impugned order Annexure P-15 cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
As such, the same is hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Petition disposed of.