N K Kapoor, J - The petitioners have sought issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to give apprenticeship to the petitioners for training for the jobs under the Life Insurance Corporation on the ground that they were selected to undergo this course and have successfully completed the same.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that pursuance to advertisement which appeared in the Daily Tribune dated 1571989 announcing a scheme for admission to two years Vocational Course (job linked and job and self-employment oriented) at 10 + 2 stage in the Government Secondary Schools mentioned therein.
The petitioners who possessed the requisite qualification applied for admission to one of the courses - Life Insurance Course - and passed successfully.
Since the course was job-oriented, the petitioners underwent vocational training at various branches of the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
Having thus completed this course, the petitioners contacted the respondents to be appointed as apprenticeship/job who somehow had been putting off the matter on the one or the other pretext.
However, one of the persons who too completed the course successfully was offered appointment by the Life Insurance Corporation of India vide its letter dated 161992, Annexure P-6.
It is on this ground that fresh representations were made by the petitioners to the respondents calling upon them to give suitable appointment to the petitioners but their request was declined on the ground that the petitioners did not possess the specific grading and their cases cannot be considered under the non-test category.
The petitioners in essence have challenged this action of the respondents terming this to be wholly arbitrary, unfair, unjust and against the principles of promissory estoppel.
3.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, respondent No. 3 - the contesting respondent has put in appearance and filed written statement.
The respondent has raised the preliminary objection as well to the maintainability of the present petition, namely, that the Central Board of Secondary Education in collaboration with Life Insurance Corporation of India introduced vocational course in Life Insurance at 10+2 level in selected schools all over the country from academic year 1989-90.
This scheme was envisaged on a pilot basis in pursuance of the National Policy of Education.
As per scheme, candidates passing 10+2 in Life Insurance with grade B2 and above or 50% marks were to be considered for selection as Apprentice Assistants subject to their qualifying in interview and medical examination, i.e. such persons were exempt from pre-recruitment test.
In all other cases, namely, persons with Grade C1 and C2 were to compete in pre-recruitment test.
The case of the petitioners was examined by the respondents.
All the petitioners failed to obtain Grade B2 or 50% marks and so were not considered for selection as Apprentice Assistants without the pre-recruitment test.
This way the petition is liable to be dismissed on this ground.
On merits, it was contended that the respondent did not hold any promise to the petitioners as is clear from the insertion in the Daily Tribune of July 15, 1989 - Annexure P-1.
Recruitment Rules of the Corporation envisage written test and the successful candidates are called for interview and it is only thereafter that persons are selected for the post of Assistant.
Controverting the averments of the petitioners with respect to their academic merit, the respondent averred that petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 were placed under compartment in the examination held in April, 1991, who cleared the compartment paper in the subsequent examination.
It was further stated that though the petitioners had passed 10+2 examination but they failed to secure the requisite minimum grade/marks and as such were ineligible for being considered for selection as Apprentice Assistants without pre-recruitment test.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners made reference to the advertisement dated July 15, 1989 and urged that a specific promise was given to the petitioners that on their completion of the course, they would be suitably employed in the various branches.
This advertisement (admission notice) specifically makes mention that this two years Vocational Course is job-linked and job and self-employment oriented.
Thus, but for this promise, the petitioners who were otherwise meritorious in tenth class examination would not had opted for the same.
Since this admission notice did not specifically mention that only such of the persons who would secure Grade B2 and above or 50% marks would alone qualify for consideration to be appointed as Apprentice Trainee in the non-test category.
Such a condition is violative of the promise given by them and is thus unsustainable.
In support of his above contention the counsel relied upon the decision of the apex court in case reported as Union of India v. Godfrey Philips India Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 806 and Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab, 1993 P.L.R.
212 : 1993(4) 238 : 1993(4) S.C.T.
328(P&H) (FB).
5.
Counsel for the respondent at the outset denied the assertion made by the petitioners that any such promise was given by the respondent.
Admission notice which appeared in the Daily Tribune - Annexure P-1 - was issued by the Education Department, Chandigarh.
This barely mentions the essential qualification desired for the prospective candidate and in no manner holds a promise to offer job irrespective of their merit.
Referring to the guidelines to the school with regard to the Vocational Course in Life Insurance, the counsel referred to Annexure R-3/1 wherein it has been specifically stipulated that such of the students who would secure Grade B2 and above in the vocational subject would be appointed subject to his qualifying in interview and medical examination.
With regard to the persons securing Grade C1 and C2, they would be allowed to compete with general candidates in the entrance examination for the appointment.
It has been further mentioned in Annexure R-3/1 that total number of vacancies to be filled from this stream will not exceed 25% of the net vacancies after providing necessary reservations for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, Ex-servicemen and others.
On merits, the counsel for the respondent submitted that none of the petitioners possessed Grade B2 and above or 50% of the marks and thus were not rightly considered without pre-recruitment test.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant material referred to during the course of arguments.
The petitioners joined this Vocational Course pursuance to the admission notice and have passed out successfully.
The grievance of the petitioners is that though they have successfully completed the Course, yet the respondent has declined to give them employment solely on the ground that they have not secured the requisite Grade i.e. B2 and above or 50% of the marks.
The basis of the promissory estoppel is admission notice Annexure P-1.
Admittedly, this admission notice was inserted in the Daily Tribune by the Education Department, Chandigarh.
All that it states is that two years Vocational Course is job-linked/job and self-employment oriented, meaning thereby that persons qualifying in these special courses would have better opportunity to be absorbed in such like vocations.
At no time, the Life Insurance Corporation held out promise to the petitioners that on their completing the course, they would be absorbed in the Corporation irrespective of their merit.
Annexure R.3/1 which bears the title - Introduction of a Vocational Course in Life Insurance, Guidelines to Schools specifically makes mention that such students who would secure Grade B2 and above in the vocational subject would be appointed subject only to an interview and medical examination.
Similarly, with regard to the persons securing grade C1 and C2, they were allowed to compete with general candidates in the entrance examination for appointment.
The guidelines appear to be quite rational.
Admittedly, none of the petitioners possessed Grade B2 and above in the vocational subject or 50% marks.
The petitioners have thus to appear in a pre-recruitment test and compete with other candidates before being finally selected.
There is no dispute with regard to the proposition of law enunciated in the above cited cases but none of these have any applicability to the facts of the present case.
On perusal of the document, no such promise to absorb all the persons who underwent the vocational course in Life Insurance was held out by respondent No. 3.
This being the position, no such direction can be issued to the respondents as sought by the petitioners.
The petition is wholly devoid of merit and is consequently dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.