NK Sodhi, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution has been filed by one Shamsher Singh challenging the action of the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak (for short 'the University') in not allowing him admission to the MBBS/B.D.S.
Course despite the fact that he cleared the entrance test held for the purpose and was provisionally placed at Serial No. 1 in the merit list of scheduled caste candidates for whom 33 seats stood reserved as per the prospectus issued by the University.
2.
There were in all about 192 seats out of which about 33 seats stood reserved for scheduled castes/backward classes which were to be filled up for the MBBS/BDS Courses in the Medical College, Rohtak, Agroha Medical College, Rohtak, Dental College, Rohtak and the DAV Centenary College, Yamuna Nagar (which too is a Dental College) for the Session commencing in the year 1991.
A common entrance test was held by the University and the petitioner who appeared for the same as a scheduled caste candidate was declared successful in the said test and was placed at serial No. 1 amongst the scheduled caste candidates though his result was declared provisionally subject to his eligibility/verification of original documents.
He was, however, not allowed admission as it transpired that he was really the son of Raj Pal Singh, who is a Jat by caste but had been taken in adoption by one Rame, a Balmiki only a few months before the entrance test was conducted by the University.
It is this action of the University which has been challenged in the present writ petition.
3.
The fact that the petitioner is the real son of Raj Pal Singh and that he had been adopted by Rame son of Dina, is not is in dispute.
The petitioner on the basis of his adoption by Rame claims to be a scheduled caste by adoption and thus eligible to take the entrance test as a scheduled caste candidate.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioner at the time of his adoption was more than 15 years of age and he has not pleaded any custom or usage applicable to the parties which permitted persons beyond the age of 15 years being taken in adoption.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the University a preliminary objection has been raised to the effect that adoption of the petitioner by Rame was in contravention of Section 10(iv) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 and that there was no material on the record of the present case to show that there was any custom or usage applicable to the parties which permitted adoption beyond the age of 15 years.
The existence of a custom whereunder a higher caste person i.e. a Jat could be adopted by a person belonging to a scheduled caste has been denied.
It is further stated that the benefit of reservation is available only to those candidates who are scheduled castes by birth and not on the basis of adoption.
It has also been pleaded by the University that the adoption of the petitioner by Rame was only a device adopted by the petitioner to seek admission in the reserved category and that the same was not bona fide.
The petitioner has not filed any replication to controvert the averments, made in the written statement.
He has, however, filed an application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure for permission to place some additional documents on record.
This application was ordered to be heard with the main petition.
Some of the documents sought to be placed on record are stated to be copies of some adoption deeds whereby some scheduled castes are alleged to have taken in adoption sons who were more than 15 years of age.
Petitioner wants to rely on these documents as instances of adoption to prove the existence of custom as referred to in clause (iv) of Section 10 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
5.
Having heard counsel for the parties at length, I am of the opinion that this petition is misconceived and deserves to be dismissed.
There is no averment in the petition that there is a custom or usage applicable to the parties which permits persons who have completed the age of 15 years being taken in adoption.
Moreover, it is by now well settled that there is no presumption that a particular person or class of persons is governed by custom and a party who is alleged to governed by customary law must prove that he is so governed and must also prove the existence of the custom set up by him.
All this can be established in a regular suit where evidence is recorded.
Custom cannot be proved in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The petitioner, if so advised, can establish the custom on which he relies in appropriate proceedings in a Civil Court.
6.
There is yet another hurdle which the petitioner cannot cross.
He appeared in the entrance test held in the year 1991 for the session which was to commence in that year.
Admittedly, he has not been admitted to that Course so far and 2 years have goneby.
MBBS Course is a 5 year Course and he cannot now at this belated stage be allowed to join the same, for he will not be able to complete the course.
Faced with this difficulty, counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner be permitted to join the current session which has just commenced.
This cannot be allowed.
Each year an entrance test is held by the University and the requisite number of students are selected to fill up the seats available for that year and the petitioner having appeared for the test in the year 1991 cannot be given a seat for the year 1993.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same stands dismissed with no order as to costs.