VK Bali, J - Sant Lal Anand through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order, Annexure P-4, vide which he was reverted to the post of Tehsil Sanitary Inspector and posted at Primary Health Centre, Bawal, District Mohindergarh with immediate effect.
The facts of the case need to be noticed first.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Sanitary Inspector Class III non-gazetted post on regular basis through the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana in the Health Department of the erstwhile State of Punjab in May, 1963 and he worked in that capacity upto September, 1978.
He was allocatted as Sanitary Inspector to the State of Haryana on November 1, 1966 provisionally and later on his final allocation was made.
He applied for the post of Government Food Inspector through Chief Medical Officer, Karnal in response to a circular issued by the Director, Health Services, Haryana to all the Chief Medical Officers in the State with a direction to bring to the notice of all the Sanitary Inspectors working under their control for the filling up of the post of Government Food Inspector.
This circular was issued after getting no- availability certificate from the Employment Exchange, Haryana.
Petitioner applied for the said post as, according to him, he fulfilled all the qualifications.
He was selected for the post under contention and was so informed by letter dated August 23, 1978.
It is stated that he was selected by the Selection Committee.
However, his appointment was made for a period of six months or till a candidate recommended by the Subordinate Service Selection Board was to join, whichever was earlier.
He joined on August 27, 1978 and continued working as Govt. Food Inspector even after the expiry of six months.
However, he was reverted from the post of Govt. Food Inspector to Sanitary Inspector on February 27, 1980.
Aggrieved, he filed a representation to the State Government which in turn directed the Director, Health Services, Haryana to re-appoint him as Govt. Food Inspector vide letter dated duly 21, 1980.
He, thus, continued to work from July 21, 1980 to April 18, 1984 when once again he was reverted to the post of Tehsil Sanitary Inspector.
It is this order, as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment, which has been challenged in this petition.
3.
The relief asked for by petitioner has been contested by the respondents in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
4.
The facts of the case reveal that petitioner was appointed as Govt. Food Inspector for a period of six months or till a candidate recommended by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana was to join, whichever was earlier.
This order of appointment was passed on August 23, 1978.
After the order of his first reversion was recalled, he was re-appointed on adhoc basis vide order dated July 21, 1980 and as mentioned above, he was again reverted to the post of Sanitary Inspector on April 18, 1984 vide order passed on that behalf by the Director, Health Services, Haryana.
The petitioner, as is made out in the written statement, was appointed as Food Inspector for the first time in the year 1978 as two posts of Food Inspector had fallen vacant and to fill up those posts the department had placed a requisition with the State Employment Officer, Haryana, Chandigarh on March 31, 1978 for recommending suitable candidates possessing requisite qualifications and experience.
The State Employment Officer, Haryana, Chandigarh, sent non-availability certificate on April 25, 1978.
Keeping in view the non-availability certificate, the Chief Medical Officers of the districts were requested to circulate the letter amongst the employees working under them and that these who possessed the requisite qualifications should apply to the respondent No. 2 and they will be interviewed on August 22, 1978.
Petitioner accordingly applied for the said post and he was selected by the department.
He was thus appointed as Govt. Food Inspector on ad hoc basis for a period of six months.
He was reverted to the post of Sanitary Inspector on the report of the Vigilance Department.
That order was, however, recalled and petitioner was re-appointed as Govt. Food Inspector on ad hoc basis under the directions of the State Government which were received through letter dated July 17, 1980.
As his re-appointment was not made through the Employment Exchange, the Government was requested to relax this condition as he should have been appointed through Employment Exchange.
The State Government vide its letter dated February 18, 1982, however, declined to relax this condition.
It is keeping in view the observations of the State Government that petitioner was reverted to the post of Sanitary Inspector.
The array of facts would, thus, manifest that petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis till such time a person from Subordinate Service Selection Board was to join.
At no given time he acquired any such status which might cloth him with any vested right.
The tenure of his post was ad hoc and he could thus be reverted strictly in accordance with the terms of his appointment.
5.
Mr. Hemant Kumar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner, however, contends that petitioner is continuing to serve on the post of Food Inspector for a period of about six years and Government instructions, Annexure P-5 and P-6, enjoin upon the respondents to regularise him in service as his tenure was uninterrupted and he had all requisite qualifications that were required for the post of Food Inspector.
Mr. Suresh Monga, learned Dy.
Advocate General, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the State has, however, made a statement that case of petitioner shall be considered for regularisation in view of the instructions issued by the Government from time to time as also the judgment passed by the apex Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992 SPJ 1 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC) and in case petitioner has pre- requisites for regularisation, he shall be confirmed.
In view of the statement of the learned State Counsel, a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of petitioner for regularisation in service and to do so if he is entitled to the same in view of the instructions issued in this behalf as also the judgment of Supreme Court in Piara Singh's case (supra).
It requires to be mentioned here that reversion of petitioner was stayed by an interim order when this writ petition was admitted and, therefore, petitioner is continuing on the post of Government Food Inspector ever since 1984.
It is, thus, ordered that petitioner would continue to hold the post till such time his case for regularisation is considered and decided either way.
With the observations made above, this petition is accordingly disposed of.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.