VK Bali, J - Through present writ filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioners seek issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to raise their pay scale to a stage higher than the pay scale fixed for inferior posts from time to time as a consequence of recommendations of Pay Commission.
The relief claimed emanates from the following facts.
2.
Petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7 were directly recruited in the Department of Employment, Punjab, against the posts of Statistical Assistant.
The details of their service have been given in para 3 of the writ petition.
Taking the short service career of Mr. Kewal Krishan Puri, for the time being, it would be seen that he entered in service to the post of Clerk on May 6, 1963 and was promoted to the post of Statistical Assistant on March 1, 1974.
The persons mentioned in paragraph 3 of the petition, i.e. petitioner Nos. 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17 were all appointed as Clerks and were promoted to the post of Statistical Assistant on the date referred to in the said paragraph.
The conditions of service of Class-III employees in the Department of Employment are governed by the Punjab Employment Department (State Service Class-III) Rules, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as '1964 Rules').
The post of Statistical Assistant is included in Appendix 'A' attached to 1964 Rules and this post is superior to the other posts, namely, Head Clerk (Employment Exchange), Accountant, Stenographer, Assistant and Clerk.
Rule 8 of 1964 Rules prescribes qualifications for appointment by direct recruitment to various posts within the cadre of the Punjab Employment Department State Service Class-III.
For appointment by direct recruitment to the post of Statistical Assistant, higher qualifications have been stipulated vis-a-vis the other posts.
The aforesaid position is clear from Rule 8 of 1964 Rules.
It is useful to reproduce Rule of 1964 Rules which runs thus :  "8.
No person shall be recruited to the service by direct appointment, unless he possesses educational qualifications in both Hindi and Punjabi upto Matriculation Standard or its equivalent and also the following educational and other qualifications mentioned against each :-  Sr. No.
Minimum Educational Qualifications Qualifications.
xx xx xx  4., Statistical Assistant (i) MA in Statistics, Mathematics, Economics or Commerce; or (ii) Graduate 2nd Class with Statistics, Mathematics, Economics or Commerce; or At least 3 years experience as Field Investigator.
(iii) Graduate with A or B Course or Economics; or At least 3 years' experience in collection, scrutiny and interpretation of Statistical data in a Government office or a business concern of repute.
(iv) Bachelor of Commerce, 2nd Class with Statistics; or (v) Graduate 2nd Class with Mathematics At least one year's training in Statistics at some recognised Institute.
xx xx xx  6.
Accountant Degree of a recognised University or its equivalent At least 3 years' experience of work relating to administration and accounts in a Govt. Office.
7.
Stenographer Matriculate of recognised University or its equivalent Should have a speed in short-hand and in type as may be prescribed by the Director.
8.
Assistant Degree of a recognised University 3 years' experience of work relating to administration or accounts in a Govt. office.
9.
Head Clerk Employment Exchange Degree of a recognised University 3 years' experience of work relating to administration or accounts in a Govt. office.
xx xx xx xx  12.
Clerk Matriculate of a recognised University or its equivalent Typing speed of at least 30 words per minute, relazable to 20 words per minute in case of a Graduate.
3.
From the qualifications as prescribed above for various posts, it is clear that the post of Statistical Assistant is superior to other ministerial posts including that of Head Clerk and Assistant.
4.
Rule 10 of 1964 Rules indicates the method of recruitment to the various posts covered by the said Rules.
For appointment to the post of Statistical Assistant, Rule 10 indicates that 75 per cent posts are to be filled up by direct recruitment and remaining 25 per cent either by promotion or by transfer on deputation.
It is clearly made out from the Rule aforesaid that post of Statistical Assistant is a promotional post from the post of Head Clerk (Employment Exchange), Accountant, Stenographer, Assistant and Clerk.
The petitioner who are presently holding the post of Statistical Assistant, were earlier holding inferior posts.
The grievance of the petitioners is that as a consequence of revision of pay scales from time to time the post of Statistical Assistant in terms of pay scales has been reduced in status vis-a-vis the other inferior posts.
Comparative scales of pay of different categories of employees of the Punjab Employment Department have been given in paragraph 5 of the writ petition which are as follows :  Sr. No. Post Scale of pay.
1.
Statistical Assistant Rs. 150-300.
2.
Head Clerk (Employment Exchange) Rs. 116-250.
3.
Accountant Rs. 116-250.
4.
Stenographer Rs. 116-250.
5.
Assistant (i) Rs. 106-200.
Assistant (ii) Rs. 116-250.
6.
Clerk Rs. 60-175.
5.
A perusal of pay scales of various posts would certainly indicate that Statistical Assistant being a promotional post was carrying a higher scale of pay i.e. Rs. 150-300, as admissible then.
With a view to illustrate the anomaly in the pay scales of petitioners and those who are holding entirely different posts, it is pleaded that petitioner No. 6, Sat Pal Pathania, was promoted from the post of Clerk to the post of Assistant on November 17, 1976.
He was further promoted to the post of Statistical Assistant on July 21, 1977.
As per the details indicated in Annexure P-1, if he was required to be reverted to the post of Assistant from that of Statistical Assistant, which post he presently holds, he was to be entitled to pay in a scale higher than the pay scale in the promoted post of Statistical Assistant.
Likewise, if he was to be further reverted from the post of Assistant to that of Clerk (Junior Assistant) he was to continue to draw the same scale in which he was to continue to draw the same scale in which he was presently fixed.
Coming now to the duties that are assigned to the inferior posts and that are discharged by the petitioners, it is pleaded that Clerks, Assistants, Stenographers, Accountants and Head Clerks (Employment Exchange) are merely required to discharge ministerial duties and as against that the main functions of the Statistical Assistants are to compile, classify, tabulate and analyse statistical data of wide variety collected from the Government/Semi-government Departments and also from private sectors, industrial units and other agencies.
Statistical Assistant is to assist the officers in conducting various surveys and studies on variety of subjects from time to time.
He prepares number of periodical reports and returns for the submission to the State Government/Central Government/other agencies.
In addition to this, Statistical Assistant has also to discharge superior ministerial duties i.e. dealing with all sorts of correspondence and other relevant works pertaining to his seat.
It is, thus, pleaded that petitioners are discharging superior duties vis-a-vis other posts, the scales of which have been fixed at higher level.
When various representations made by petitioners brought no tangible results, they filed the present writ for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
6.
In the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, all that has been pleaded is that the pay scale of Statistical Assistant before 1968 was Rs. 150-300/-.
However, the post of Head-Clerk shown at Sr. No. 3 of the Appendix 'A' of the Punjab Employment Department (State Service Class III) Rules, 1964, was also in the scale of Rs. 150-300/-.
But the post of Statistical Assistant is a technical post and the posts of Head Clerk, Accountant, Stenographer are the ministerial posts based on separate experience and qualifications.
Therefore, question of superiority of the post of Statistical Assistant from ministerial post, does not arise.
In para 7 of the written statement it has been admitted that departmental promotions are effected from amongst of Head Clerks, Accountants, Assistants and Clerks provided the persons to be promoted have requisite minimum educational and other qualifications prescribed for the posts at Sr. No. 4 of the Rule 8 of 1964 Rules.
7.
From the pleadings as extracted above, it is, thus, proved to the hilt that whereas the petitioners were earlier drawing better scale, it came so considerably down that it was even below the inferior posts.
It is rather strange to note that a person on promotion has been paid in a lower pay scale from the one which he was getting on lower post.
If this is permitted to happen, no one would ever work with zeal and dedication nor he would ever like to acquire better experience and more qualifications.
This would, thus, result in complete stagnation.
Further, it is legitimate aspiration of every citizen to be better placed, both, in status and pay on promotion and if this is to be frustrated, it will, obviously, damper in the growth of the man which, as observed above, is a natural desire of everyone.
The action of respondents in placing higher post in lower pay scale from the one that he has been promoted, is thus wholly arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
A direction is issued to the respondents to forthwith fix the pay of petitioners in a scale which would be immediately higher from the one from which they were promoted.
This may be the only relief which this Court can possibly grant.
This Court is of the confirmed view that the authorities responsible for fixing the pay scales of petitioners should immediately get down and see through that the justice is done to the petitioners by fixing them in a pay scale commensurate to their nature of duties and post.
This exercise must be done within three months from today.
However, petitioners be paid forthwith all the arrears that may be due to them by fixing them in a pay scale immediately higher to that they were getting on the post from which they were promoted to the post of Statistical Assistant.
This petition deserves to be allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.