V K Bali, J - Petitioner, Daljinder Singh Kahlon, seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the order of the Selection Committee dated January 20, 1989, annexure P-4 wherein the relative merit of Readers appointed in Physical Education, as per the case of petitioner, was changed and respondent No. 3 was placed at No. 1.
He further seeks a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allow him to continue as Head of the Department of Physical Education for a period of three years with effect from December 2, 1988.
The facts on which the twin reliefs, referred to above, have asked for stem from the following facts :-  2.
Guru Nanak Dev University(hereinafter referred to as the University) advertised one post of Reader in Physical Education in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5700/- vide advertisement No. 4 of 1988.
In response to the advertisement, aforesaid, six persons inclusive of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 applied for the solitary post and all the candidates, who had applied, were interviewed which was held on November 12, 1988.
The Selection Committee consisted of the Vice Chancellor, who was the Chairman of the Selection Committee Dr. J S Neki, Dr. R S Sandhu, Dean of the respondent University, Dr.(Miss.)
J Bhullar, Professor, Department of Physical Education, Panjab University, Chandigarh and Dr. J S Naruka, Officer on Special Duty, Indira Gandhi Institute of Physical Education & Sports Science, Delhi, Petitioner pleads that in consequence of the interview, a merit list was prepared in which petitioner and respondent No. 3 were said to be bracketted.
In anticipation of the approval of the Syndicate, the petitioner was appointed as Reader in the Physical Education Department on November 25, 1988.
As per terms and conditions of the letter of appointment aforesaid, the petitioner was to remain on probation for a period of one year.
If during the period of probation his work or conduct was not found satisfactory, the appointing authority might dispense with his services or extend the period of probation and thereafter pass such orders as would have been passed by it on the expiry of the first period of probation, provided that the total period of probation including extension, if any, was not to exceed three years.
The perusal of the appointment letter does show that petitioner was given appointment on permanent basis.
On December 2, 1988 petitioner was appointed as Head of the Department of Physical Education for a period of three years with effect from the date he was to take over the charge.
This again was in anticipation of the approval of the Vice-Chancellor and the Syndicate.
In pursuance of the orders of the appointment as Reader and Head of the Department, annexures P 1 and P 2, petitioner joined the posts of Reader and Head of the Physical Education Department on December 2, 1988.
In the case of petitioner is that even though he was selected and appointed yet the Selection Committee was reconvened on January 20, 1989 to determine his relative merit with that of respondent No. 3 on the ground of administrative difficulty.
The Selection Committee proceeded thus, to review the relative merit and placing respondent No. 3 at serial No. 1.
It is this decision of the Selection Committee (P 4) that has been challenged through the present petition.
It is pleaded that petitioner was sent a letter dated January 18, 1989 in which he was asked to be present in the office of Vice-Chancellor on January 20, 1989 at 930.
A.M. and when he reported in the office of Vice Chancellor, he was informed that he was to be re-interviewed for the post on which he had already been appointed on the basis of the earlier selection.
Petitioner refused to take part in the interview but Selection Committee still proceeded to redetermine his relative merit with that of respondent No. 3 on the same very day.
It is further pleaded that after the selection of petitioner, respondent No. 3 was accommodated on the post of Reader against the post of Professor for the time being.
This was only to be an interim measure as the petitioner and respondent No. 3 had been bracketted.
However, merit of the petitioner was higher than respondent No. 3 as he was appointed on the post of Reader and Head of Department.
He was otherwise, it is pleaded, shown at serial No. 1 whereas the respondent No. 3 was shown at serial No. 2 at the time when they were bracketted.
On the aforesaid facts, it has been pleaded and likewise canvassed by Shri S S Nijjar, learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner that once petitioner had been selected and recommended for appointment, respondents had no jurisdiction to review the selection.
The Selection Committee after applying its mind and deciding to recommend the petitioner for the post under contention, had become functus officio and the review entertained by it so as to redetermine relative merit with that of respondent No. 3, it is contended, was clearly violative of clause 84 of the Statute given in Chapter-I of the University Calendar.
The Selection Committee could only submit the recommendation to the Syndicate and it had no other role whatsoever to play.
It is the Syndicate which had the jurisdiction to accept or reject the recommendations made by the Selection Committee.
If the recommendations were not accepted, it was then the duty of the Syndicate to record reasons and submit the case to the Chancellor for final orders.
It is maintained that the Syndicate had not disagreed with the selections made on the basis of which the petitioner was given appointment nor the present case was referred to the Chancellor for final orders violation of the principles of rules of natural justice is also pressed into service.
It is stated that the petitioner had been appointed on the post of Reader and Head of the Department in anticipation of the approval of the Syndicate.
The Selection Committee, it is stated, could not usurp the powers given to the Syndicate and review the earlier recommendations for appointment without hearing the petitioner in the matter.
It is also pleaded and so argued that the petitioner could be removed/reverted from the post of Reader/Head of the Department on no grounds than the one mentioned in his appointment letter, annexure P. 1 and inasmuch as the review was not made on account of work and conduct of the petitioner, the same was without jurisdiction.
The change so brought about by the Selection Committee while placing respondent No. 3 at serial No. 1 and petitioner at serial No. 2, is also stated to be arbitrary and based on legal mala fides.
It is further contended that the order annexure P. 4 was passed purely to accommodate respondent No. 3 who exerted political influence and had managed to get the review done.
The action of the respondents in reviewing the whole matter is stated to be on extraneous considerations and, thus, vitiated.
3.
The motion bench vide orders dated January 24, 1989 while issuing notice of motion for March 8, 1989 also ordered that appointment of the petitioner as Reader would continue and while admitting the petition on May 9, 1989, the motion bench further clarified the order dated January 24, 1989 so as to say that since by the time the order dated January 24, 1989 was passed, the petitioner had already been appointed as Head of the Department, which order was later changed and respondent No. 3 was appointed as Head of the Department, same thus, amounted to bye-passing the order dated January 24, 1989.
It was, thus, made clear that the petitioner would continue as Head of the Department as ordered vide annexure P 2 and respondent No. 3 would vacate the post.
4.
This petition has been contested and two different written statements, one by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 which is detailed one and the other by respondent No. 3, have been filed.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement have denied the claim of petitioner by specifically pleading that the Selection Committee did not prepare any merit list but only mentioned two names, one of the petitioner and the other of respondent No. 3 who were bracketted for one post of the Reader in Physical Education Department.
Copy of the proceedings of the Selection Committee dated November 12, 1988, has been placed on record with a view to prove said assertion.
It is pleaded that the recommendations of the Selection Committee were taken up by the Dean Academic Affairs and Students welfare and he was of the view that in the event of two candidates being bracketted, previous seniority in the lecturer cadre may be made operative and, therefore, the appointment be given to petitioner against the vacancy of Reader and respondent No. 3, who had been bracketted by the Selection Committee along with petitioner may be appointed against the vacancy of Professor in the same department on a temporary basis till the post of Professor was filled up.
It was in these circumstances that the petitioner was appointed as Reader on November 25, 1988.
The appointment admittedly was subject to and in anticipation of the approval of the Syndicate.
The petitioner was, it is admitted, appointed as Head of the Department for a period of three years but the same was also concededly in anticipation of the approval of the Vice Chancellor and Syndicate.
The petitioner did submit his joining report in response to the letter of appointment.
He also submitted his joining report as Head of the Department on December 2, 1988 but, it is stated, both the appointments as Reader and Head of the Department were subject to and in anticipation of approval of the Syndicate.
Meanwhile, it is pleaded, respondent No. 3 made a representation to the University on December 27, 1988 contending therein that in view of an earlier instance of a similar nature that when the Selection Committee had recommended more than one person for one post and had bracketted them, the case was sent back to the Selection Committee to assess their inter se relative merit, the same procedure should be adopted in the present case as well.
Alongwith his representation, respondent No. 3 had also attached the Syndicate proceedings dated August 28, 1971 wherein the matter had been referred back to the Selection Committee by the Syndicate under similar circumstances.
It is thus stated that it was under these circumstances that when for one post, two persons had been bracketted, there arose an administrative difficulty and for that reason alone the matter was referred to redetermine the relative merit of the bracketted candidates.
The Selection Committee which met on January 20, 1989 after reviewing the relative merit of the bracketted candidates found that respondent No. 3 were not asked to be present in the office of Vice Chancellor for interviewing them again but the same was with a view that the Selection Committee might like to ask anything further from the bracketted candidates.
However, no such need was felt and, therefore, petitioner was not to be interviewed again as stated by him.
The whole matter was thereafter placed before the Syndicate in its meeting held on January 20, 1989 vide item No. 82-A and it was resolved that the orders passed by the Dean, Academic Affairs determining the seniority of the selected candidates, who were bracketted by the Selection Committee on 12.11.1988 be not confirmed and that the recommendations of the Selection Committee which was conveyed on January 20, 1989 be approved and the appointment letter dated January 25, 1988 be amended accordingly.
Insofar as appointment of respondent No. 3 as Reader against the post of Professor concerned it is admitted that he was so appointed but again subject to and in anticipation of the approval of the Syndicate.
The respondent No. 3 was so accommodated as the post of professor was lying vacant and he too had been recommended by the Selection Committee for the post of Reader in Physical Education.
The plea of petitioner that he was recommended at No. 1 whereas respondent No. 3 was recommended at No. 2 has been vehemently denied and it is as referred to above positive case of the respondents that both of them were found of same merit and were thus bracketted.
5.
The sole question that requires determination in the present case is as to whether the stand of petitioner that he was recommended at No. 1 whereas respondent No. 3 was recommended No. 2 is correct- the answer to the question aforesaid is in favour of petitioner, nothing less would survive for determination as concededly thence could not be any change in the selection after the Selection Committee had applied its mind and recommended the petitioner for appointment in consequence whereof he had even taken the charge of the post under contention.
However, if the answer of the question is to turn against the petitioner the second question that would need determination is whereas re-determination of relative merit of petitioner and respondent No. 3 by the Selection Committee constituted of same very persons, in the facts and circumstances of the case, was justified or the same was arbitrary giving to scope the bracketted candidates to canvass for their case contrary to influence the decision of Selection Committee.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, I am of the considered view that petitioner was not selected at serial No. 1.
The proceedings taken by the Selection Committee have been placed on record, as Annexure R1/1.
Dr. Bal Ram .K.
Gupta has also shown me the original proceedings, the perusal of some unmistakeably reveals that it is a printed proforma wherein the blanks have been filled.
In the column of selection serial No, name, father's name and qualification/experience have been mentioned.
Both, Daljinder Singh Kahlon, petitioner and Kamaljit Singh, respondent No. 3 have been mentioned under the column of selection (selected).
They have been bracketted.
In the circumstances as were available i.e. when both, petitioner and respondent No. 3 were selected and it was not shown as to who is higher in merit, there was every justification for the respondent No. 3 to make a representation as also the University had jurisdiction to deal with the matter and order re-determination of the merits of two bracketted candidates.
No question of review is, thus, involved in the matter.
That being the findings, the case of petitioner based upon lack of jurisdiction so as to review the matter, as also violation of Clause 84 of the University Calendar, would fall into insignificance and thus need no determination by this Court.
6.
The manner and method, however, in which things have gone about, would certainly show that the respondent acted in an arbitrary manner.
Even though the petitioner can have no grouse of his having been bracketted with that of respondent No. 3 and in that account he can not raise any meaningful arguments in his favour, yet it is surprising to note that for the sole post, the Selection Committee chose to make two recommendations.
It was clearly known to the Selection Committee that the post required to be filled is only one.
It is clearly mentioned in the proceedings of the Selection Committee, annexure R1/1, that the number of posts to be filled is one and yet two recommendations were made.
It is difficult to conceive of the situation where two candidates were so much alike in their qualifications, experience, intelligence and other relevant matters to be of exactly same merit but as mentioned above that in any case, would provide no solace to the petitioner and the only point that in my clear view entitles the petitioner same relief is that when the Selection Committee had bracketted two candidates of equal merit, when the matter was reconsidered, the same very selection Committee ought not to have been entrusted the job of redetermining the merit of bracketted candidates.
If once the Selection Committee of the persons mentioned in the earlier part of this judgment had applied their mind and considered two candidates exactly equal in all regards, persons constituting the same Committee, it is surprising, how could come to a different conclusion and that too without interviewing the concerned candidates.
Reconsideration of merit by the same persons, thus, give scope for pulls and pressures and to secure selection on matters other than merit.
The respondents in referring the matter to the same very persons for redetermining the merit of petitioner and respondent No. 3, thus, acted arbitrarily offending Article 14 of the Constitution of India and on that count alone, selection of respondent No. 3 has to be set aside.
In the very nature of things, a further direction has to be issued to the respondents to reconstitute the Selection Committee which, of course, would be hearded by the Vice-Chancellor of the University as it is a statutorily required, but those who earlier participated in the Selection Committee, would not be its members and whole process shall be gone into again and selection would be made accordingly.
Before I part with the judgment, it would be appropriate to mention that both, petitioner and respondent No. 3 are not at fault and, therefore, they would not be deprived of benefits, in particular pecuniary benefits, that they might have derived on account of the interim orders passed by this Court, or by the University in accommodating respondent No. 3 and it is made clear that the newly-constituted Selection Committee would interview only petitioner and respondent No. 3 and no other candidate shall be interviewed while making selection to the post of Reader in Physical Education Department.
7.
The University, which created a mess by first making recommendations of two persons against one post and then reconsidering the matter by the same very Selection Committee, must pay costs of this litigation to the petitioner which are quantified at Rs. 3000/-.
8.
Petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Petition allowed.