VK Bali, J - Petitioner Kewal Krishan seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-University to grant him the benefit of improvement of Part-II 3rd Semester MA (English examination for which he appeared successfully in November, 1990.
Facts on which the relief aforesaid stems need to be enumerated.
2.
Petitioner after doing his Matriculation and B.Sc (Medical) from Punjabi University got admission in MA (English) at its Regional Centre located at Bhatinda.
He was successful in passing 1st and 2nd Semesters of Part-I, 3rd and 4th Semesters of Part-II.
He obtained 405 marks out of 800.
For the 4th Semester for which he had appeared, the examination was held in April, 1990.
He has given the detail of marks obtained in MA (Part-I) 1st Semester in July, 1988, MA (Part-I) 2nd Semester in February, 1989, MA(Part-II) 3rd Semester in January, 1990 and MA (Part-II) 4th Semester in April 1990, in para 4 of the petition, which as such has been admitted in the corresponding para of the written statement.
In order to improve his marks, the petitioner applied to appear in Part-I, 2nd Semester in November, 1990.
He was allotted Roll No. 6531.
He did appear in the 2nd paper, but did not attempt the same at all.
Even in so far as 3rd paper is concerned, he was absent.
Inasmuch as he had applied for improvement in 2nd and 3rd papers of Part-I, 2nd Semester, he was not to appear in 1st and 4th papers of the said part of the Second Semester.
He also applied for improvement of marks in 2nd, 3rd and 4th papers of Part-II 3rd Semester and he did improve in these papers as he was awarded 24, 25 and 27 marks in papers 2nd, 3rd and 4th, respectively.
He obtained 101 marks out of 200 on improvement whereas earlier he had obtained 87 marks.
As he had not attempted or had absented in 2nd and 3rd papers of Part-I 2nd Semester in November, 1990, he again applied for improvement of marks of the aforesaid papers in July, 1991.
He successfully appeared and got 31 and 30 marks raising his score to 115 marks out of 200.
The said result of the petitioner was duly declared by the respondent-University.
However, he was not given the benefit of improvement that he had in papers 2nd, 3rd and 4th of Part-II, for which he was given a separate Roll No. 7201 and for which he had appeared in November, 1990.
On improvement, the petitioner got 101 marks out of 200, as referred to above, but the University kept on considering his earlier marks, i.e. 87 marks out of 200.
The entreaties of the petitioner to grant him the benefit of improvement, that he had made in three papers of Part-II, fell on deaf ears.
He was informed that because he had appeared for Part-I 2nd Semester as well as Part-II 3rd Semester and as he could not make any improvement in Part-I 2nd Semester examination, so his previous result would stand and he would get no benefit even though he had improved his marks in Part-II 3rd Semester.
This stand of the respondent-University is termed arbitrary, thus, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-University through Tirath Singh, Registrar, it is, inter alia, pleaded that the petitioner had appeared under Roll No. 6531 for improvement of his marks in Part-I 2nd Semester and after putting in appearance in second paper, he did not attempt any question and accordingly scored zero.
He absented himself in the third paper.
It is further pleaded that the petitioner had applied for improvement in papers second and third of 2nd Semester and papers second, third and fourth of 3rd Semester in one go and accordingly was required to appear in all the papers.
As per the University rules contained in the Ordinance relating to Master of Arts (Semester System) Examination Session 1988-89, the result of a candidate where he appears for improvement of his marks or division, can only be modified if the improvement is there in overall performance.
Para 14 of the Ordinance, which is relevant on the subject, is reproduced below :-  14.
"A candidate who had passed MA examination from this University shall have one chance within a period of two years after passing the examination to improve his division/55% marks in maximum of 1/3rd total theory papers offered in both MA previous and final examinations.
Improvement will not, however, be allowed in dissertation/viva-voce and practicals.
The result of the candidate shall be declared only if the candidate shall be declared only if he improves his performance as aforesaid ..."  It is from the portion of the rule, reproduced above, that it is pleaded that result of the candidate would only be declared if he improves his performance and nor otherwise and in the event of a candidate nor improving his result, his previous result is made to stand and the result declared as 'Previous Result Stand.'
Since the petitioner had applied for improvement in second and third papers of 2nd Semester and second, third and fourth papers of third Semester in one go, his improved result could have been declared only if the improvement was noticed in the overall result of 2nd and 3rd Semesters.
4.
After going through the records of the case and hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the stand projected by the respondent-University, as noticed above, is wholly unjustified and is an outcome of complete misinterpretation, misapplication and misconstruction of Rule 14, produced above.
The relevant rule would not even remotely suggest that the improved result could be declared only if the improvement is noticed in overall in 2nd and 3rd Semesters.
On the other hand, plain reading of the Rule is that it is only if a candidate has to improve upon his division or he attains 55% marks or more that his result shall be declared.
Improvement in division or improvement in marks so as to reach within the vicinity of 55% or more marks has its own significance in as much as the same stands to benefit the student in seeking admission in MPhil.
or other higher class as also to get job of Lecturer, for which minimum percentage of marks required is 55%.
Obviously, if the improvement is such that it does not improve upon division of a candidate as also does not exceed for making aggregate of 55% or more, it would be meaningless for him to improve his score, as the same would be of no benefit to him.
If a candidate improves upon his division or scores on improvement 55% or more marks then his result has to be declared.
The only condition for declaration of result on improvement is the one, noted above, and it is nowhere spelled out in the Rule that the result shall be declared if improvement is noticed in overall result of 2nd and 3rd Semesters.
Admittedly, the petitioner after improving his marks would obtain exactly 55% marks and that being so, there was no valid reason available with the respondent-University to deny him the benefit of improvement in his marks.
Mr. Randhawa, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-University, with his usual vehemence and ability endeavoured to defend the stand of University on the ground stated by the University in its written statement but confronted with Rule 14 and the only condition for declaring the result of improvement, as mentioned above, he gracefully and rightly gave in.
5.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition succeeds and is accordingly allowed.
A direction is, thus, issued to the respondent-University to forth- with grant benefit of improvement to the petitioner in Part-II 3rd Semester of MA (English) for which the petitioner improved in November, 1990.
6.
It is pity that the petitioner, who was eligible for securing admission in MPhil, course for the year 1991-92 as the marks required for admission were 55% in the concerned MA, has been deprived of his right.
Further, the petitioner is deprived of from competing for the post of Lecturer for which the University held examination in December, 1991 and fixed eligibility certiorari to be 55% marks in the MA Examination.
Had some official/officer of the University applied his mind and examined the rule, the petitioner would have been saved not only from coming to this Court for seeking justice, but he would have also been eligible to apply for admission in MPhil.
as also compete for the post of Lecturer.
The obdurate and unjustified stand, however, came in the way of the petitioner.
In the very circumstances of the case, I am convinced that the petitioner had suffered great deal of loss, but as actual loss cannot be ascertained in the writ jurisdiction of this Court, and, in fact, depends upon proof of actual loss sustained by him, it would always be open for him to claim damages from the University or those who dealt with his case by instituting a civil suit.
This petition, however, deserves to be allowed with costs, which are quantified at Rs. 3,000/- (Rupees three thousand).