Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner graduated from DAV College Malout (Punjab) which is affiliated to the Panjab University Chandigarh Securing 607 per cent marks.
He thereafter sought admission to the Department of Laws in the Ist Semester and for that purpose duly submitted his admission form properly filled in.
He was given the benefit of weightage of 11 per cent marks as per paragraph VI of the Prospectus (Annexure P-5) including 10 per cent for being a graduate of the Panjab University and by this method, his marks were reckoned at 6798 per cent.
It has been averred by the petitioner that on 20th October, 1992 he read in the newspaper that ten students (who are respondent Nos 4 to 13) had been admitted to the Department of Laws by the creation of additional seats.
The case of the petitioner is that he was never offered admission against these additional seats as on the basis of his marks he was entitled to admission in preference to some of the respondents.
He has also additionally urged that the weightage that was to be give to him as per the prospectus was to be calculated on the basis of the total marks in the qualifying examination and not the marks obtained by him and had this been done, he would have got admission on the basis of his merit.
2.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
As far as the challenge to admission of respondent Nos. 4 to 13 is concerned, we have in our judgment rendered in CWP No. 15740 of 1992 (Vivek Sood v. The Panjab University) on 27th May 1993 quashed these admissions but at the same time have also held that the provisional admission granted to the petitioners under the orders of this Court stood cancelled.
No relief therefore is available to the petitioner on this score.
3.
We have considered the second argument as well.
Paragraph VI of the Prospectus (Annexure p-5) is reproduced hereunder :-  "VI.
The admission shall be made on merit which shall be determined after giving weightage as under :-  (a) 10% to those passing the qualifying examination from the Panjab University.
(b) ..........x........x......x........x.
(c) 3% marks to the members of the Armed Forces, including the ex- servicemen on the marks obtained in the aggregate of the last qualifying examination on the basis of which the admission is sought to the Law Course.
(d) Any other weightage approved by the DUI/Vice Chancellor.
Note :- A candidate can claim weightage in one or more categories given above.
However, the total weightage allowed shall not exceed 15% of the normalised marks obtained in the qualifying examination."
Mr. Ajay Mittal, learned counsel for the petitioner, has urged that from the difference in the terminology used in sub-paras (a) and (c) of Para VI, it is clear that while tabulating the weightage the per centage of the total marks in the qualifying examination have to be taken as a base.
He has pointed out that in sub-para (c) it has been specifically mentioned that the weightage with respect to the Armed Forces was to be determined on the basis of the marks obtained in the aggregate of the last qualifying examination on the basis of which the admission was sought to the Law Course, whereas in sub-para (a) the reference is only to the qualifying examination and not to the aggregate marks obtained in that examination.
We are, however, unable to agree.
It appears to us that the purpose of giving weightage is to give a higher weightage to the better student and those securing higher aggregate in the qualifying examination are, therefore, entitled to higher weightage.
Our views are further strengthened by the 'Note' given under sub-para (d) and quoted above which specifically provides that the total weightage that is to be allowed shall not exceed 15 per cent of the normalised marks obtained in the qualifying examination.
This note takes into account all the weightage mentioned in Paragraph VI including the weightage given in sub-para (a) afore-quoted.
It would be anomalous to hold, therefore, that while giving weightage to those qualifying in the examination from the Panjab University the total marks have to be kept in view, whereas while determining the weightage due to one or to other categories in Paragraph VI the marks obtained in aggregate in the qualifying examination have to be kept in mind.
Our opinion is further fortified by the fact that if the weightage was to be given, as suggested by Mr. Mittal, there would have been no need to mention the figure as a percentage to be duly calculated, and the respondent University could have indicated the number of marks that were to be given to the various categories in Paragraph VI.
In the light of the above discussion the mere fact that there is some difference in terminology between sub-paras (a), (b) and (c) would not support the case of the petitioner.
4.
The last argument of Mr. Mittal is that the petitioner who had also been granted provisional admission by this Court should be allowed the benefit of having passed the Ist-year Examination i.e. Ist and 2nd Semester so that he can get admission on that basis in some other Institution.
As we have already while rendering our judgment in Vivek Sood's case (supra) held that the provisional admissions granted to the petitioners stood cancelled, we find that this prayer too is untenable.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition too is disposed of in terms of our judgment in Vivek Sood's case (supra).
No costs.