Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was working as a Clerk in the Treasury Officer, Karnal tendered his resignation from service on April 23, 1990.
He also deposited three months' pay in lieu of notice.
His request was accepted vide order dated April 25, 1991.
He contested elections to the State Legislative Assembly.
Having lost the elections, he submitted an application dated June 27, 1990 (Annexure P-3) seeking permission to withdraw the resignation.
It is averred that he sent a reminder on September 16, 1991.
Having heard nothing in reply, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer that the respondents be directed to accept his request.
It has been averred that a similar request made by one Mr. Ram Singh of Revenue Department in the Government of Haryana has already been accepted.
It has been further pointed out that the State Government has issued instructions vide letter dated October 21, 1980 in which guidelines have been laid down.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
It is averred that the action of the respondent is arbitrary and suffers from the vice of discrimination.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Deputy Director, Treasuries and Accounts Department, Haryana.
It has been averred that the petitioner was appointed as a clerk vide letter dated January 4, 1974 and had joined as such on January 14, 1974.
On receipt of his request for permission to resign from Government service on the ground that "he wanted to contest the Assembly election for Nilokheri...." alongwith a sum of Rs. 6, 342/- on account of three months' pay, the respondents had permitted the petitioner to resign.
He was relieved of his duties on April 26, 1991.
Thereafter, he submitted a representation dated June 27, 1991.
It was considered in the light of instructions dated May 4, 1960 and October 21, 1980.
It was decided not to take him back in service.
Accordingly, the representation was filed.
It has been further averred that "since there were no overwhelming reason to take him back in service and to condone the broken period in his service, he was not allowed to withdraw his resignation by Government."
With regard to the petitioner's averment that persons similarly situated have been permitted to withdraw their resignations and that one Mr. Ram Singh of the Revenue Department was allowed to do so, vide order dated December 31, 1991 (Annexure P-7), the respondents have averred that "para 9 of the petition is denied for want of knowledge."
On these premises, it is claimed that there is no merit in this petition and it may be dismissed.
3.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder and reiterated the averments made in the petition.
Copies of various commendation certificates and awards given to the petitioner have also been produced to show that he has had a consistently good record of service.
4.
I have heard Ms. Nirmaljit Kaur, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, she submits that the respondents were bound to consider the petitioner's claim in accordance with the instructions dated October 21, 1980 issued by the Chief Secretary to all Heads of Departments.
She submits that the respondents have arbitrarily rejected the petitioner's claim in spite of the fact that persons who were similarly situate have been granted relief as sought by the petitioner.
She has also referred to a Division Bench Judgment in Ram Kumar Mann v. The State of Haryana, CWP No. 1154 of 1984 decided on August 10, 1984 and a single Bench judgment in Sukhdev Singh Chauhan v. State of Punjab, CWP No. 956 of 1986 decided on May 14, 1986.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents contends that the Government did not find it expedient to allow the petitioner's request and consequently, the representations submitted by him were rejected.
6.
Since no order rejecting the petitioner's request had been conveyed to him and no reason had been disclosed in the written statement for declining his representations, I have called upon Mr. Jaswant Singh to indicate the reasons on perusal of the original record.
On examining the record, he has pointed out that on October 15, 1991, the office had put up a note that keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had served for 17 years and he was only 38 years old and had already crossed the age for entering the Government service, his request for withdrawal of resignation and condonation of break be accepted.
This request was endorsed by the Deputy Director Treasuries but was declined by the Director Treasuries and Accounts with the following orders:-  "He should not be taken back in service.
F.C.Fs' order dated 8791 (page 57 ante) may also please be seen.
Sd/- 29/10."
At page 57, the observation was as under :- "I think permission to rejoin Government service should not be given.
However, advice of CS may be sought."
A perusal of the above note indicates that no reason whatsoever was assigned for rejecting the petitioner's claim.
7.
Further, it also deserves notice that the petitioner has made a categorical pavement in paragraph 9 of the petition that similarly situated persons have been permitted to withdraw their resignations and allowed to continue on the posts held by them.Reference has been made to the case of Mr. Ram Singh of Haryana Revenue Department.
In reply, the averment has been merely denied for want of knowledge.
On a perusal of the pleadings of the parties, it is clear that the specific averment of the petitioner has not been specifically denied.
Denial for want of knowledge is not denial.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jahuri Sah v. Dwarika Prasad Jhanjhunwala, AIR 1967 SC 109 wherein their Lordships were inter alia pleased to observe that Order VIII Rule 5 C.P.C. " provides that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary implication or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of the defendant shall be taken to be admitted, to say that a defendant has no knowledge of a fact pleaded by the plaintiff is not tantamount to a denial of the existence of that fact, not even an implied denial."
It is thus apparent that the averment has not been specifically denied.
In fact, it amounts to having been admitted.
8.
Still further, it is not unlikely that if resignations are allowed to be withdrawn easily, a large number of Government servants may try to enter politics and then seek to rejoin Government service after losing the election.
Such a course of action will neither promote discipline nor be in the interest of public servants.
However, the fact remains that the government has issued instructions governing the withdrawal of resignation.
It was incumbent on the respondents to examine the case in the light of those instructions and the petitioner's claim could have been rejected only for some valid reason.
Without going into the merits of the case, the Director, Treasuries and Accounts passed a one line order to the effect that the petitioner's request is declined.
This was neither fair nor just.
Even while filing a reply to the writ petition, no specific answer was given to the petitioner's averment that persons who were similarly situate had been given the requisite relief.
9.
Consequently, in view of this peculiar situation, it appears just and reasonable to set aside the order passed by the respondents.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.