VK Bali, J - Sudesh Bala, through present petition filed by her under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to admit her to the Teachers Training Course (State Scheme).
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner applied for Teachers Training Course (State Scheme) and last date for submission of the applications was September 30, 1991.
The applications had to be made to the Principal, Industrial Training Institute (Women Wing), Rohtak and the date of interview was fixed as October 5, 1991.
The interview contained no marks and was only a formality as the admission had to be granted on the basis of academic qualifications.
The case of the petitioner is that on October 5, 1991 a list was displayed and there were only 31 seats and she was shown at Serial No. 8 On October 5, 1991, however, no interview was held as all the Educational Institutions including the Industrial Training Institute, Rohtak was closed by the orders of Deputy Commissioner taking into consideration the prevalent law and order situation upto October 17, 1991.
The case of the petitioner further is that even though there were no marks for interview but when she alongwith her relative had gone for the said purpose on October 5, 1991 to the Principal, Industrial Training Institute, Rohtak, she came to know that all the Institutions have been closed upto October 17, 1991 and therefore, was asked to come on October 18, 1991.
On the date aforesaid, when she approached the Principal-respondent No. 3, she was informed that the candidates have already been admitted on October 16, 1991.
The absence of petitioner became a ground for the respondents to admit some one else in preference to her.
A representation was made by the petitioner to the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak wherein the action of the respondents was termed to be arbitrary.
It was further represented that the persons, lower in merit, had been admitted.
It is on the abovesaid facts that petitioner has sought the relief, as indicated above.
3.
The cause of the petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been pleaded that the date of interview was changed by issuing a public notice in the Dainik Tribune and India Express which was so published on October 7, 1991 and inasmuch as the petitioner did not attend the interview on the adjourned date, she was rightly ignored.
4.
It requires to be mentioned that vide interim orders passed by this court, petitioner was provisionally admitted to the course in question and the said order was passed on November 29, 1991.
The course is stated to be of two years' duration.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the cause of the petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition deserves to be allowed.
A specific averment was made in the writ petition that the persons lower in merit had been admitted but the same has not been specifically denied.
It, thus follows that petitioner was ignored and some one else lower in merit to her, was admitted to the course even though the interview was a mere formality.
Assuming that the date of interview was changed and public notice was issued in the Tribune.
It was, in the circumstances, incumbent upon the respondents to have given a personal notice to the persons who were in merit commensurate to the seats available.
The petitioner was within 31 seats which were required to be filled.
In any case petitioner cannot be blamed for not having attended the interview as it was not possible to keep track of the newspaper particularly when the interview date had since already been fixed and it was informed to the petitioner.
Be that as it may, the petitioner having been admitted provisionally and having completed the course, it will be too harsh to deny her the benefit of orders of this Court, and, thus, the provisional admission given to her is ordered to be regularised.
The petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.