MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of twenty Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8741, 8742, 8743, 8744, 8745, 8746, 8747, 8748, 8749, 8750, 8751, 8752, 8753, 8754, 8755, 8756, 8757, 8758, 8759 and 8760 of 1992 filed by the Farm Guidance Officer of the Central Cooperative Bank Ltd Challenging the decision dated 24th June 1992 of the Haryana State Cooperative Apex Bank Ltd Chandigarh to abolish the posts of Farm Guidance Officers with immediate effect, thereby resulting in the termination of the services of the petitioners by making necessary payment equivalent to four months' pay through demand draft dated 24th June 1992 for Rs. 15,680 to each of the petitioners.
2.
The Haryana State Cooperative Apex Bank Ltd Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the 'Apex Bank') is a society registered under the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
The affairs of the Apex Bank are controlled by the Board of Directors constituted according to the by-laws framed under the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The main function of the Apex Bank is banking, that is to grant loans and effect recoveries thereof, for agricultural purposes, professions, small scale industries, cottage industries etc.
It has a cadre of Assistant Managers/Development Officers for performing the duties of banking and development work undertaken by the Apex Bank.
3.
On 25th March, 1988 additional posts were created in the category of Assistant Managers/Development Officers and Farm Guidance Officers.
Against these posts the petitioners were appointed as Farm Guidance Officers on 25th June 1990.
Since the posts of Farm Guidance Officers had been created and the incumbents thereto were appointed in the category of Assistant Managers Development Officers, they were assigned the duties of assessing the requirements of fertilizers for different crops, seeds, pesticides, weedicides etc ... and to ensure the preparation of claims for subsidy and lodging the same with the Agriculture Department.
However, on 24th June 1992 (Annexure P.34) the Apex Bank found that the posts of Farm Guidance Officers had very little positive impact on the activities of the Apex Bank Central Coop.
Banks and the primary societies and as the Farm Guidance Officers did not serve any useful purpose it further found that there was absolutely no necessity to have the team of Farm Guidance Officers.
Consequently the posts of Farm Guidance Officers were abolished.
As a result thereof, the termination orders of the petitioners who were incumbents of those posts were issued.
4.
Though at the time of filing the writ petition the impugned decision to abolish the posts of Farm Guidance Officers had been challenged, on a variety of grounds including mala fides of the various functionaries of the State Government and the political over tone around but at the time of hearing of the case the learned counsel for petitioners confined the challenge only to the contention that the utility of the posts of Farm Guidance Officers was very much there and the decision to abolish the same was arbitrary.
5.
In response to the writ petition separate written statements have been filed by the respondents in which allegations of mala fides have been denied.
The decision to abolish the posts of Farm Guidance Officers has been justified on the ground that the utility of these posts to the Apex Bank was very limited as the work was being done more effectively by the incumbents of other posts.
It has further been pleaded that the decision had been taken after thorough deliberations by the Board of Directors and there was no arbitrariness about the same.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and we do not find any legal infirmity in the impugned decision by which the posts of Farm Guidance Officers have been abolished.
In fact after closely going through the records of the writ petitions which run into more than two hundred pages, we find that though the Apex Bank had been in existence since long, yet the posts of Farm Guidance Officers had been created only a couple of years ago, on experimental basis.
With the experience gained during the last two years, the Board of Directors found that no useful purpose would be served by retaining the posts of Farm Guidance Officers and without them the functioning of the Central Cooperatives Banks was not going to be stalled or adversely affected.
Many of the Central Cooperative Banks had stated that these posts had been created by the Apex Bank without their consent or proposal by the Central Coop.
Banks, and as such, it was a burden on them.
It has further been brought on the record that the annual financial burden of these officers was twelve lakh rupees whereas the utility of these posts had been found to be negligible.
It is further found that the posts of Farm Guidance Officers have very little positive impact on the activities of the Apex Bank/Central Co-Operative Banks and the primary societies, as that the work of ensuring maximum use of fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, etc. was already being performed by the Agriculture Department of the State.
7.
In view of the material on the record, we are satisfied that the decision to abolish the posts of Farm Guidance Officers was not an arbitrary exercise of power but the decision had been arrived at by the competent authorities after due deliberations and adequate appraisal of the relevant considerations.
Since the petitioners happened to be the incumbents of these posts which were abolished, there was no option with the Apex Bank, but to terminate their services by complying with the necessary provisions and after making the requisite payment equivalent to four months pay through demand draft of Rs. 15,680/- to a each petitioner simultaneously that is on 24th June, 1992 itself.
8.
Faced with the aforesaid factual and legal,position Mr. JN Kaushal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioners, vehemently contended that as the posts of Farm Guidance Officers had been created equivalent to the rank and status of the posts of Assistant Managers Development Officers the same should be considered as part and parcel of this category and in fact, an integral part of the cadre of Assistant Managers/Development Officers.
Advancing the argument further Mr. Kaushal contended that with the creation of twenty posts of Farm Guidance Officers, there was an increase in the cadre strength of Assistant Managers/Development Officer and therefore if the posts of Farm Guidance Officers have now been abolished the incumbents of these Posts should be absorbed by accommodating them on the posts of Assistant Managers/Developments Officers, as the duties of the Farm Guidance Officers have almost been same or similar and on some occasions these posts have been inter-transferable also.
9.
We have considered the argument in detail but with respect we do not find any merit in the same.
The decision to create twenty posts of Farm Guidance Officers was only for a specific purpose and it was not as a measure of increase in the existing cadre-strength of Assistant Managers/Development Officers.
It was wholly a new experiment which the Apex Bank wanted to undertake by appointing the Farm Guidance Officers, which the Bank later on found as ill-advised.
The abolition was of the sub-cadre of Farm Guidance Officers and not the abolition of the main cadre of Assistant Managers/Development Officers.
Despite all this, if the Apex Bank wants to utilise the services of the petitioners against the posts of Assistant Managers/Development Officers or on some other posts against which these officers with their academic and technical qualifications coupled with their experience can be useful this Court can certainly have no objections; but the petitioners cannot claim the issuance of a writ of mandamus from this Court, for that purpose.
10.
Consequently, the writ petitions are dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.