MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner is serving as Executive Engineer in the Irrigation Department of Haryana, Respondent No. 2 - Shri Devki Nandan Verma, was Superintending Engineer in this Department before 31st July, 1992, on which date he retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation, that is, 58 years.
2.
According to the service record maintained by the respondent-State of Haryana, respondent No. 2 - Shri Devki Nandan Verma, was appointed by direct recruitment as Assistant Engineer/Temporary Engineer a Class-II Service in the Irrigation Department, Haryana, on 10th May, 1961.
At the time of his entry into service, he had declared his date of birth as 17th July, 1934, and produced his Matriculation Certificate issued by the Panjab University in which also 17th July, 1934, was mentioned as his date of birth, and on the basis thereof he was to attain the age of 58 years on 17th July, 1992, and to retire from service on 31st July, 1992.
Respondent No. 2 continued to serve as such and after his allocation to the present State of Haryana he was promoted to Class-I Service against the posts of Executive Engineer and Superintending Engineer in due course of time.
3.
Despite this, respondent No. 2 filed a civil suit in the Court of Senior Subordinate Judge, Chandigarh, for seeking declaration for the change of date of birth from 17th July, 1934 to 14th June, 1936.
When the petitioner to the present petition - Shri SC Jhari and other employees of the Haryana Irrigation Department came to know about the pendency of the suit, they filed an application under Order 1, Rule 10, Code of Civil Procedure, for being impleaded as defendants to the suit, since they apprehended that with the suit being decreed, their rights for further promotion would be adversely affected.
So far as the respondent-State of Haryana was concerned, the suit was being effectively contested by it.
But during the pendency thereof, on a representation made by respondent No. 2 - Shri Devki Nandan Verma, plaintiff in the civil suit, the State Government accepted his claim vide its order dated 18th June, 1992 (Annexure P 10), and ordered the change of entry of his date of birth from 17th July, 1934 to 14th June, 1936, so as to enable him to continue in service for another two years and not to retire him on 31st July, 1992.
It is this order the quashing whereof is the subject matter of the present writ petition.
4.
On 20th July, 1992, while issuing notice of motion, operation of the impugned order, Annexure P 10, was stayed by the Motion Bench, and on 30th July, 1992, the writ petition was admitted to DB and the stay order was allowed to continue.
5.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondents have filed separate written statements in which it has been pleaded that the State Government was competent to change the entry with regard to date of birth of respondent No. 2 and for that matter any other Government servant, as and when the Government thinks appropriate or justified on the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
It has further been pleaded that there is no bar in the way of the State Government in entertaining repeated representations for changing the entry with regard to date of birth, and the rejection of earlier representations as also the afflux of time, do not debar the State Government from exercising its administrative jurisdiction.
Still further, the respondents plead that while ordering the change of entry of date of birth of an employee, the State Government is not obliged to afford hearing to other employees of the Department, even though they might be adversely affected by such a change.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, we find that having entered into service on 10th May, 1961, it was after rendering about 25 years' service under the State Government that respondent No. 2, for the first time, made a representation for the change of entry of his date of birth, on 9th October, 1986.
This date of birth was based on his Matriculation Certificate issued by the Panjab University on 15th May, 1954, and had been so declared by respondent No. 2 himself at the time of his initial entry into service.
The representation was duly considered by the State Government, but was found without any merit and was rejected on 20th April, 1987.
The matter assumed finality so far as the claim of respondent No. 2 was concerned.
Thereafter, when the civil suit was filed by respondent No. 2, the State Government decided to contest the same and to stick to their earlier stand, which according to their affidavit, they actually did by effectively pursing it.
In this situation, there was hardly any occasion or legal justification with the State Government to suddenly review its earlier stand and to issue the impugned order changing the entry regarding date of birth of respondent No. 2, thereby rendering the suit as infructuous.
Moreover, even if it is assumed for the argument sake that the State Government has to competence and jurisdiction to review an earlier administrative order, still for the sake of uniformity, consistency and in the interest of finality of administrative decision, there must be some fresh cogent and convincing material available with the State Government to justify a review or reconsideration of its earlier decision.
In the instant case, no administrative exigency or fresh material had come into existence which might have necessitated the issuance of the impugned order, nor was any public interest going to be served by passing the said order.
The impugned order, therefore, in our considered view, being wholly arbitrary and untenable in law, deserves to be quashed.
7.
Otherwise also, once it had come to the notice of the State Government that other officers of the Haryana Irrigation Department, whose ambitions aspirations and expectations were adversely affected, had got themselves impleaded as defendants in the civil suit and were also requesting the State Government not to accede the demand of respondent No. 2, which had already been considered and rejected by it earlier, it was incumbent on the respondents to afford to the employees concerned an opportunity of being heard before taking a decision in favour of respondent No. 2 - Shri Devki Nandan Verma.
After all, it was also the duty of the State Government to show regard to the ambitions, aspirations and expectations of other employees of the Department, who had been eagerly waiting for their promotion, before granting extension to the officers nearing retirement or making any similar change having the effect of postponing the chances of promotion of other employees or affecting their service prospects adversely.
Since neither the petitioner nor persons similarly situated, who were parties to the civil suit filed by respondent No. 2, had been afforded an opportunity of being heard, before the impugned order was passed such an order is certainly liable to be struck down being violative of the principles of natural justice.
8.
Resultantly, we allow this petition, quash the impugned order dated 18th June, 1992 (Annexure P10), and leave the parties to pursue their litigation, if so advised, in the civil Court.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.