Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - In these two Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4098 and 9863 of 1992 the issues are common.
These can, therefore, be disposed of by one order.
The facts as emanating from CWP No. 4098 of 1992 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as Clerk-cum-Cashier in the Punjab National Bank on December 21, 1978.
At that time, the post carried a pay scale of Rs. 540-1060.
In April, 1989 this pay scale was revised and raised to Rs. 900-2835 w.e.f.
November 1, 1987.
On March 13, 1990, the petitioner was promoted from the post of Clerk-cum-Cashier to the Junior Management Grade Scale I At the time of his promotion, the post in this rank carried a pay scale of Rs. 2100-4020.
In the order of his promotion, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1, it was mentioned that "you have been selected for promotion as Officer in Junior Management Grade Scale-I viz. Rs. 2100-120-4020 on the following terms and conditions.
Your fitment in JMG Scale -I shall be conveyed subsequently."
Vide letter dated May 30, 1990, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P.3, the petitioner was informed regarding the fitment of his salary.
It was observed that "the subject has been placed in Rs. 2940/- as Basic pay w.e.f.
19.3.1990.
However, the date of Annual Graded Increment will be the same as was in clerical cadre."
Subsequently, the bank issued a circular vide letter dated December 12, 1991, by which a revised formula for fixation of pay was prescribed.
Apprehending that the petitioner's pay was likely to be reduced, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A two-fold submission has been made.
Firstly, it has been averred that the respondents cannot reduce the petitioner's emoluments except after hearing him.
Secondly, it has been averred that by an executive order the employer cannot retrospectively take away the vested rights.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been averred by way of preliminary objection that the writ petition is not maintainable and the petitioner has tried to mislead this Court by giving wrong averments.
It has been further stated that vide order dated December 21, 1990, the petitioner's basic pay has been refixed.
I have heard Mr. JS Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. GS Bajwa for the respondents.
4.
It is well settled that no order which adversely affects the civil rights of an employee can be passed affects without grant of a due and reasonable opportunity.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner's pay was actually fixed at Rs. 2940/- vide order dated May 30, 1990.
If at any stage it was considered necessary to revise this order and to reduce the petitioner's pay, it was incumbent on the respondents to give him a due and a reasonable opportunity.
If such an opportunity were to be granted, the petitioner could have shown that an executive order cannot operate to the prejudice of an employee retrospectively.
He could have further shown that the settlement noticed in the circular of the Bank, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6 was not applicable to him as he had ceased to be a member of the Employees' Federation which had entered into the agreement as a result of which the new formula had been circulated by the Bank.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents contends that initially the petitioner's pay was fixed only on tentative basis and, therefore, the bank had a right to revise it.
This assertion is not borne out from the order dated May 30, 1990.
It does not show that the petitioner's pay has been fixed provisionally.
6.
Mr. JS Khehar states that the petitioner's basic pay has in fact been reduced from Rs. 2940/- to Rs. 2700/-.
This reduction of emoluments was violative of the principles of natural justice.
7.
Accordingly, the action of the respondents in reducing the petitioner's basic pay is set aside.
It would, however, be open for the Bank to redecide the matter after giving the petitioner a due and a reasonable opportunity.In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.