KP Bhandari, J - Vide order dated April 10, 1992, I had allowed the writ petition and passed the following order :  "For the reasons to be recorded separately, the writ petition is allowed, the order, Annexure P/1, cancelling the candidature and result of BA Part I of the petitioner is quashed and a writ of mandamus is issued to the respondent-University to declare the result of BA Part I of the petitioner within one week from today.
The petitioner will submit his admission form for appearing in BA Part II examination within ten days from today together with the fee to the Principal, AS College for Women, Khanna who will immediately forward the same to the University.
The University is directed to entertain the admission form of the petitioner and allow him to appear in BA Part II examination if the petitioner has qualified the BA Part I examination or is placed in the compartment, as the case may be, and issue the necessary Roll Number before the commencement of the examination.
A copy of the order be given dasti to the counsel for the petitioner today".
Now, I proceed to give reasons in support of the judgment dated April 10, 1992.
2.
This writ petition is directed against the respondent-University for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the University to declare the result of the petitioner of BA Part I examination held in April, 1991.
3.
The petitioner appeared in plus 2 class examination held in March, 1990.
The examination was conducted by the Punjab School Education Board, SAS Nagar, Mohali (for short the 'Board').
The petitioner was placed in compartment in Maths paper.
The petitioner could appear in the examination upto March, 1991 in order to clear the compartment examination.
4.
The petitioner was granted admission in BA Part I for the Sessions 1990-91 in AS College for Women, Khanna, District Ludhiana.
The petitioner appeared in the examination conducted by the University for BA Part I examination in April, 1991.
Her roll number was 42569.
The petitioner could not clear the compartment examination and her candidature was suspended.
After the result of the compartment was declared, the petitioner applied for re-checking of the answer sheet as she could not clear the subject.
At the time of the re-checking of the paper the petitioner claimed that she was present.
It is averred in the writ petition that two parts of one of the questions were not evaluated.
In view of the above fact, the petitioner has averred in the writ petition that she made a representation to the Board.
On her representation, as a special case, the petitioner was given a chance for appearing in the compartment examination in September, 1991.
She appeared in the examination and was declared successful.
Consequently, the petitioner was declared having passed her Senior Secondary Certificate Examination Part II.
Thereupon, the petitioner applied to the University that as she has cleared the Senior Secondary Certificate Examination Part II her result of BA Part I examination be declared.
The University declined her request on the ground that she has not cleared the Senior Secondary Certificate Examination Part II in April, 1991.
The petitioner represented to the Vice Chancellor.
The Vice-Chancellor referred the matter to the Committee.
Finally the representation was declined on 1921992.
It is averred in the writ petition that provisions of Rule 31 of Punjab University Calander Volume II requiring the candidate to clear the compartment in two consecutive examinations is arbitrary and is liable to be struck down.
5.
A Division Bench of this Court consisting of MM Punchhi and MR Agnihotri, JJ in Civil Writ Petition No. 2307 of 1988 observed as under :  Written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has been filed and a copy thereof lids been given to the petitioner.
This case is squarely covered by the decision of one of us (MR Agnihotri, J) reported in 1987(2) P.L.R.
638.
The condition that there should be one year's gap between passing of the supplementary examination and the final examination was held to be arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution in the said case.
Herein the same one year rule is a stumbling block in the career of the petition.
He could not clear his Pre-University Examination held in April, 1987.
He could do so in the Supplementary Examination held in September, 1987.
As permitted under the rules the petitioner was allowed to pursue his studies in BA Part II and he was successful in that examination.
Now, the hurdle has been put on the petitioner in BA Part II examination, because one year gap was not completed after passing the Supplementary Examination in the Pre-University and the final examination of BA I.
The condition having been held to be arbitrary, the candidature of the petitioner to BA II Examination would stand regularised.
We, accordingly, allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to issue roll number to the petitioner to appear in the BA Part II Examination Scheduled to be held on 9th April, 1988.
Let the needful be done forthwith."
It is important to note that candidature of the petitioner was never cancelled.
It was merely suspended.
The petitioner was permitted to clear the Senior Secondary Certificate Examination Part II by the Board on her representation.
It is also significant to note that the petitioner has secured provisional admission in BA Part II Examination in AS College for Women, Khanna.
6.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of Punjab School Education Board.
Written statement has also been filed on behalf of the Panjab University by the Registrar.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the present case is squarely covered by the decision of the Division Bench of this Court rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 2307 of 1988.
Further the result of the petitioner was merely suspended.
On her representation a special chance was given to her to appear in the examination.
In these circumstances, there is no justification not to declare the result of the petitioner of BA Part I Examination held in April, 1991.
Action of the respondent-University being arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
8.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.
Order Annexure P/1 cancelling the candidature and result of BA Part I Examination of the petitioner is quashed and a writ of mandamus is issued to the respondent-University to declare the result of BA Part I of the petitioner.
The petitioner will submit her admission form for appearing in BA Part II Examination within ten days to the Principal, AS College for Women, Khanna.
The Principal will forward the admission form to the University.
The University is directed to allow the petitioner to appear in BA Part II Examination if the petitioner has qualified the BA Part I Examination or is placed in the compartment, as the case may be, and issue the necessary roll number before the commencement of the examination.
Petition allowed.