KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner Dr. (Mrs.) Jagdish Chhatwal, PCMS-I, has filed the present writ petition challenging the order of pre-mature retirement dated June 6, 1989 (Annexure P-7).
It is averred in the writ petition that the petitioner, while on duty, was involved in a car accident and sustained head injury.
She remained in coma for one and a half years.
It is also averred that the petitioner wa's awarded State Award for her performance in family planning.
It is further averred that there was a move to compulsorily retire the petitioner on attaining the age of 55 years.
On coming to know about this, the petitioner submitted a representation to the Chief Minister, Punjab.
The Chief Minister passed the following order :-  "I agree that her record of service gives no cause for satisfaction.
However, considering the compassionate circumstances, particularly the physical and mental impairment caused to her in a road accident while she was going back after receiving a State Award for doing excellent work in family planning, I am inclined to view her case with sympathy.
She may be allowed to continue in service for the present and case be reviewed a gain after one year."
Thereafter the petitioner continued in service.
Suddenly, the petitioner was served with the order of compulsory retirement dated March 3, 1988 (Annexure P-5).
This order is purported to have been issued under Rule 3(1)(b) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 (for short 'the Rules'), Vide Annexure P-5 three months' notice was given to the petitioner.
However, on the face of this order, it is plainly averred that keeping in view the service record and performance of the petitioner, her continuance in Government service is not in public interest.
Thereupon the petitioner submitted a representation.
This order was kept in abeyance for over one year by the government, but suddenly vide order dated June 6, 1989 (Annexure P-7), the petitioner was retired from service with immediate effect.
Before passing the order of compulsory retirement (Annexure P-7), the petitioner was not served any notice nor she was paid three months' pay in lieu of notice as contemplated by Rule 3(1) (a) of the Rules.
It is also averred in the writ petition that a vigilance enquiry was initiated against the petitioner, but nothing was found against her.
The vigilance enquiry was dropped on October 9, 1987, and she was duly informed.
According to the petitioner, there wore certain influential persons who were bent upon harming her.
The petitioner was served a charge-sheet Annexure P-1.
She submitted her reply to the charge-sheet (Annexure P-2).
Thereafter an enquiry officer was appointed vide order Annexure P-3.
Subsequently, on January 31, 1989, the enquiry officer was changed vide order Annexure P-4.
The enquiry did not make any progress.
In the writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the validity of the order (Annexure P-7) on various grounds.
2.
The State has filed written statement through Dr. Ram Lal, Additional Director, Health Services, Punjab.
They have justified the order of compulsory retirement.
3.
Mr. T S Doabia, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted that there was a move to compulsorily retire the petitioner, but on her representation the Chief Minister, Punjab, did not approve the move and ordered that she should be allowed to continue in service for a year.
It is submitted that there was nothing against her, but in spite of that the petitioner was retired vide order dated March 3, 1988 (Annexure P-5).
The petitioner submitted representation against the same and on her representation the petitioner was allowed to continue in service.
But suddenly she was compulsory retired on June 6, 1989 vide order Annexure P-7.
It is submitted that once on the representation of the petitioner, she was allowed to continue in service for over one and a half years after the issuance of notice (Annexure P-5), this notice stood superseded by the act and conduct of the government in allowing the petitioner to continue in service.
If any order of compulsory retirement was to be passed on June 6, 1989, it was obligatory on the part of the government to serve three months' notice or give three months' salary in lieu of notice as contemplated by Rule 3 of the Rules.
It is submitted that the order of compulsory retirement is plainly invalid being contrary to the mandatory provisions, of the Rules.
4.
The learned counsel for the State has not been able to justify how after allowing the petitioner to continue in service for over one and a half years after the issuance of notice of compulsory retirement dated March 3, 1988 (Annexure P-5), the petitioner could suddenly be retired on June 6, 1989, without service of notice or allowing three months' salary to her, as provided in the Rules.
5.
I find considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In my opinion once on her representation the petitioner was allowed to continue in service for over a year after service of notice dated March 3, 1988 (Annexure P-5), the said notice stood lapsed.
If the petitioner was to be retired on June 6, 1989, it was obligatory to serve on the petitioner notice or give three months' pay in lieu thereof as contemplated by the Rules.
In this view of the matter, the order of compulsory retirement is plainly contrary to the Rules.
6.
It has been next contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that after the Chief Minister disapproved the move for compulsory retirement and allowed the petitioner to continue in service, there was no adverse report against her for the years 1987-88 and 1988-89.
Accordingly, the order of compulsory retirement was not justified.
It is further contended that on the date the order of compulsory retirement was passed, the petitioner had hardly one year left for attaining the age of retirement and according to the instructions dated June 22, 1981.
(Annexure P-8) no order of compulsory retirement can be passed one year preceding the age, of superannuation.
It is also emphasised that the petitioner was awarded State Award and this laudable work done by her has not been kept in view while passing the impugned order,  7.
I find that the order of compulsory retirement not justified in this case because after the passing of the order by the Chief Minister, Punjab, there was nothing on record which may justify the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
In addition, the petitioner had earned State-level Award for her outstanding performance in the family planning work.
In this view of the matter, it could not be said that the petitioner was a dead-wood and could not function as a Doctor.
The order of compulsory retirement, in this view of the matter, is also bad being wholly unjustified and contrary to the instructions.
8.
Lastly, it is contended that the order of compulsory retirement is not bona fide.
The order has not been passed in bona fide exercise of the statutory powers.
Firstly, a vigilance enquiry was instituted against the petitioner.
Nothing was found in the vigilance enquiry and the enquiry was dropped on October 9, 1987.
Thereafter, again a charge-sheet was given vide Annexure P-1.
The petitioner submitted her reply Annexure P-2.
The enquiry proceedings did not make any headway.
Suddenly the petitioner has been retired from service on June 6, 1989 vide order of compulsory retirement could be passed without dropping the charges.
In the circumstances of the case, the order is by way of punishment and violates the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution because the petitioner was not given any reasonable opportunity to show-cause before passing the impugned order.
The counsel for the petitioner, in particular, had drawn my attention to order of compulsory retirement dated March 3, 1988 (Annexure P-5).
It is submitted that in this order it is stated that after consideration the record and performance of the petitioner, the order of compulsory retirement has been passed.
It is submitted that the expression by considering the record and performance of the government servant her continuance in government service is not in public interest, casts a stigma on the performance of the petitioner as a public servant.
For this reason also, the order (Annexure P-7) read with Annexure P-5, shows that the order has been passed by way of punishment without affording the petitioner an opportunity of being heard.
Reliance has been placed on the decisions of the Supreme Court in Jagdish Mitter v. The Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 449 and State of Uttar Pradesh v. Madan Mohan Nagar, AIR 1967 SC 1260 in support of the proposition that if the order of termination, on the face of it, casts a stigma against a public servant, then the order is by way of punishment.
In the latter case, the order of compulsory retirement was passed stating that the employee had outlived his utility.
This expression was construed to be stigma by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court.
In my view, the order (Annexure P-7) read with Annexure P-5 also casts a stigma on the petitioner.
As the order had been passed by way of punishment, it was obligatory on the government to afford the petitioner a reasonable opportunity for showing cause.
No such opportunity was given and, therefore, the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution were clearly violated in this case.
In addition, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that once the Chief Minister allowed the petitioner to continue and disapproved the move for compulsory retirement, no fresh material had come to notice which may justify the retirement of the petitioner.
The Government, after the fall of popular government, has only tried to circumvent the earlier order of the Chief Minister and passed the impugned order of compulsory retirement.
Considering the overall facts of the case, in particular when the petitioner has won State Award, it cannot be said that the petitioner as a doctor was dead-wood and her continuance in service was not in public interest.
It is contended that, on the facts of the present case, the order is also arbitrary, unreasonable, capricious and is hit by the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution.
I find considerable force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Nothing has been brought to my notice by the learned counsel for the State that for the year 1988-89 there was anything adverse against the petitioner.
He has also not been able to explain why the petitioner's performance on the basis of which she was awarded State Award has not been considered by the Government while passing the impugned order.
In this view of the matter, the order of compulsory retirement in the present case is arbitrary, unreasonable and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
8.
For the aforesaid reasons, this writ petition is allowed with costs.
A writ of certiorari is issued, the impugned order of compulsory retirement (Annexure P-7) is quashed and the respondents are directed to allow the petitioner all the consequential benefits of pay and allowances etc. with 12 per cent interest within three months from today.
Counsel's fee Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.