RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who is a Constable in the Haryana Police Force, was undergoing Lower School Course at the Police Training College, Madhuban (in short PTC).
He was allegedly found in possession of some unauthorised handwritten notes on search conducted by one Shri Balkar Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, on 19th March, 1990, when the examination of Police Science Paper I was going on.
The then Deputy Inspector General of Police/Director, Police Training College, Madhuban, passed an order on 27th March, 1990 (Annexure P-1.)
that on the basis of the above said allegations, the petitioner was being sent back from the Lower School Course with immediate effect and the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat was asked to initiate departmental enquiry against the petitioner.
2.
A departmental enquiry was conducted by the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat, on the basis of the report submitted by the Director, PTC.
The petitioner was exonerated in the departmental enquiry and the case against the petitioner was filed by the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat.
In the departmental enquiry, Shri Balkar Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, had also appeared.
The report that was made by said Shri Balkar Singh on 19th March, 1990, on the basis of which, the Director, PTC had passed the order on 27th March, 1990, reads as under :-  "Constable Virender Singh No. 681/SPT of Lower School Class has produced the enclosed hand written papers during a general search conducted prior to the examination.
His case is submitted for perusal and necessary orders please."
After the exoneration of the petitioner by the Enquiry Officer, he made a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police that his result of the Police Science Paper I may be declared and in case he is failing, he may be allowed to reappear in the same.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, passed an order on 12th September, 1990 (Annexure P-1) accepting the representation of the petitioner, in which it was observed as under :-  "However, I feel that no such instructions or criteria in black and white exists with the Director PTC and if I take up directly with the Director PTC who will be of my rank though junior to me, he is likely to feel annoyed or insulted.
However I strongly recommend that Constable Virender Singh No. 681/SPT's misconduct is not of such a serious nature that he should be debarred permanently from appearing in Police Science-I paper again and if he passes in this paper and has also passed other tests/papers be declared successful in the Lower School Course at the proper seniority/list.
In the end I request that there is no need to call for the comments of Director PTC now and I recommend that he may be permitted to appear in the Police Science-I paper."
This order of Deputy Inspector General of Police, dated 12th September, 1990 was sent to the Director General of Police, Haryana.
However, the Director General of Police, Haryana, rejected the representation of the petitioner and intimation to that effect was sent to the petitioner on 10th December, 1990.
The order of the Director, PTC, dated 27th March, 1990 (Annexure P1) and the rejection of the representation of the petitioner by the Director General of Police, Haryana, vide order dated 10th December, 1990 (Annexure P-3) are the orders under challenge in the present writ petition.
3.
When this writ petition was admitted, the Motion Bench directed the respondents to declare the result of the petitioner on the basis of the examination he had already taken.
The petitioner's result was declared in pursuance of the order of the Motion Bench and according to the result so declared, he was required to reappear in the Police Science Paper 1 of the Lower School Course.
The petitioner filed Civil Misc.
Application No. 2594 of 1991 to allow the petitioner to appear in the reappear paper.
This Court passed an order on 16th April, 1991, that as an interim measure, the respondents should permit the petitioner to sit in the examination of Police Science Paper I of the Lower School Course, but the result of the said paper may not be declared.
This was however made subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner was punished by sending him back from the Lower School Course with immediate effect by the order of the PTC dated 27th March, 1990 (Annexure P-1) but the said order was passed in complete violation of the principles of natural justice as no opportunity of hearing was granted before passing the said order.
He further submitted that in the enquiry held by the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat, he was exonerated and even the report of Shri Balkar Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, on the basis of which, the order, Annexure P-1 was passed, does not indicate any unfair means on the part of the petitioner.
The counsel went on to submit that in fact the Deputy Inspector General of Police had, in very strong wording recommended that since the petitioner was not guilty of any unfair means, his Police Science Paper I should be assessed and if he passes in the said paper and has already passed in the other paper, then he be declared successful in the Lower School Course.
He further argued that no reasons have been given by the Director General of Police in the order dated 10-12-1990 (Annexure P-3) as to why the petitioner's representation was being rejected.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents relied upon Clause 310 of PTC Manual to submit that an examinee who is detected copying from another candidate or from unauthorised book or notes or he is found in possession of such book or notes etc. shall be normally liable to dismissal, the Principal shall forthwith disqualify the candidate from taking any further examination.
For ready reference, Clause 310 is reproduced below :  "310 An examinee who is detected copying from another or from unauthorised books or notes or is found in possession of such books or notes for the purpose or is noticed facilitating another in copying or using any other unfair means, shall be normally liable to dismissal.
The Principal shall forthwith disqualify such a trainee from taking further examination."
According to the learned counsel, the very fact that an examinee is detected using unfair means, the Principal of the PTC has to disqualify such a trainee from taking further examination.
It may also entail dismissal.
On the basis of the above Clause, learned counsel submitted that there is no need to give any opportunity of hearing or show cause notice before passing the impugned order.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this writ petition is liable to succeed.
Clause 310 of the PTC Manual pre-supposes the detection of use of unfair means by a candidate.
This detection and the finding regarding use of unfair means has to be arrived at after complying with the rules of natural justice.
Whether a person is guilty or nor, has to be based on some material evidence, which has to be put to the delinquent official/officer, who may be able to rebut the same.
It is by now well settled that such an order of disqualification, which entails penal consequences, has to be passed after complying with the rules of natural justice.
Admittedly, no opportunity of hearing etc, was granted to the petitioner before passing the order, Annexure P-1 by the Director, PTC on 27th March, 1990.
7.
Apart from the above, I also find that the Superintendent of Police, Sonepat, who held the departmental enquiry, exonerated the petitioner.
Not only that, from the bare perusal of the report of Shri Balkar Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police, dated 19th March, 1990 (already reproduced above) shows that the alleged incriminating papers were produced by the petitioner himself during the general search conducted prior to the examination.
In other words, nothing was detected during the course of examination.
Further more, the Director General of Police has not given any reason whatsoever as to why the petitioner's representation that his result of paper in question should be declared and in case he is failing, he should be allowed to reappear, was rejected.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and the orders, Annexure P-1 dated 27th March, 1990 and that of the Director General of Police, Haryana, dated 10th December, 1990 (Annexure P-3) are hereby quashed.
The result of the petitioner of the 'Police Science Paper I', in which he reappeared in pursuance of the order of this Court, be now declared and his seniority should be determined in accordance with the Rules pertaining to those candidates who pass some paper(s) in the reappear examination.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.