NK Sodhi, J - The Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi conducted an All India Pre-Medical/Pre-Dental Examination in May, 1991 for admission to the MBBS/BDS Course.
in different Medical Colleges in the country for filling up the open seats meant for All India Quota.
Petitioners herein appeared in the said examination and having fared well, were selected for admission under the All India Scheme for the said course.
They were informed that their selection was subject to their satisfying the conditions of eligibility and that for further details they were advised to contact the Director General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi.
The Director General of Health Services then admitted them to the MBBS Course at Shri Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot in the State of Punjab which is affiliated to the Punjabi University, Patiala and sent to them a communication dated November 18, 1991 in this regard.
Petitioners were further directed to report to the Principal of the said college latest by December 9, 1991.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioners reported to the Principal much before the last date fixed for the purpose and joined the said college in the last week of November, 1991.
It is pertinent to observe here that although the result of the All India Pre-Medical Entrance Examination was conveyed to the petitioners by letters dated July 11, 1991, yet the Director General of Health Services who was to admit the students in different Medical Colleges as per their merit and options, did not communicate to them about their admission till November, 1991.
After joining the Medical College the petitioners have been pursuing their studies and have attended the classes regularly.
The final First Professional Examination was to be held by the Punjabi University in January, 1993.
The Principal of the College put up a notice dated October 30, 1992 requiring the students of the First Professional Course to fill up their examination forms and deposit the necessary fee.
When the petitioner approached the office they were informed that they could not be permitted to sit in the said examination as, according to the regulations, they had not been on the roles of the College throughout the period of 1-1/2 years preceding the date of the examination.
It was at this stage that they filed the present writ petition and were permitted by an interim order of this Court to appear in the First Professional MBBS examination which commenced on January 15, 1993.
2.
In response to the notice issued to the respondent, the Principal of the College has filed a written statement in which all the material facts stated by the petitioners have been admitted.
It is also admitted that the petitioners joined the college in the last week of November in pursuance of the allocation made by the Director General of Health Services, New Delhi as per his letter dated November 18, 1991.
What has been stated by the Principal in defence is that the last date for admission under the Pre-Medical Test as fixed by the Punjabi University, Patiala was October 31, 1991 and since the petitioners were admitted after the last date, their cases for admission were referred to the said University which, while according permission of late admission, laid down the following two conditions for them to become eligible to appear in the First Professional MBBS Examination :  (i) of having attended not less than 75% of the full course of lectures delivered and practicals held separately in each of the subjects of the examination provided that deficiency in the number of lectures may be condoned by the Principals as decided by the Academic Council;  (ii) of having undergone for not less than 1-1/2 years teaching in studies in the subjects of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry.
It is also the case of the Principal that since the petitioners have not completed 1-1/2 academic years' of study in the subjects of Anatomy, Physiology, Biochemistry, they are ineligible.
Reliance for this stand was placed on Ordinances 3 and 7 of the Punjabi University Ordinances.
Relevant portion of Ordinance 7 is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :  "Ordinance 7 :  This examination shall be held twice a year in the months of January and May or on such other dates as may be fixed by the Academic Council and shall be open to any student who :  (i) has attained the age of 17 years on December 31 of the year of admission to the colleges admitted to the privileges of this University in the Faculty of Medicine for the degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery;  (ii) has been on the rolls of a medical college admitted to the privileges of this University throughout 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination;  (iii) xx xx xx  (iv) xx xx xx"  3.
Having heard counsel for the petitioners and after perusing the written statements filed on behalf of the respondents, I am of the view the stand taken by the Principal as also by the Punjabi University Patiala (though no return has been filed on its behalf) as referred to in the written statement of the Principal, is most unreasonable and their action highly arbitrary.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioners joined the college in the last week of November, 1991 when the last date for admission to the Course was over.
This delay in their admission occurred not because of any fault of theirs but because the Director General of Health Services allocated them to the respondent-Colleges after the last date for admission was over.
Petitioners cannot be made to suffer for the fault, if any, of the Director General of Health Services.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners after joining the college have complied with the requirement of attending 75% of the total lectures delivered and practicals held by attending the classes in each of the subjects of the examination regularly as also the extra classes held for the purpose.
The only reason why they were not bring permitted to appear in the examination was that they had not been on the rolls of the college throughout 1-1/2 academic years preceding the examination.
This condition in the very nature of things could not be satisfied in the present case.
Even the students who might have joined some time in October, 1991 i.e. before the last date of admission would become ineligible as they too would not be on the rolls of the college throughout a period of 1-1/2 years preceding the examination.
In my opinion, clause (ii) of Ordinance 7 of the aforesaid Ordinances can only be directory in nature and the University has been treating it as such.
If it is held otherwise, many students admitted even before the last date of admission would become ineligible.
Again, the University imposed a condition that they must complete 1-1/2 years' study preceding the date of examination.
I fail to understand how such a condition could be imposed when the University knew that the petitioners had joined in the end of November, 1991 and could not possibly complete 18 months of study.
If the University thought that clause (ii) of Ordinance 7 was mandatory, it would not have permitted/approved the late admission of the petitioners.
4.
There is yet one more grievance of the petitioners.
According to them, there were many students who had been admitted to the Course before the last-date of admission and who had not completed 18 months of study immediately preceding the commencement of the examination on January 15, 1993 but their forms were accepted and those students were allowed to take the examination.
The names of those students have been mentioned in para 8 of the writ petition.
The Principal of the College admits that these students did not complete the requisite period of studies before the commencement of the examination but justifies his own action and that of the University in allowing them to take the examination on the ground that they were admitted to the college before the last date.
This is hardly any reason and can there be anything more arbitrary than this.
One fails to understand as to what was so sacrosanct about the last date or the cut-off date as fixed by the college or the University when students from the All India Quota were allowed to be admitted after the said date and the University is approving their admission.
What, indeed, is really substance and importance is that the students should complete the requisite number of lectures before they become eligible to sit in the examination which condition the petitioners undoubtedly satisfy.
5.
For the reasons stated above, the petitioners cannot be held to be ineligible and the Principal of the College as also the University acted illegally and arbitrarily in not permitting them to take the First Professional MBBS examination.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The petitioners have taken the said examination under the interim order of this Court.
Respondents 1 and 3 are, therefore, directed to declare their result forthwith and permit them to continue with their MBBS Course in accordance with the relevant rules and regulations.
Respondents 1 and 3 will pay a sum of Rs. 1000/- to each of the petitioners as costs of this petition.
Petition allowed.