Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner is a doctor of Ayurvedic Medicine from the Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi.
He taught in various Ayurvedic institutions and ultimately joined Shri Krishna Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra as Professor on 781973.
On June 6, 1975 the said College was taken over by the Government of Haryana and was called the Sri Krishna Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra (hereinafter referred to as the Government College).
Vide orders No. 3564-2.HB.II-76/ 17619 dated 26/2751976, copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition, petitioner was appointed Professor of Pathology on regular basis w.e.f.
6.6.1975 but the Government.
A perusal of this order would show that the petitioner was appointed as Professor of Pathology on regular basis after taking approval from Haryana Public Service Commission.
On April 15, 1977, the government handed over the College for all purposes to the Rohtak University Rohtak.
Consequently, the petitioner was discharged from the service of the Haryana Government under Rule 59 Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II as applicable to the State of Haryana and employed by the University on the same terms and conditions on which he was serving the government.
A copy of the latter issued by the Registrar of the Rohtak University dated 541977, has been attached as Annexure P-2 to the petition in which it is mentioned that petitioner shall be governed by the same terms and conditions on which he was serving the Government.
The College functioned under the University from 1541977 to 3181980.
As the Principal of the College left the institution, the petitioner was given the charge of the post of Principal of the College w.e.f.
6.12.1977.
On 141980, the Government of Haryana again took over the College from the University.
Copy of the agreement regarding the terms and conditions of taking over has been appended as Annexure P-3 to the petition in which it has been provided that the employees of the College as are considered suitable by the Haryana Public Service Commission shall be taken over by the Government.
It has further been provided that "the employees whose services have already been regularised by Public Service Commission .... prior to the transfer of Sri Krishana Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra to the University are not required to be regularised again."
Vide orders dated 8.1.1981, the petitioner was appointed as Professor of Pathology, purely on ad hoc basis.
A copy of this order has been attached as Annexure P-4.
Petitioner submitted a representation on 2011981, Annexure P-5, objecting to his appointment as Professor on ad hoc basis.
According to the averments made in the petition; the representation has not been decided so far.
The grievance of the petitioner is that he was appointed as Professor of Pathology on regular basis after taking approval from the Public Service Commission; before the taking over of the College by the University and when the College was re-transferred from the University to the Government, it had been specifically mentioned in the terms of agreement that the persons whose services had already been regularised by Public Service Commission prior to the transfer of the College to University, were not required to be regularised again.
2.
Petitioner has sought a writ of mandamus from this Court on two counts; firstly to the effect that action of the respondents in appointing him on ad hoc basis is totally contrary to the terms of agreement, Annexure P-3 entered into between the University and the Government at the time of the re- transfer of the College by the University to the Government and, secondly, that the charge of acting Principal could not be taken from him.
Written statement has been filed.
Basic facts aforementioned have not been denied.
Although it has been stated that petitioner could be appointed on ad hoc basis on re-transfer of the College from the University to the Government.
3.
I have gone through the writ petition along with the Annexures attached to it and the written statement filed by the State of Haryana.
I find force in the first submission of the counsel for the petitioner.
Petitioner had been appointed vide Annexure P-1 as Professor of Pathology on regular basis w.e.f.
6.6.1975 and his appointment was made after taking approval from the Haryana Public Service Commission.
As per agreement, Annexure P-2 which was entered into between the University and the Government on the re-transfer of the College, it was mentioned that the persons who had been appointed on regular basis after taking approval from the Public Service Commission need not be regularised again.
In the given circumstances, the appointment of the petitioner on ad hoc basis by virtue of Annexure P-4 dated 8.1.1981 is bad in law being contrary to order Annexure P-1 read with agreement between the University and the Government, Annexure P-3.
Petitioner already stood appointed on regular basis after taking approval from the Haryana Public Service Commission and could not be ordered to work on ad hoc basis in the year 1981.
The action of the State Government in appointing the petitioner on ad hoc basis in the year 1981 is thus struck down being bad in law.
Petitioner would be deemed to be a regular appointee as Professor w.e.f.
6.6.1975 as ordered in Annexure P-1.
4.
Taking up the second point raised, it has been stated that the petitioner was working as Principal on 141980 when the College was re-taken by the Government from the University; that the petitioner was governed by the Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class I and II) Services (Haryana First Amendment) Rules, 1975.
Appendix `A' to these rules lays down the qualifications for the post of Principal of the Government Ayurvedic College.
The Appendix `A' thus reads as under :-  "(i) A degree (with at least five years regular course... ii) is senior-most Professor."
That on 21.1.1981 while the petitioner was discharging the duties of the office of the Principal, Shri KL Sharma, Assistant Director (Ayurveda) came to the College and asked the petitioner to hand over the charge of the office of the Principal to him.
The charge of the acting Principal was taken over by Shri KL Sharma in compliance with orders issued by the Government vide Annexure P-6.
Petitioner has impugned Annexure P-6 issued by respondents also pleading there in that petitioner was the only qualified person who could be appointed to the post of Principal and the charge of the acting Principal could not be taken from him.
In reply to this averment it has been stated in the written statement that post of Principal can be either filled in by promotion or through direct recruitment and the Government has as yet not decided as to in which manner the vacancy of the Principal is to be filled in.
The averments of the petitioner that action of the Government in not appointing him as Principal is illegal, is not correct.
I do not find much substance in the submission of the counsel for the petitioner that action of the Government in not appointing him as Principal is illegal.
Petitioner was the acting Principal and the question of qualification for appointment to the post of Principal would only arise as and when the post is filled on regular basis.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that the post could only be filled in by promotion and not by direct recruitment.
I am not expressing any opinion on this point at this stage.
It would be for the Government to make appointment in accordance with the rules framed by them.
As and when the Government acts contrary to the rules framed, it shall be open to the petitioner to challenge the same by filing a separate writ petition.
At this stage, a direction cannot be issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Principal of the College.
The relief claimed by the petitioner is pre-mature.
Counsel for the petitioner was unable to mention the developments which might have taken place in the last ten years during the pendency of the writ petition in this Court.
So the second submission of the counsel for the petitioner is rejected being without any merit.
5.
For the reasons stated above, it is directed that the petitioner be treated to be a regular appointee to the post of Professor of Pathology w.e.f.
6.6.1975 in the College.
Writ petition to that extent stands allowed.
No costs.
Order accordingly.