RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was denied admission to Diploma in Education Course for the session 1991-92, in Government Primary Teachers Training Institute, Dharla, Morni Hills, District Ambala (hereinafter referred to as Institute), against the seats reserved for the wards of Ex-Servicemen.
The course is of two years' duration.
Out of 50 seats, three seats were reserved for the dependent sons/daughters of Ex-Servicemen.
The petitioner was called for interview on 5th December, 1990.
Vide letter dated 14th May, 1991, (Annexure P-6) the petitioner was informed to be present for seeking admission in the Institute, on 22nd May, 1991 and she was told to bring the fees and the original certificates.
According to the petitioner, the above said letter meant that she stood selected for the course.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that when she went to the Institute on 23rd May, 1991, (as on 22nd May, 1991, the Institute was closed due to the death of Shri Rajiv Gandhi, Ex-Prime Minister), she was asked as to what her father was doing.
The petitioner informed the Authorities that her father was an Ex-Serviceman who after being discharged from the military service, was working as a Clerk in Government Senior Secondary School, Moth (Hissar) on ad hoc basis.
According to her it was on this basis, that she was refused admission.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
3.
According to the respondents, if an Ex-Serviceman on discharge from the Military service, takes up a Government job, then he is to be treated like any other State Government employee and his dependent sons and daughters cannot be considered for admission to the Educational Institutions by treating them as wards of Ex-Servicemen.
Reliance in this behalf has been placed on the Haryana Government Instructions, dated 1st July 1980 (copy Annexure R-1 with the written statement), relevant portion of which reads as under :-  "RESERVATION OF POSTS FOR THE CHILDREN OF EX-SERVICEMEN IN SERVICES OF THE HARYANA STATE :  "The Government has agreed that the dependents sons and daughters of Ex-servicemen, who fulfil all the conditions of qualifications, age etc. prescribed for various posts should also be considered on merit for the posts reserved for the Ex-Servicemen.
This entitlement would be available to one dependent child only.
The Government has decided that such ex-servicemen after joining the service under the State Government are like other State-Government employees, their dependent sons and daughters should not be considered for appointment to the posts reserved for Ex-Servicemen."
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the instructions relied upon by the respondents are specifically meant for giving appointment in Government service to the dependents of Ex-Servicemen and have no applicability regarding admission to the Educational Instructions.
In any case, he submitted that Instructions, Annexure R-1, relied upon by the respondents are wholly arbitrary and ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
According to the learned counsel by mere fact that the Ex-Serviceman gets a job in the Government service he does not cease to be an Ex-Serviceman and the reservation of the seats in the Educational Institutions being for the dependent children of the Ex-Servicemen, the wards of such Ex- Servicemen would be entitled to the benefit of reservation.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition is liable to succeed.
It is not disputed that the petitioner is a dependent child of an Ex-Serviceman.
The reservation of seats in the Educational Institutions was for the dependent children of Ex-Servicemen.
The instructions relied upon by the respondents are meant only for appointment to the Government service and cannot be applied to admissions in the Educational Institutions.
In this view of the matter, it is not necessary for me to go into the vires of the instructions, though prima-facie I am of the view that the instructions are arbitrary.
An Ex-Serviceman still remains an Ex- Serviceman even if he takes up a Government job after being discharged from the Military service.
Simply because, the father of such a child has taken up a Government job after being discharged from the Army, to keep the body and soul of the family together, would not deprive of the benefit of reservation to the wards of the Ex-Servicemen.
Such a person who has joined the Government service after discharge from the Military service till remains an Ex-Serviceman.
As observed above, this is my prima-facie view and I am not opening on the same finally.
Accordingly, a dependent child of an Ex- Serviceman is entitled to get admission against the reserved seat for the dependent of Ex-Serviceman, even though such Ex-Serviceman may have taken up a Government job after discharge from the Military service.
30th May, 1991, the respondents were directed to allow the petitioner to join the course at her own risk and subject to the result of the writ petition.
The petitioner had appeared in the 1st year examination in May, 1992, but her result was not declared.
However, she was allowed to join the 2nd year class of the course.
The examination of the 2nd year was to commence on 10th May, 1993.
This Court in C.M.A. No. 3317 of 1993, had passed an order that petitioner should be allowed to appear in the examination of Diploma in Education, Part-II commencing on 10th May, 1993, but the petitioner's result be not declared.
In pursuance of the said directions, the petitioner has appeared in the said examination.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner was entitled to admission in the Diploma in Education Course against the reserved seat for the dependent child of an Ex-Serviceman.
Since by virtue of the interim orders of this Court, the petitioner has appeared in Parts I and II examination of the Diploma course, the respondents are directed to declare her result of the said examinations, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.