RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Without adverting to the facts regarding service career of the petitioner prior to 1011976, it may only be noticed that in the year 1974 the Director, Health Services, Haryana, Chandigarh issued a circular to all the Chief Medical Officers in the State of Haryana with a direction to them to bring to the notice of all the Sanitary Inspectors working under their control for filling up the posts of Government Food Inspectors on ad-hoc basis.
It is averred in the writ petition and admitted by the respondents that Director Health Services had issued this circular after getting non-availability certificate from the Employment Exchange, Haryana.
Petitioner applied for the post of Government Food Inspector in response to the circular referred to above.
Petitioner was duly selected and was appointed as Govt. Food Inspector vide order dated 2081974 on ad hoc basis, but was reverted as Sanitary Inspector (which post he was holding before his appointment as Government Food Inspector on ad hoc basis), vide order dated 151975.
He was again appointed as Government Food Inspector on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
9.11.1976.
According to the terms and conditions, the appointment was purely on temporary basis and he was likely to be reverted to his original post of sanitary Inspector without assigning any reasons.
It is not disputed that the petitioner continued to hold the post uninterruptedly.
2.
On 111980 the Government of Haryana issued a Notification (Annexure P.5 to the writ petition) excluding from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (hereinafter called the 'Board') such Class-III posts as had been held for a minimum period of two years on 31121979 by the ad hoc employees who were to be regularised if they fulfilled certain conditions mentioned in the Notification (Annexure P-5).
One condition was that ad hoc employee must have completed minimum to two years service on 31121979.
The other condition was that the ad hoc appointment had been made though the agency of Employment Exchange and work and conduct of the employee sought to be regularised was overall of good category.
It was further provided in the Notification that only those employees would be considered for regularisation who possessed the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of their appointment on ad hoc basis.
3.
The precise grievance of the petitioner is that in spite of the instructions contained in Notification (Annexure P-5) dated 111980 and even sub-sequent Notification he was not being considered for regularisation in service as Government Food Inspector.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents the defence taken is that no selection committee was constituted in place of the Board while taking out the posts out of the purview of the Board and the post of Food Inspector had not been taken out of the purview of the Board.
It has further been mentioned that the petitioner had not been recruited through the Employment Exchange and he had become overage.
It has further been taken as a defence that w.e.f.
1985, it was only a science graduate who would be appointed as a Government Food Inspector.
5.
After going through the record and hearing the petitioner in person as well as counsel for the respondents I am of the view that the petitioner deserves to succeed.
It is not disputed that by 31121979 petitioner had completed more than two years, service on ad hoc basis as Government Food Inspector.
Consequently, he fulfilled the first condition of the Government Instructions contained in Notification (Annexure P-3).
By this Notification all such Class-III posts which had been held by ad hoc employees for a minimum period of two years on 31121979 were taken out of the purviews of the Board.
The post of Government Food Inspector is a Class-III post.
Consequently the post held by the petitioner on ad hoc basis for more than two years on 31121979 would be deemed to have been taken out of the purview of the Board.
A learned Single Judge of this Court in has also taken the view that under the Notification the post of Government Food Inspectors stood excluded from the purview of the Board.
As far as the question of the initial employment not being done through Employment Exchange is concerned suffice it to mention that before recruiting the petitioner non-availability certificate from the Employment Exchange was taken by the Director, Health Services Haryana as mentioned in Para 6 of the petition.
Moreover, I am of the view that after such a long lapse of time it will be too much now to insist on this condition at this stage keeping in view the experience gained by the petitioner as has been held by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1208 of 1988 decided on 1871991 in Ram Singh Food Inspector v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 10787 of 1988 decided on 21101991 in Balwan Singh Sidhy v. State of Haryana and others.
The Government accepted that judgment and regularised the petitioner in the said case.
It may be observed here that Balwan Singh-petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 10787 of 1988 was also overage.
However, Secretary to Government Haryana Health Department vide letter dated 4.9.1992 relaxed that age of Balwan Singh.
By the same letter, the age of the petitioner was also relaxed.
Copy of the letter (Memo No. 36/12/82-HB-II dated 4.9.1992) of the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana has been kept on record.
In this letter, which is addressed to the Director, General Health Services, Haryana it has been mentioned by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana that relaxation in age of S/Shri Balwan Singh and Moti Ram.
Food Inspectors is allowed and their services be now regularised under intimation to the Government.
Petitioner, who is present in person says that though Balwan Singh's services have been regularised, but no decision has been taken in regard to the petitioner.
In view of this letter the objection regarding the petitioner being overage also becomes baseless.
6.
As far as the question of qualifications is concerned, it is pertinent to mention that the day the petitioner was recruited on ad hoc basis he did fulfill the requisite qualifications as were prescribed on the said date.
If these qualifications have been amended later on, that would be no bar to the petitioner being regularised in view of the Notification dated 111980.
7.
Taking into consideration that above facts and also the letter of the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana Health Department addressed to the Director General Health Services Haryana referred to above, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to regularise the petitioner as Government Food Inspector in view of the instructions contained in the Notification dated 111980 (Annexure P/5).
Let these directions be carried out within three months from the receipt of copy of this order.
There will be no orders as to costs.
Order accordingly.