SK Jain, J - The petitioner was appointed a Hindi teacher on ad hoc basis through Employment Exchange in the Punjab Education Department.
She was appointed as such by the Principal, Government Higher Secondary School, Sangrur, vide letter dated 14111967, and since that date she is continuing in service without break.
The President of India issued order dated 3rd May, 1977 (Annexure P-2), on the basis of which the petitioner applied for being regularised as a Hindi teacher.
Since she was not being regularised the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has been filed.
2.
In para No. 2 of the writ petition, it has been stated that the petitioner is Prabhaker, BA with Hindi as one of the elective subjects and has also passed the B.Ed.
examination.
In para No. 12 of the petition it is mentioned that the post of Hindi Teacher is governed by the Punjab Educational Service Class III (School Cadre) Rules, 1995.
Under the Rules the qualification for the post of a Hindi Teacher is Prabhaker with OT certificate and that the petitioner is Prabhaker and BA, B.Ed.
She rather possessed qualification higher then the minimum required for the post of a Hindi Teacher and as such she was fit to be regularised on the basis of Annexure P-2.
It is further averred in para No. 8 that the Punjab State issued a policy circular Dated 28101980 (annexure P-3) vide which it was decided to regularise the services of all those who were working on ad hoc basis and had completed minimum period of one year's service on 3091980.
It was further directed vide this letter that the cases of such ad hoc employees who had completed three years' service but did not fulfil the prescribed condition with regard to qualifications, age or mode of their initial recruitments, their services should also be regularised in relaxation of these conditions.
According to her, other similarly situated persons had already been regularised.
She gave the specific example of Narinder Kumar, who had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1527 of 1980, which was allowed by a Single Bench of this Court on 10.10.1980 (1981 (1) S.L.R.
575).
3.
In the written statement, stand of the State is that the requisite qualification for appointment as a Hindi teacher is Matric - Prabhakar/and OT whereas the petitioner does not possess the OT certificate and therefore, her services cannot be regularised.
As regards the case of Narinder Kumar, the reply is that the facts of that case are not identical to the case in hand and that the decision given in that case was not the correct law.
4.
After giving a thoughtful consideration to the point involved in this case, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
There is no difference so far as the qualifications for regular appointment or appointment on ad hoc basis is concerned, except that whenever it is not possible to appoint in a regular manner ad hoc appointment is made but the basic qualifications are always the same.
In Annexure R-1 qualifications for the post of Hindi teacher are given under item No. 14 as under :-  " 14.
Hindi Teacher Matric, Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi) OT"  5.
According to Punjab Educational Service Class III (School Cadre) Rules 1955, the basic qualification for regular appointment is Matric Prabhakar and Oriental Training Certificate.
Therefore, the petitioner is higher qualified then requisite qualification and accordingly could not be denied regularisation on the basis of Ex-P-2.
In holding the above view I am fortified by Single Bench of this court in Narinder Kumar, Hindi Teacher v. The State of Punjab, 1981(1) SLR 575.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the petitioner as fully qualified for being appointed as a regular Hindi Teacher on the basis of Presidential order Annexure P-2 and to decide her case within two months from today.
No costs.
Petition allowed.