RS Mongia, J - Petitioner, Shri RK Madan, was appointed as a Factory Inspector in the State of Punjab on ad hoc basis in April, 1970, and was made regular through the Punjab Public Service Commission on 3rd June, 1971.
Respondent No. 3, Shri Karam Singh, who belongs to Scheduled Caste category, was appointed as a Factory Inspector on 12th July, 1971.
A tentative seniority list of Factory Inspectors was issued on 23rd December, 1982 (Copy Annexure P-1) and the position of first five factory Inspectors in the seniority list was as under :-  1) Shri G.S.
Saroya (SC)  2) Shri GS Pannu.
3) Shri RK Madan (Petitioner).
4) Shri Surjit Singh Gill.
5) Shri Karam Singh (SC) (Respondent).
Vide Notification, dated 20th January, 1989, published in the Punjab Government Gazette on 23rd January, 1989, two posts of Factory Inspectors were upgraded to the level of Deputy Chief Inspectors of Factories and were redesignated as Deputy Directors of Factories in the pay scale of Rs. 2400- 4000.
Further, the solitary existing post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories was upgraded to the level of Joint Chief Inspector of Factories and redesignated as Joint Director of Factories in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500.
A copy of the notification has been appended as Annexure P-9 to the writ petition.
The relevant portion of the Notification reads as under :-  "In pursuance of the provisions of Rule 3 (h) of the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988, the President of India is pleased to notify the second schedule to the Rules ibid as sunder :- xx xx xx xx xx xx xx Sr. No. Post Existing scale in rupees Revised scale in rupees Remarks.
2.
Factories Inspectors 850-1700 2400-4000 To be redesignated as Assistant Director of Factories prospectively subject to the condition that it does not create any legal complications.
Two posts to be upgraded prospectively to the level of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories in the scale of Rs. 2400-4000 the designation of which shall be Deputy Director of Factories prospectively subject to the condition that it does not create any legal complications."
Note to 2 the notification reads as under :-  "The Administrative Department concerned will ensure issuing of formal orders regarding upgradation/redesignation of the posts wherever required as per decisions recorded in column 5."
2.
In pursuance of the Government Notification, dated 20th January, 1989, referred to above, read with Note 2 thereof, the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department Labour and Employment, issued orders on 15th March, 1989 (Annexure P-4), upgrading two posts of Inspectors of Factories to that of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories, in the pay scale of Rs. 2400-4000.
It may be noticed here that in the `remarks column' of this order, dated 15th March, 1989, it was mentioned that the upgradation would be effective from the date the upgraded posts were filled up.
3.
On 9th May, 1991, the State Government issued a notification amending its earlier Notification dated 20-23 January, 1989 (Annexure P-9).
In fact, vide the later notification dated 9th May, 1991, the earlier notification dated 20th January, 1989 was substituted.
According to the substituted notification, the solitary post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories, was to be upgraded to the level of Joint Chief Inspector of Factories and redesignated as Joint Director of Factories with effect from 23rd January, 1989.
Further, Factory Inspectors were redesignated as Assistant Directors with effect from 23rd January, 1989.
Two posts of the Factories Inspectors were to be upgraded to the level of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories in the scale of Rs. 2400-4000 with effect from 23rd January, 1989 and the post of Deputy Chief Inspectors were to be designated as Deputy Directors of Factories.
Further, two posts Deputy Directors of Factories and one post of Assistant Director of Factories was to be upgraded as Joint Directors of Factories in the scale of Rs. 3000-4500.
The relevant extract of the Notification dated 9th May, 1991 is reproduced below :-  Pr Sr. No. Post Existing scale in rupees Revised scale in rupees Remarks, 1.
Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories 1,200-1950 2,400-400 The existing post to be upgraded to the level of Joint Chief Inspector of Factories in the scale of Rs. 3000-4500 which shall be redesignated as Joint Director of Factories with effect from the 23rd January, 1989.
Further, the post of Joint Director of Factories as so upgraded and redesignated shall be upgraded as Additional Director of Factories in the scale of pay of Rs. 3700-5300 with effect from the date of Publication of Govt. of Punjab, Department of Finance Notification No. 10290 FPI/3860 dated the 9th May, 1991.
2.
Factories Inspector 850-1700 2400-400 To be redesignated as Assistant Director of Factories with effect from the 23rd January, 1989.
Two posts to be upgraded to the level of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories in the scale of Rs. 2400-4000.
The designation of which shall be Deputy Director of Factories, with effect from the 23rd January, 1989.
Further two posts of Deputy Director of Factories and one post of Assistant Director of Factories to be upgraded, as Joint Directors of Factories in the scale of pay of Rs. 3000-4500 with effect from the date of publication of Government of Punjab, Department of Finance Notification No. 10/2/90-FPI/3860 dated the 9th May, 1991.
Twelve posts of Assistant Director of Factories to be upgraded as Deputy Directors of Factories in the scale of pay of Rs. 2400-4000 with effect from the date of publication of Government of Punjab, Department of Finance Notification No. 10290 FPI/3860 dated the 9th May, 1991. xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx"  4.
One Shri G.S.
Saroya belonging to the Scheduled Caste category, who was the senior-most Factory Inspector, was promoted to the rank of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories on 7th August, 1979 and was confirmed as such vide order dated 12th January, 1988, with effect from 7th August, 1979.
Said Shri Soraya was promoted to the post of Joint Director of Factories with effect from 20th June, 1989, after the existing post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories had been upgraded to the rank of Joint Chief Inspector of Factories and redesignated as Joint Director of Factories vide Notification dated 20/23rd January, 1989 (Annexure P-9), which was later on substituted by Notification dated 9th May, 1991, reproduced above.
5.
Vide order dated 10th July, 1989 (Annexure P-7), Sarvshri GS Pannu and Karam Singh respondent, were promoted as Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories (redesignated as Deputy Director of Factories) with immediate effect subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
They were to remain on probation for a period of one year.
Shri GS Punnu was the senior- most Factory Inspector, but Shri Karam Singh who was at Serial No. 5 in the seniority list and belongs to Scheduled Cast category, was promoted, treating one vacancy to be reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes under the Government instructions.
Petitioner, RK Madan filed the present writ petition, challenging order dated 10th July, 1989 (Annexure P-7), promoting Shri Karam Singh, respondent, as Deputy Director of Factories.
6.
Before adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner, certain further facts may be noticed.
Shri GS Soraya, who had been promoted as Joint Chief Inspector of Factories on 20th June, 1989, was further promoted as Additional Director of Factories on 31st May, 1991 with effect from 9th May, 1991, for which date the post was upgraded vide notification dated 9th May, 1991.
He retired from service also on the said date, ie 31st May, 1991.
Sarvshri GS Punnu and Karam Singh were promoted as Joint Directors on 20th June, 1991 with effect from 9th May, 1991, the date from which two posts of Deputy Directors were upgraded (notification has already been reproduced above.)
7.
The following points were raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner :-  1) The up-gradation of the post is neither promotion, nor direct recruitment.
Consequently, instructions regarding reservation, which are only applicable to promotions or appointments by direct recruitment, would not be applicable when the posts are filled because of the upgradation.
2.
Shri GS Soraya, who was a member of Scheduled Castes, was appointed to the post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories (redesignated as Deputy Director) against the first vacancy of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories.
He, therefore, consumed the first roster point meant for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
Consequently, Shri Karam Singh, respondent, could not be appointed to the post of Deputy Director on the basis of reservation for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
3) Even if it is held that Sh. GS Soraya did not consume the first roster point because when the first vacancy arose, the cadre of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories consisted of only one single post, yet consequent upon the increase of the cadre strength of the Deputy Directors (earlier known as Deputy Chief Inspector he had to be taken into account while working out the representation of the members of the Scheduled Castes as contemplated by the judgment of this Court in Joginder Singh Sethi v. Punjab Govt, 1982(2) SLR 307, and the interim orders passed in appeal by the Supreme Court in Joginder Singh`s case.
8.
In support of the first point, learned counsel for the petitioner referred to Notification dated 20/23rd January, 1989 (Annexure P-9) to substantiate that in fact two posts of Factory Inspectors were upgraded to the level of Deputy Chief Inspectors of Factories and redesignated as Deputy Director of Factories in the scale of Rs. 2400-4000.
He also referred to Notification dated 9th May, 1991, by which the notification, dated 20/23rd January, 1989 had been substituted, in which it is again mentioned that the posts of Factories Inspectors were being upgraded to the level of Deputy Chief Inspectors (designated as Deputy Directors).
The argument proceeded that on the up-gradation of a post or posts, the incumbent of the post comes along with the post and starts holding the upgraded post.
According to the learned counsel, in case of up-gradation of a post, no element of promotion is involved and the incumbent whose post is upgraded, automatically gets the upgraded post.
In the present case, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, two posts of Factories Inspectors were upgraded vide Notification dated 20/23rd January, 1989 (the upgradation was made effective with effect from 23rd January, 1989 vide notification dated 9th May, 1991, reproduced above) and, therefore, the two senior- most Factories Inspectors should have been appointed automatically to the upgraded posts of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories (redesignated as Deputy Directors).
Shri GS Pannu and the petitioner were the two seniormost Factory Inspectors on 23rd January, 1989 and, therefore, they should have been appointed as Deputy Directors of Factories with effect from that date.
Shri Karam Singh, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, had no right to be considered for appointment as there could not be any reservation for the members of the Scheduled Castes while filling the upgraded posts.
9.
The learned counsel on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that though the expression in the notifications has been used as `upgrading the post' but in fact, it amounted to creation of new posts in the cadre, which had to be filled in by promotion after considering the claim of each eligible person.
To buttress the argument, the learned counsel referred to the impugned order, dated 10th July, 1989 (Annexure P-6) by which Sarvshri GS Punnu and respondent Karam Singh were promoted as Deputy Chief Inspectors of Factories (redesignated as Deputy Director of Factories), with immediate effect, subject to the approval of Punjab Public Service Commission.
By the said order, they were also put on probation for a period of one year.
From this order the learned counsel emphasised that both Shri GS Pannu and Karam Singh, respondent, were promoted to the upgraded posts and they were put on probation.
If it was to be treated as simple upgradation of posts, the question of promotion and putting Sarvshri GS Pannu and Karam Singh on probation did not arise and further there was no necessity to have the approval of the Public Service Commission, which is only required in case of promotion.
It was also pointed out that cases of all eligible persons, including the petitioner, were considered for promotion against the unreserved post of Deputy Director of Factories.
Further, it was pointed out that vide order dated 19th June, 1989, Shri GS Soraya, Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories (redesignated as Deputy Director of Factories) was promoted as Joint Chief Inspector of Factories (redesignated as Joint Director of Factories), after the upgradetion of the post of Deputy Director of Factories to that of Joint Director of Factories.
He was also put on probation for a period of one year.
From this the learned counsel wanted to point out that even GS Soraya who was holding the solitary post of Deputy Director of Factories, was promoted and not automatically appointed to the upgraded post of Joint Director of Factories and was also put on probation.
Still further the learned counsel referred to the notification dated 9th May, 1991 (reproduced above), by which two posts of Deputy Director of Factories (earlier known as Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories) and one lower post of Assistant Director (earlier known as Factory Inspector) were upgraded as Joint Directors of Factories in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500.
It was submitted that if the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner was to be accepted, then in pursuance of notification dated 9th May, 1991, one Factory Inspector and two Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories would automatically become Joint Directors of Factories with effect from 9th May, 1991, which would be wholly anomalous, as one person holding the post of Assistant Director (Factory Inspector) and two persons holding the higher post of Deputy Director (Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories) would all become Joint Directors of Factories on the same day.
From the above, the learned counsel submitted that in fact the posts were not just upgraded but in fact new posts of Deputy Directors of Factories were created by reducing the posts in the lower ranks.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Perhaps I would have agreed with the learned counsel for the petitioner that if it was simple upgradation, then the incumbents of the posts would automatically get the upgraded posts.
However, I am of the view that vide notification dated 23rd January, 1989 (Annexure P-9) substituted by notification dated 9th May, 1991 (substituted notification), new posts in the higher ranks were created.
This would be apparent from the fact that not only the incumbents in the lower ranks were promoted after due consideration but they were also put on probation, which was made subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Notification, dated 9th May, 1991, even upgraded one post of Assistant Director (Factory Inspector) to the rank of Joint Director, whereas there was another post in between i.e. that of the Deputy Director.
Two posts of Deputy Directors of Factories were also upgraded to the rank of Joint Director of Factories.
If the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is accepted, then one Assistant Director and two Deputy Directors would become Joint Directors on the same day, which would offend Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
No doubt, the expression `upgradation' has been used, but for all intents and purposes this was creation of posts in the higher rank.
Even the intention of the Government was to create new posts, inasmuch as the incumbents from the lower ranks were promoted to the higher posts after due consideration.
Therefore, I reject the first point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Point No. 2.
11.
Shri GS Soraya, a member of the Scheduled Castes was promoted to the solitary post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories on 7th August, 1979, as he was the senior-most Factory Inspector (the post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories was redesignated as Deputy Director with effect from 23rd January, 1989).
At that time, there could not be any reservation as there was a solitary post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories and since there was no reservation, the question of operating the roster for reservation or Shri GS Soraya consuming the first reserved point for Scheduled Castes did not arise, Shri GS Soraya did not come to occupy the post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories (later on redesignated as Deputy Director of Factories) by virtue of reservation.
Therefore, there is no merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that Shri GS Soraya would be deemed to have consumed the first reserved point on the roster and Karam Singh could not be appointed against the reserved point.
Consequently, I reject the second point raised by the petitioner's counsel.
Point No. 3.
12.
As far as the third point of the petitioner's counsel is concerned, the submission was that on the date Shri GS Pannu and Shri Karam Singh- respondent were promoted to the rank of Deputy Directors of Factories, i.e. 10th July, 1989, Shri G.S.
Saroya, Joint Director should be deemed to be occupying substantively one post of Deputy Director of Factories and since out of the two posts available of the rank of Deputy Director of Factories, one post is deemed to have been held by a member of the Scheduled Castes (Shri GS Soraya), the second post could not have gone to Shri Karam Singh, as it would amount to 100% reservation and would be violative of the instructions of the Government as well as in violation of the law laid down in Joginder Singh Sethi's case (supra).
I am unable to agree with the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Vide notification, dated 9th May, 1991, referred to above, the upgradation of the post of Factory Inspector (which I have held to be creation of the posts of Deputy Director) was made effective from 23rd January, 1989.
On that day out of the two posts of Deputy Directors of Factories, one post was held by Shri GS Soraya and the other post was still vacant.
On 20th June, 1989, Shri Soraya was promoted as Joint Director of Factories, and, therefore, w.e.f.
20th June, 1989, both the posts of Deputy Director of Factories were vacant, which were filled in by promotion on 11th July, 1989 by the impugned order.
On 11th July, 1989, there was no other member of the Scheduled Castes holding the post of Deputy Director of Factories.
It was for the first time that with effect from 23rd January, 1989, the cadre strength of Deputy Directors of Factories was of two posts.
Both the posts were vacant on 11th July, 1989, when these were sought to be filled in by promotion and since there was no other person belonging to the Scheduled Caste category holding the post of Deputy Director of Factories, the roster would start functioning and according to the Government instructions, one of the posts would be filled from the Scheduled Caste Category.
Consequently, Karam Singh was rightly considered and promoted against the reserved vacancy for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
The third point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is also hereby rejected.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition, which is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.