Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - This is claimants' appeal for enhancement of compensation.
2.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the undisputed facts of the case which emerge from the file are that Varinder Singh Yadav, DSP/Assistant Commandant 79 Central Reserve Police Force Batallion (Since deceased) was traveling in Jeep No. MZY 9133 which met with accident with bus bearing No. PBA 7716 owned by Municipal Corporation, Amritsar.
As a result of the said accident, Virinder singh Yadav succumbed to the injuries.
Kala Devi Wd/o of the deceased and three children out of whom two were minors, filed claim petition before Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Amritsar, seeking compensation to the tune of Rs. 20,00,000/- on account of the death of Virinder Singh Yadav.
In this case, the deceased at the time of his death was about 40 years old.
His gross emoluments were Rs. 3139/- per month and his carry home salary was Rs. 1857/- per month out of which the deceased used to keep about Rs. 500/- per month for himself.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, assessed the monthly income of the deceased as Rs. 1857/- and monthly income of the deceased as Rs. 1357/- taking into consideration the fact that the deceased must be spending at least Rs. 500/- per month on himself.
A multiplier of 10 was applied and by doing so awarded a total sum of Rs. 60,000/- compensation.
Aggrieved against the award, the claimants have filed this appeal.
3.
The argument raised at the Bar is that while calculating the monthly income of the deceased, the deduction from the salary made towards Income Tax, GPF and Insurance could not be separated as these are part and parcel of the salary drawn by the deceased.
The other plea is taking into consideration the fact that the deceased was about 40 years of age at the time of his death, a higher multiplier should have been applied by the Tribunal.
4.
The respondents contested the claim and argued that the carry home salary should be the basis for assessing the monthly income of the deceased.
5.
The sole question which has cropped up for consideration is whether the gross or the carry home salary of the deceased should be made the basis for calculating the monthly income of the deceased.
After giving full consideration to the matter, this Court is of the view that financial benefits like Insurance, provident fund, family pension or gratuity are in essence the deferred earning of the victim of the accident or the result of his savings.
Even if no compensation is claimed, the dependents of the deceased are always entitled to the retiral benefits.
In a claim application under the Motor Vehicles Act, the claimant is not to be denied the benefit of the deductions from salary like provident fund, family pension or gratuity while calculating the monthly income of the deceased.
This view also finds support from a Full Bench decision of this Court in Bhagat Singh v. Smt. Om Sharma and others, 1983 PLR 1.
6.
In view of the settled principle of law, I am of considered view that benefits like income-tax, insurance, GPF are not to be excluded from the compensation.
7.
It is proved on the record that the deceased was drawing a total salary of Rs. 3139/- per month at the time he met with an accident.
He was posted as DSP/Assistant Commandant.
He must be spending at least Rs. 1000/- or more to maintain his status and Rs. 2000/- is held to be monthly dependency.
At the time of his death, the deceased was about 40 years of age and he would have continued to hold that post but for his death upto the age of 58 years, i.e. for another 18 years.
Therefore, a multiplier of 15 would be quite reasonable.
8.
Calculating the annual dependency as Rs. 24,000/- and applying a multiplier of 15 the total amount of compensation to which the claimants would be entitled comes to Rs. 3,60,000/-, besides 12% interest on the said amount from the date of claim petition.
order accordingly.