Satya Brata Sinha, J - An intricate question as regard the right of the writ petitioners-respondents to obtain employment in terms of the Civil Defence Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) is involved in these appeals.
2.
The Parliament enacted the said Act to make provisions for Civil Defence and for matters connected therewith.
The word 'Civil Defence' has been defined in section 2(a) of the said Act to mean :-  "Civil Defence included any measures, not amounting to actual combat, affording protection to any property, place or thing in India or any part of the territory thereof against any hostile attack, whether from air, land, sea or other places, or, for depriving any such attack of the whole or part of its effect, whether such measures are taken before, during, at or after the time of such attack."
3.
Section 3 provides for the power of Central Government to make Rules, for securing Civil Defence, by issuing of a notification in respect of the matters enumerated therein.
The State Government in terms of Section 4 of the said Act is entitled to constitute an area within the State, a body of persons to be called the Civil Defence Corps and for that purpose a person not below the rank of District Magistrate can be appointed as the Controller for the purpose of commanding the said Corps.
The State is entitled to appoint a Director for co-operating the activities of the Controller.
It is also entitled to appoint members and other officers of the Corps.
Section 6 provides for the dismissal of the members of the Civil Defence Corps.
4.
The Central Government in exercise of its power under Section 3 of the Act made rules known as Civil Defence Rules, 1968, inter alia, for the control of light and sounds, outbreaks of fire, camouflage, keeping of dangerous articles and substances, evacuation of areas, accommodation of evacuated persons, billeting, power to slaughter dangerous and injured animals in the event of hostile attack, maintenance of water supply, power to require local authorities to take precautionary measures, protection of major ports and their environs against fire etc., protection of factories and mines, precaution against hostile attack, watching of premises to detect fire, safety measures in premises, prevention of spread of disease, air raid shelters, civil defence exercises.
5.
The Central Government has also made regulations in exercise of its power conferred upon it under Section 9 of the said Act known as Civil Defence Regulation, 1968 which came into force with effect from 10th July, 1968.
6.
Competent Authority as contained in Regulation 2(b) has been described in the following manner :-  "Competent authority means the State Government or any person appointed by the State Government to exercise the powers of a competent authority under any provision of these regulations."
7.
Regulation 3 provides for the eligibility of a person who intends to apply for appointment to a Civil Defence Corps.
Regulation 4 provides for the manner of application.
Regulation provides for enrolment.
Regulation 6 provides for the organisation.
Regulation 8 which provides for conditions of services, reads thus:-  "(1) The members of the Corps shall ordinarily serve in a voluntary and honorary capacity : Provided that the State Government may, by order, authorise payment of duty allowance (at such scales as may be prescribed by it from time to time in consultation with the Central Government) to a member of the Corps when called on duty.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the Central Government may declare any appointment or class of appointments as paid appointments.
A person appointed on the basis of payment shall be entitled to such conditions of service as regards pay, leave and other benefits as the State Government may, by order, prescribe."
8.
Regulation 9 provides for duties.
Regulation 10 provides for the discipline.
9.
The provision of the said Act, the Rules and Regulation framed thereunder as noticed hereinbefore, clearly point out that although the State Government is the appointing authority, the Central Government has retained control in respect of such matters.
10.
Allegedly in the year 1988 a select list was prepared for empanelment to the post of staff officer, instructors in the Civil Defence Organisation for which a scale of pay of Rs. 380-910 was admissible.
Allegedly they were given provisional appointment subject to availability of post and were to be deputed to undergo full time a CD Instructors' Course at the NCDC Nagpur.
The petitioners allegedly were directed to report to duty on diverse dates beginning from September 15, 1985; pursuant whereto they called upon the Director of Civil Defence and allegedly each of them successfully completed their training.
However, as despite the same, the petitioners were not given appointment, they filed the writ applications.
11.
An affidavit-in-opposition as also a supplementary affidavit were affirmed by one Parimal Chakraborty, Assistant Secretary (Home), wherein inter alia, a question was raised that no panel was prepared for accommodating the petitioners and as such they have acquired no legal right therefor.
It was further alleged that two lists were prepared, one for filling up the then existing vacancy and another for filling up future vacancies.
There were allegedly 136 vacancies wherein it was mentioned that they were selected for appointment.
But allegedly the petitioners were selected for empanelment.
It was stated that one Sri SC Mazumdar made certain records available to the Home (Civil Defence) Department but such records are now not available.
It appears that one Usha Adhikari, one of the writ petitioners, inter alia, took a point that even if no posts had been sanctioned, a supernumerary post should have been created as there were instances where such additional posts had been created upon obtaining special cabinet approval for appointment of candidates selected for appointment and empanelment.
12.
Before the learned trial Judge reliance had been placed on a decision of this court in, State of West Bengal and ors. v. Chirantan Sarkar & anr. reported in 1992(2) CLJ 247 : 1993(2) SCT 321 (Calcutta).
as well as various other decisions of this court including a decision of GN Ray, (as His Lordship then was).
The learned trial Judge directed production of records relating to 136 vacancies but the same had not been produced.
The Home Secretary who is the present Chief Secretary of the State was, therefore, directed to be present in court and he categorically stated that his Department was not even aware as to who the incumbents of these posts were and an affidavit was affirmed by him to that effect as was directed wherein it was categorically stated that no records were available.
The Home Secretary in a further affidavit was affirmed on 14th July, 1992 stated that relevant information was collected from the different offices of the different Controllers of various Civil Defence Organizations located at different districts and from a perusal of the papers made available, it appeared that a list of 136 Staff Officers Instructors, who were selected for appointment and were given appointment but it was categorically stated that no recruitment relating to actual process of selection, interview was made but as records relating to appointment of such 136 persons selected for appointment have not been made available, it had not been possible to ascertain in what manner the said 136 posts would be filled up.
The petitioer in the affidavit-in-reply stated that the aforementioned figure of 136 posts appear to be hypothetic in nature and there is nothing to show that such appointments have been made on the basis of a panel made for appointment as contra-distinguished from the panel for list of empanelment.
13.
It was further alleged that at least certain records must be available as the writ petitioners had to undergo a training.
SC Majumdar who had since then retired from post of Director of Civil Defence was then asked to affirm an affidavit.
According to Sri Majumdar, a selection committee comprising of the Deputy Secretary and a Joint Director/Controller of Civil Defence, Calcutta and Commandant, Civil Defence Training Institute were members of the Selection Committee and a panel was prepared much prior to his joining which was subject to passing the training course.
He opined that had there been any irregularity in appointment, the same could have been found out by the concerned authorities.
He further stated that he had to receive orders from the Minister to issue letters to the boys and girls whose names were below in the panel and who could not be given appointment for want of vacancies wherein they were clearly intimated the term of their empanelment, pursuant whereto they did not have any right to employment but they would be called when future vacancies arise or when some grave emergency takes place subject to their passing the training course.
He stated that on the letter of empanelment it was clearly indicated that those letters did not give any guarantee to employment.
He, however, could not recollect how much empanelment and appointment letters he had actually signed.
However, according to the learned trial Judge, such endorsements did not appear to have been made in the letters of appointment.
14.
GN Ray, J by an order dated 6th March, 1989 in CO No. 8124/88 directed :-  "The Court, therefore, should proceed on the footing that the petitioner is fit to be empanelled for getting an appointment to the post of Staff Officer Instructor having already completed the wholetime Instructors Course Training from the CCDTI, West Bengal for a period of four weeks.
The respondents are, therefore, directed to consider the case of appointment of the petitioner on the footing that he had been duly empanelled on 16th December, 1985 for such appointment.
Let such consideration be made within a period of three months from today for giving appointment to the petitioner if on the strength of such empanelment he is entitled to be absorbed against the available vacancy."
15.
In that case reference was made to selection for empanelment.
MR Mallick, J however, in another case being Matter No. 4062/90 which was filed when allegedly the said order was not implemented by an order dated 9th October, 1988, directed :  "The learned Advocate for the respondents has been directed by this Court to produce the list of names of those writ petitioners who actually filed writ petition and for whom the said posts have been created.
But, the Learned Advocate has not been able to produce such list.
Therefore, the annexure to the supplementary affidavit which shows that one of the posts has been created for the present writ petitioner as they filed writ petition cannot be challenged by the respondents.
Therefore, I have to accept the contention of the writ petitioner that one of the posts that have been created in terms of the Cabinet decision is for giving appointment to the present writ petitioner to such post.
In that view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed.
The writ petitioner be given appointment to the post of Staff Officer Instructor within 2 months from the date of communication of this Judgment and Order by the concerned respondents."
16.
An appeal was taken from the said order a division bench of this court comprising of AK Sengupta, J since retired and SK Sen, J after quoting from several files referred to a process maintained in a file which was to the following effect:  "There was a proposal for creation of 105 posts of Staff Officer Instructor in population growth basis.
A selection committee consisting of the then Director, Civil Defence, West Bengal, the then Deputy Secretary, Home (Civil Defence) Department and the present Commandant, CCDTI Selected candidates for filling up of the vacancies in the post of SOI then in existence, and the 105 posts of SOI proposed to be created.
The candidates who were selected for employment for the post of SOI were informed that their appointment in the said posts would be subject to their passing the prescribed training in the CCDTI as well as availability of vacancy.
However, sanction of 80 posts of SOI out of the 105 was accorded to subsequently.
As a result, 18 candidates who were empanelled for the aforesaid appointment and who underwent training in the CCDTI but could not be given appointments such to non-sanction of the training 25 posts moved the Calcutta High Court for their appointment and judgment of the different benches of the said High Court has gone in their favour."
17.
In that case, it was opined that 25 posts be created and in that view of the matter the stay application was dismissed and consequently the appeal was also dismissed.
18.
The learned trial Judge, in view of the aforementioned decision, held that the petitioners would be deemed to have been selected for appointment and the State Government should take steps for appointing them within 15th April, 1994.
The learned Judge held:  "It has been submitted by the learned Advocate for the State that at the moment no vacancy is available.
It has been already noted that in other cases the State Government has created posts.
In these cases also the State Government may create posts, if necessary supernumerary posts, as they may be advised and given appointment to the petitioners."
Similar orders have been passed in other cases.
19.
Mr. Milan Bhattacharjee, the learned Councel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that there were posts of 45 scouts which had been reduced to 11.
The learned Counsel pointed out that earlier the Central Government used to bear the expenses to the extent of 50% which has since been reduced to 25%.
The learned Counsel further submits that the empanelled candidates do not have any right to obtain employment.
It was further urged that in any event the panel having been prepared in the year 1986 they have lost their life and in that view of the matter the writ petitions could not have been allowed.
The learned Counsel submits that earlier division bench case in the matter of State of West Bengal & ors. v. Chirantan Sarkar & anr. reported in 1992(2) C.L.J 247 proceeded on the basis that no records were made available.
It was submitted that as the petitioners have no right and there are no sanctioned posts there could not have been given appointment and in any event supernumerary posts could not have been directed by this Court.
The learned Counsel in support of his aforementioned contentions reliance has been placed on SK Mukherjee v. Union of India and anr., reported in 1994(4) SCT 262 (SC) : AIR 1994 SC 2485, State of Bihar and ors., v. The Secretariat Assistant Successful Examinees Union 1986 and ors., reported in AIR 1994 SC 736 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
522 holding:-  "It is now well settled that a person who is selected does not, on account of being empanelled alone, acquire any indefeasible right of appointment.
Empanelment is at the best a condition of eligibility for purposes of appointment, and by itself does not amount to selection or create a vested right to be appointed unless relevant service rule says to the contrary.
(See Shankaran Dash v. Union of India, 1991(3) SCC 47 : AIR 1991 SC 1612 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
194 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
555 and Sabita Prasad v. State of Bihar, 1992(3) Scale 361 : 1993(2) SCT 283 (SC).
20.
See also Bihar Public Service Commission and anr. v. State of Bihar and ors. reported in AIR 1997 SC 2280 : 1997(1) SCT 501 (SC).
It was further submitted that in any event even if certain illegalities have been committed, the same could not be directed to be perpetuated.
Reliance in this connection has been placed in Chandigarh Administration and anr. v. Jagjit Singh and anr., reported in AIR 1995 SC 705 : 1995(2) R.R.R.
291 and State of UP and ors. v. Harisha Chandra and ors. reported in 1996 (9) SCC 309 : 1996(2) SCT 712 (SC).
21.
Sardar Amjad Ali, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that from the decision of the Apex Court in SK Mukharjee v. Union of India and anr., reported in AIR 1994 SC 2485, it would be evident that the State Government is the appointing authority.
The learned Counsel has in extenso referred to the decision of Chirantian Sarkar (supra) and submitted that a great deal of bungling has been made by different authorities as would appear from the fact that the different authorities of the State of West Bengal had made different statements before this court from time to time.
The learned Counsel submitted that in the matter of Chirantan Sarkar (supra) the Apex Court has dismissed the special leave applicaiton and further dismissed a review applicaiton also and in that view of the matter if posts could be directed to be created in the earlier judgment, in view of Article 14 of the Constitution of India the petitioners are also entitled to the same relief.
It has been pointed out that if the panel has lapsed its force in the year 1988 there was absolutely no reason as to why appointments have been made in the year 1996.
22.
Mr. Bhattacharjee, however, submitted that in the year 1996 an appointment has been made only in a Group-D post and not in the posts of Civil Defence Instructor.
23.
Before dealing with the respective contentions of the parties, it appears that all along a distinction is sought to be made of a panel of appointment and empanelment for future appointment.
This is one of those cases which to our mind depict a sordid state of affairs prevailing in the Home (Civil Defence) Department of the State of West Bengal.
It is rally a matter of great surprise as to how without there being any records, persons had been sent for training but some were appointed and some were not.
Had the records been produced, there could not have been any difficulty whatsoever in arriving at a definite conclusion as to whether two separate panels were prepared.
24.
In law, there is absolutely no difficulty in preparation of such panel.
In fact, the provision of the said Act, the Rules and Regulations which have been noticed hereinbefore clearly suggest that empanelment as members and officers of the Corps by itself do not entitle them to be called duty.
A panel may be kept prepared with a view to call the volunteers being called on duty as and when an emergent situation arises.
The State in the instant case has categorically stated that there does not exist any sanctioned post.
In absence of any sanctioned post the court has absolutely no jurisdiction to direct creation of any post.
It is now a well settled principle of law that irrespective of fact as to whether a panel has been prepared either for appointment in the existing vacancies for the purpose of filling up of the post as and when vacancies arise by itself does not create any right in the empanelment candidate for appointment.
136 posts had already been filled up.
The court in its earlier judgment proceeded on the basis that posts had to be created in view of the different orders passed by this court from time to time.
Creation of such posts under the order of courts only enables the State to direct appointment of the candidates concerned.
Unfortunately, in none of the aforementioned decisions the question as regards parameters of judicial review of the court had been taken into consideration.
It is a well settled principle of law that a person when empanelled, does not derive any right for appointment.
A panel may be cancelled.
Only when somebody is appointed from the panel who ranks below the petitioner in the merit list, a question of discrimination would arise and the court can intervene.
It goes without saying that an adverse inference could be drawn as against State for non-production of the records but while drawing such adverse inference, the court cannot by itself come to the conclusion that the petitioners' name appear in the panel and there exists sanctioned posts.
The purpose for which the authorities are created, the Corps are constituted and members and other officers are appointed would be explicit from the different provisions of the said Act, Rules and Regulations framed thereunder.
25.
The members of the Corps constitute voluntary organisation and it is only in the discretion of the State to grant them allowances as and when they are called for duty.
The service is really meant to be a voluntary service for the protection of the nation and for serving it as and when an emergent situation arises.
A Civil Defence is created evidently for dealing with an emergent situation either by reason of external aggression or internal disturbance which is grave in nature with a view to combat the difficulties which may be faced by the State or when the country faces an external aggression, a team of volunteers who had undergone training to cope up with the emergent situation and particularly when services of some trained persons are meant, they can be called for duty.
Empanelment in Civil Defence Department for the reasons aforementioned must be issued differently their empanelments for state services.
The purport and object of the said Act and the Rules have clearly been stated by the Apex Court in SK Mukherjee v. Union of India and anr., reported in AIR 1994 SC 2485 : 1994(4) SCT 262 (SC).
26.
In Union of India v. SS Uppal & anr. reported in 1996 2 SCC 168 : 1998(1) S.C.T.
384, the law is stated in the following terms :-  "There is also another aspect of the case.
The appointment as IAS, after inclusion of the name of a candidate in the select list, is not automatic.
Mere inclusion of the name in the panel does not confer any right of appointment."
27.
In State of Bihar & ors. v. The Secretariat Assistant Successful Examinees Union 1986 & ors., reported in AIR 1994 SC 736, it was held :-  "We are, therefore, of the opinion that the directions given by the High Court for appointing of the empanelled candidates according to their position in the merit list against the vacancies till 1991 was not proper and cannot be sustained.
Since, no examination has been held since 1987, persons who became eligible to compete for appointments were denied the opportunity to take the examination and the direction of the High Court would prejudicially affect them for no fault of theirs.
At the same time, due to callousness of the State in holding the examination in 1987 for the vacancies advertised in 1985 and declaring the result almost three (years) later in 1990 has caused great hardship to the successful candidates."
28.
Although great hardship was caused in that case, the Apex Court apart from making certain adverse comments, did not issue any such direction as has been done by this Court.
29.
In Bihar Public Service Commission and anr. v. State of Bihar & ors., reported in AIR 1997 SC 2280 : 1997(1) SCT 501 (SC), it has been found that no credence should be given to the examination and subsequent action of the Board recommended cancellation of the examination and in that situation it was held :-  "Be that as it may, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court committed gross error of law in issuing the mandamus requiring the Public Service Commission and the State to give appointment to the respondent even after going through the Biswas Committee Report which in no uncertain terms indicates the gross irregularities and illegalities committed by the Service Selection Board in the matter of holding the examination and drawing the list of successful candidates.
Further the Board having been abolished by the Govt. decision dated 22.10.91 had no further jurisdiction to publish a revised list of 238 persons on 28292 including the respondent.
The said list of 15 persons containing the respondent's name recommended on 4392 is a list wholly without jurisdiction and the persons recommended thereunder including the respondent had no enforceable right for which a mandamus could have been issued by the High Court."
30.
This aspect of the matter has also been considered by a division bench of this court in State of West Bengal v. Manoranjan Mondal & ors. reported in 1996(1) C.L.J 425 holding :-  "Further the question of appointment is within the domain of the employer.
The court may direct the authority concerned to consider the same in accordance with the recruitment rules or relevant law, but court cannot direct the authority concerned to give appointment in favour of any person unless a case has been made out that under the rules such appointment can be given in an automatic process or appointment in such a case is ministerial.
Further life of a panel is also for one year and in the instant case the panel was prepared in 1990.
It is well settled principle that when validity period of panel is fixed after the expiry of that period the said panel lapses and on the basis of that panel no appointment can be given."
31.
In Government of Orissa v. Haraprasad Das & ors., reported in 1998 1 SCC 487 : 1998(1) SCT 271 (SC), the Apex Court has clearly held :-  "It was contended by the Ld.
Counsel for the appellant-State that the Tribunal in giving the aforesaid directions has acted beyond its jurisdiction and that the said directions are illegal inasmuch as they are contrary to Rule 11 of the Rules.
In our opinion the contention deserves to be accepted.
Merely because there were some vacant posts of Copyholders and the Director of the Press had recommended to the Govt. to fill up those posts, it was not open to the Tribunal to direct the Govt. to fill up those posts even though it has good reasons not to do so.
It should have been appreciated by the Tribunal that mere empanelment or inclusion of one's name in the selection list does not give him a right to be appointed.
So also if the Govt. decides not to make further appointments for a valid reason, it cannot be said that it has acted arbitrarily by not appointing those whose names are included in the selection list.
Whether to fill up a post or not is a policy decision and unless it is shown to be arbitrary it is not open to the Tribunal to interfere with such decision of the Govt. and direct it to make further appointments.
The Tribunal in directing the Govt. to make further appointments on the efficiency ground of public administration went beyond its jurisdiction."
32.
It is further well settled principle of law that an appointment has to be made in accordance with law.
It is for the candidate concerned to show that all pre-requisites for a valid appointment was complied with in his case.
In absence of such a finding it is not possible for this court to issue a writ of or in the nature of mandamus only on the basis of a hypothesis.
The Court although is entitled to draw an adverse inference to the effect that had any document been filed by the State, the same would have gone against its interest, but it has not been held that the State has deliberately and will fully suppress the materials.
The State has expressed its helplessness in the matter.
It had pointed out the illegalities committed by its officers.
It has been pointed out as to under what circumstances, appointments had to be made and posts had to be created i.e. only because of the orders of this court and on the pain of contempt.
But such a situation cannot be allowed to be continued for a long time nor the court, in our considered view, can create a legal fiction to the effect that the petitioners would be deemed to have been empanelled for appointment.
Such a legal fiction cannot be, in the facts and circumstances of this case, created by the courts.
33.
In State of Haryana and ors. v. Piara Singh & ors. reported in AIR 1992 SC 2130 : 1992(3) SCT 201, the law is stated in the following terms :-  "Ordinarily speaking, the creation and abolition of a post is the prerogative of the Executive.
It is the Executive again that lays down the conditions of service subject, of course, to a law made by the appropriate legislature."
34.
The matter relating to creation of posts lies within the domain of the State.
The court shall always make an endeavour not to direct creation of posts, far less supernumerary posts as thereby a financial burden would be imposed upon the State.
It is for the State to determine as to services of how many persons are required for doing a particular job.
Situation of that nature can neither be assessed by the court nor can it usurp the role of an expert.
35.
Furthermore, even if certain illegalities have been committed, such illegalities cannot be directed to be perpetuated.
An illegality as well known is incurable.
See Chandigarh Administration & anr. v. Jagjit Singh & anr. reported in AIR 1995 SC 705 and ICAR and anr. v. TK Suryanarayan & Ors., reported in AIR 1997 SC 3108 : 1997(4) SCT 156 (SC).
36.
As indicated hereinbefore, assuming that the writ petitioners were empanelled for appointment and their names did not appear only in the list of empanelment, the panel has its own life.
Even if they were empanelled for appointment they had no existing right to be appointed unless there exists sanctioned post.
In the instant case, the State has categorically pleaded that there does not exist any sanctioned post.
37.
In a case of this nature where no day-to-day service can be taken from the intending employees the court should be slower in granting such appointment keeping in view the objects and reasons of the Rules and Regulations framed under the Act.
38.
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained which is accordingly set aside and the appeals are allowed.
In the facts and circumstances of these cases there will be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.