Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These two petitions, viz. C.W.P.
No. 9229 of 1990 and 7467 of 1992 involve an identical question.
These can, therefore, be disposed of by one order.
The facts as emanating from C.W.P.
No. 9229 of 1990 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The seven petitioners aver that they were working in different departments/Boards of the Government and had put in service of five years or more as Draftsmen by the year 1982.
They applied for direct recruitment to the posts of Divisional Head Draftsmen, which had been advertised by the Punjab Mandi Board.
They were selected and appointed as such on August 31, 1982.
In the advertisement issued by the Board, it had been inter-alia provided that the applicant should have an experience of five years as Draftsman.
The service rendered by the petitioners in the departments of the Government or various Boards etc. was considered as sufficient experience and as a result they were considered to be eligible and were allowed to compete.
After the selection, the petitioners were actually appointed as Divisional Head Draftsmen vide order dated August 31, 1982.
Petitioner No. 1 was thereafter promoted as Circle Head Draftsman on December 27, 1989.
All the petitioners were confirmed as Divisional Head Draftsmen on March 2, 1990.
They have continued to work on their respective posts.
3.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as a Divisional Head Draftsman by promotion on April 8, 1993.
The list, circulated by the respondent-Board vide its letter dated December 15, 1989, the petitioners are senior to respondent No. 2.
In spite of this, vide orders dated February 2, 1990, respondent No. 2 was promoted as Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) without considering the claims of the petitioners.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition.
The promotion of respondent No. 2 have been primarily challenged on the ground that it is violative of Article 16 inasmuch as the claims of the petitioners, who even though eligible were not considered while their junior was promoted.
4.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
On behalf of the Board, (Respondent No. 1), written statement has been filed by Mr. NK Jain, Administrative Officers.
It has been inter-alia averred that the petitioners "do not fulfil the requisite experience of 10 years for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) as prescribed under the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class-II) Service Rules, 1988.
As such the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on this score alone."
On merits, it has been admitted that the final seniority list was circulated vide order dated December 15, 1989.
It is, however, averred that this seniority list was subject to the decision to be given by the State Government on the appeal filed by Mr. Bachan Singh, Head Draftsman (Respondent No. 2).
On these premises, the claim of the petitioners has been contested.
5.
In the written statement filed by Respondent No. 2, certain preliminary objections have been raised.
It has been averred that the petitioners have an effective alternative remedy under Section 42 of the Punjab Agriculture Produce Markets Act, 1961 by way of a revision petition before the State Government.
It has been further averred that reliance has been placed by the petitioners on the seniority list issued vide letter dated December 15, 1989, but the fact that M/s Bachan Singh, Raghbir Singh and Baldev Raj, whose names appear at Sr. No. 9 to 11 have filed a petition before the Government under Section 42 of the Act, has been disclosed.
Otherwise, the primary defence in the written statement is that the petitioners do not fulfil the requisite experience of 10 years for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) as prescribed under Class-II Rules.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Mr. Jagdish Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners has primarily contended that the petitioners fulfilled the qualifications prescribed under the Rules and they were eligible to be considered.
He has further contended that if the interpretation as placed by the learned counsel for the respondents is accepted, it would lead to totally arbitrary results and would cause great injustice to eligible candidates.
On the other hand, Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, has contended that the petitioners were ineligible for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer as their experience outside the Board could not be taken into consideration for the purposes of determining their eligibility.
He has further contended that under the rules, the seniority has to be determined by taking into consideration the total length of service in the ranks of Assistant Draftsman, Divisional Head Draftsman and Circle Head Draftsman.
He points out that it is on this basis that even the seniority list issued by the Board vide its letter dated December 15, 1989, Annexure P4, has been challenged before the Government.
He contends that if the entire service is taken into consideration, the respondent is senior to the petitioners and the claim regarding the violation of Article 16 made on behalf of the petitioners cannot be sustained.
He further points out that Mr. Nirmaljit Singh, petitioner No. 7 in CWP No. 9229 of 1990 and petitioner No. 1 in CWP No. 7467 of 1992 had filed another Civil Writ Petition viz. Nos. 16030 of 1990.
Through this petition he had challenged the appointment of Mr. Raghbir Singh to the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
Ultimately, Mr. Nirmaljit Singh had withdrawn that petition.
His petition having been dismissed as withdrawn, he was not competent to maintain a challenge to the appointment of respondent No. 2 through the present petition.
7.
Before considering the respective contentions, it is apt to notice the relevant provisions of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class II) Service Rules, 1988.
Rule 8 lays down the method of recruitment and qualification, etc.
It inter-alia provides that "appointments to the Service shall be made in the manner specified in appendix 'B'."
It is further provided that no person shall be appointed to a post in the Service unless he possesses the qualifications and experience as specified against that post in appendix 'B'."
The rule further postulates that "all appointments by promotion to the Service shall be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone."
In Appendix 'B', the relevant entry so far as the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) is concerned, appears at Sr. No. 3.
The post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) can be filled up by transfer on deputation or by direct appointment and promotion.
For the purposes of promotion, one of the eligible categories is of Draftsmen.
For this category, the qualifications are prescribed at Sr. No. (iii).
It reads as under :-  "(iii) From amongst the Draftsmen working in the Board who possess Diploma in Engineering (Draftsman) who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of ten years."
It is this provision which is the basic source of dispute between the parties.
On behalf of the petitioners, it is contended that all Draftsmen who possess a Diploma in Engineering (Draftsmen) and who have a total experience of working as Draftsmen for a period of 10 years are eligible.
As against this, the claim made on behalf of the respondent is that the requisite experience of 10 years has to be acquired in the service of the Board.
Any experience acquired by a person outside the Board is irrelevant and cannot be taken into consideration.
8.
A persual of the provision shows that to be eligible for promotion, a Draftsman must possess a Diploma in Engineering (Draftsman).
Further, he should have an experience of "working as such for a minimum period of ten years."
In other words, the rule requires that a person should have an experience of working as Draftsman for a period of 10 years.
It does not postulate that the experience must be acquired as a Member of a particular Service or in a particular Board or department.
Any experience acquired in the capacity of a Draftsman can be taken into consideration while considering the claim for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
9.
The purpose of the rule is that a person who has acquired the necessary skill by working as a Draftsman for a period of ten years, is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil).
If the rule making authority had intended that to be eligible for promotion, a person should have worked as a Draftsman in the Board only for a minimum period of ten years, it could have specifically said so.
It has not Mr. TP Singh submits that 'working as such' implies that the experience should be as a member of the Service in the Board.
I am unable to accept this contention.
We cannot add to the provision.
The Court cannot add my word to the qualifications prescribed by the rule-making authority.
This is especially so as the language of the rule is absolutely clear and leaves no manner of doubt.
10.
Even otherwise, if the contention raised on behalf of the respondents is accepted, it would lead to anomalous and unfair results.
Firstly, it deserves mention that for appointment to the post of Divisional Head draftsman, the Board had inter-alia laid down that the candidate should have an experience of five years on the post of Draftsman.
The petitioners who had worked in the various departments of the Government or in any other instrumentality of the State for five years or more as Draftsmen applied for these posts.
The experience acquired by them on their respective posts was considered as relevant and suitable for the purpose of direct recruitment to the posts of Divisional Head Draftsmen.
The same experience is now sought to be excluded for the purpose of promotion.
If the experience is relevant and adequate for the purpose of direct recruitment, it does not appear to be reasonable to hold that it is irrelevant and inadmissible for the purpose of promotion.
Still further, the purpose of the rule is to ensure that the person is not a raw-hand but has acquired reasonable amount of skill by working on the post of Draftsman.
For this purpose, it does not matter as to whether a person has worked in the respondent-Board or in any other department or instrumentality of the State.
No qualitative difference between experience as acquired in the Board and in any other department or instrumentality of the State has been pointed out.
In such a situation, it would be totally unfair and unreasonable to hold that any amount of experience acquired outside the Mandi Board would be irrelevant for the purpose of determining the eligibility of a person for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer Civil).
11.
Still further the inequity resulting from the action of respondent No. 1 is apparent.
The petitioners even according to the Board are senior to respondent No. 2.
In spite of that, they are being declared as ineligible while their junior was treated as eligible and promoted to the higher post.
Mr. TP Singh points out that the petitioners have filed a revision petition before the State Government challenging the seniority list at Annexure P4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have pointed out that the said revision petition has already been dismissed by the State Government and, therefore, any claim made on that basis cannot be sustained.
Be that as it may, as at present the petitioners are and were admittedly senior to the respondent and they were wrongly ignored from consideration for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer when respondent No. 2 was promoted vide order dated February 2, 1990.
12.
The next contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent is regarding the provision contained in Clause (3) of Rule 8.
It was contended that the promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) has to be made by selection and seniority alone confers no right.
Learned counsel is undoubtedly right in raising the contention.
The only grievance of the petitioners is that they had a right to be considered for selection.
If on consideration, a junior person was found to be more meritorious, he could be selected and promoted.
However, the respondent-Board could not have ignored the claims of the petitioners on the ground that they were not eligible to be considered.
13.
Learned counsel also contended that the seniority had to be determined by taking into consideration the total length of service as Assistant Draftsman, Divisional Head Draftsman and Circle Head Draftsman.
In my view, the learned counsel is not right in his contention.
Even though all the three categories of posts are in Class-III service, yet they are at different levels in the hierarchy of the Service.
The lowest is in the rank of Assistant Draftsman, which is now stated to have been redesignated as Draftsman.
The persons working as Draftsmen are eligible for promotion to the post of Divisional Head Draftsmen and those working as Divisional Head Draftsmen are entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Circle Head Draftsmen.
A person who is superseded for promotion to a higher post or is actually not promoted cannot claim to be senior to the one who is in more meritorious and is in fact promoted.
Respondent No. 2 may have rendered longer service as a draftsman than the petitioners.
However, he was promoted to the post of Divisional Head Draftsman on April 8, 1983, while the petitioners had been directly recruited and appointed as Divisional Head Draftsmen on August 31, 1982.
Therefore, in the rank of Divisional Head Draftsman, the petitioners rank senior to the respondent.
Petitioner No. 1 has been further promoted to the rank of Circle Head Draftsmen.
If the argument of the respondent is accepted, the result would be that he would be senior to persons, who were promoted to higher post much earlier than him.
This would not be correct.
Consequently, the contention cannot be accepted.
14.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2, however, points out that CWP No. 16030 of 1990 having been withdrawn by Mr. Nirmaljit Singh, the present petitions also deserve to be dismissed.
I am unable to accept this contention.
Even if it is accepted that Nirmaljit Singh, who is one of the petitioners in this case, had filed the petition on the same or similar grounds against the promotion of Mr. Raghbir Singh and that he had withdrawn that petition, it does not debar either him or the other eligible persons from challenging the appointment of respondent No. 2 or others.
A person may be aggrieved by different orders of the Government.
He may initiate appropriate proceedings against those orders.
Even if he chooses not to continue with the proceedings in respect of one of those orders, his claim against others cannot be automatically defeated.
This is all the more so as the matter was not heard and decided.
He may have persuaded by different considerations to withdraw the petition against Mr. Raghbir Singh.
Learned counsel for Mr. Nirmaljit Singh, contends that the petition had been withdrawn because the petitioner was assured of promotion against the next available vacancy.
It may or may not be so.
I am of the considered view that the withdrawn of the challenging the appointment of Raghbir Singh cannot operate as res judicata or even as constructive res judicata, vis-a-vis, the appointment of respondent No. 2 or any other person.
Accordingly, the contention raised on behalf of the respondent is rejected.
15.
No other preliminary objection, through raised in the pleadings, was pressed at the time of arguments.
In view of the above, it is held that the respondent-Board had erred in not considering the claims of the petitioners while promoting respondent No. 2 vide order dated February 2, 1990.
The order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.5, is consequently quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claims of the petitioners for promotion with effect from the date respondent No. 2 was promoted in accordance with the rules.
If, on consideration, any of the petitioners is found suitable and promoted, all consequential reliefs shall be granted.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.