Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Mr. Janak Singh, the husband of the petitioner was working as a Manager at the Ropar Central Cooperative Bank, Ropar.
He retired from service on August 31, 1987, after putting in 33 years of service.
The retrial benefits due to him towards gratuity and leave encashment were not released in spite of innumerable representations.
He passed away on March 14, 1992.
Now his widow has approached this Court for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the retiral benefits due to her alongwith interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, besides various preliminary objection, it has been stated that the retiral benefits were not released as Mr. Janak Singh had recruited certain person and clerks over and above the sanctioned strength of the cadre without the approval of the competent authority, and he had also appointed his son in the Bank.
It has been further mentioned that the Bank had called for the records for taking disciplinary action against Mr. Janak Singh.
However, he expired and no action was taken against him.
3.
Mr. Amar Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that an amount of Rs. 1,08,100/- is due to the petitioner towards gratuity besides an amount of Rs. 41,240/- on account of leave encashment.
As such, a total amount of Rs. 1,49,340/- is due to the petitioner.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that there is a dispute with regard to the amount claimed by the petitioner but nothing has been mentioned to show as to what is the dispute.
5.
It is unfortunate that Mr. Janak Singh after his retirement of service in the year 1987 was not paid his due till his death on March 14, 1992.
Thereafter his widow appears to have run from pillar to post and having failed to get the requisite relief, she has had to approach this Court through the present proceedings.
6.
Mr. RK Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents submits that orders have been passed by the Registrar that his dues may be withheld till the decision of the issue.
He has referred to the letter dated October 27, 1988, issued by the Registrar to the Managing Director of respondent No. 2.
7.
I have perused this letter.
The Registrar had undoubtedly ordered that dues of Shri Janak Singh, retired Manager may please be withheld till the decision of the issue.
There is nothing on record to indicate that any order has been passed by the competent authority imposing any punishment on the petitioner's husband, Mr. Janak Singh.
Without any order having been passed, the retiral benefits could not have been withheld.
8.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to release all the retiral benefits with interest at the rate of 12 per cent with effect from November 13, 1987 till the date of actual payment.
Respondent No. 2 is further directed to make the payment within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner will also be entitled to her costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.