VK Bali, J (Oral) - Petitioner, Shri Krishanjeet Sharma takes exception to the orders dated June 9, 1978 Annexure P-9 and May 3, 1982 Annexure P-11 vide which the Director, Local Government Punjab addressed a memo to the Administration, Municipal Committee Faridkot that if there is any vacancy of Asstt./Inspector in the Municipal Committee, Faridkot then the petitioner be absorbed against the post as also that after version from the post of Superintendent on which post he was working, what pay he will get as also as to whether the earlier orders sent by the Department were complied with or not.
This order of reversion was passed on March 3, 1978.
The petitioner being aggrieved by the aforesaid order filed Civil Writ Petition bearing No. 2750 of 1978 in this Court which was withdrawn enabling him to avail alternative remedy available to him under Section 237 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
He unsuccessfully availed of the aforesaid remedy, as his representation was dismissed vide order Annexure P-11 dated 351982.
2.
The facts as pleaded reveal that petitioner initially joined Government service as Ahlmad on 2.10.1947 and was appointed in Municipal Committee, Faridkot.
At that time, Municipal Committee was a Government Department.
On March 23, 1964 a resolution was passed by which the designation of the post of Head Clerk was changed to that of Office Superintendent and the grade was also revised from 80-5-140/7-175 to 100-8-180.
The petitioner thus claims that he was promoted as Head Clerk/Office Supdt w.e.f.
16121964 vide resolution No. 5 dated 111965.
He was confirmed on the said post vide resolution No. 67 dated 20.2.1966 which was approved by the Government on August 16, 1966.
It is also pleaded that his grade was further revised with effect from 121968 with the sanction of the Punjab Government and in the letter dated 2341970, it was admitted by the Punjab Government that he was working as Superintendent on deputation with the Municipal Committee, Faridkot in pursuance of the order No. 35 dated 22111949.
The petitioner maintains that he had excellent service record and for that reason, he was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar on 121975 in the grade of Superintendent.
The post of Head Clerk which petitioner was holding was upgraded by the resolution of the Committee to that of Office Superintendent.
The petitioner was recognised as Office Superintendent by the Municipal Committee as also by the State Government for a very long time.
However in the year 1975 the services of the employees of the Municipal Committee were provincialized and Municipal Services were constituted but the post of the petitioner was not included in the Municipal Services for the reasons that the said post could not be provincialized since he was a Government employee and not a Municipal employee.
There were two Superintendents in the Municipal Committee, Faridkot.
The post of one of the Superintendents was disallowed by the Deputy Commissioner while sanctioning the budget for the Municipal Committee Faridkot for the year 1977-78.
While disallowing the post of Superintendent, the Deputy Commissioner did not specify as to which of the two posts of Superintendents had been disallowed.
In view of the fact that petitioner was serving for the last 12 years as Office Superintendent, his case was sent to Government for provincialisation, On June 9, 1978, a letter was issued by the Director Local Government to Municipal Committee, Faridkot by which it was directed that the petitioner be reverted and absorbed on the post of Assistant/Inspector.
It is this order which was challenged by the petitioner in earlier writ with the result as indicated above.
3.
The main contention of the petitioner is that he had been working on the post of Office Superintendent for nearly 14 years and he had not earned even one adverse report and his work, conduct and integrity had been found throughout exemplary, Therefore, he, could not be reverted from the post of Office Superintendent to that of Assistant/Inspector.
It is also maintained that he being a Government employee on deputation with Municipal Committee, Faridkot and not being an employee of Municipal Committee, there was no question of provincialising his services as also that he was a permanent Government employee and had been sent on deputation to Municipal Committee, Faridkot and all promotions granted to him carried with it direct or indirect sanction of the State Government.
He had worked as Office Superintendent for 14 years and so treated by the State Government and it was, therefore, not open to the respondents to revert him to the post of Assistant.
Non-issuance of a notice as also not hearing him before passing the order of reversion is also pressed into service with a view to set aside the impugned order.
4.
This matter has been hotly contested in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It has been inter alia pleaded that the Municipal Committee, Faridkot, vide its resolution No. 80 dated 2731964 resolved to designate the post of Head Clerk as Superintendent while approving the proposals of Budget Estimates for the year 1964-1965.
The Budget Sanctioning Authority i.e. the Deputy Commissioner, did not approve the proposal.
However as that time, the petitioner was working as clerk.
He was promoted as Head Clerk by Committee vide its Resolution No. 184/5 dated 111965 and the resolution passed to that effect specifically mentioned his appointment as Head Clerk.
There was no order or resolution changing the designation of the post of Head Clerk to that of Superintendent passed by the Competent Authority and that being so, the petitioner was confirmed as Head Clerk vide Resolution No. 67 dated 2821966.
After the Punjab Municipal Employees Pay Committee Report came into effect w.e.f.
121968 a reference was made to the Government in the Local Government Department by misrepresenting facts for allowing the petitioner the scale of the post of Superintendent.
In fact, in the communication, itself the petitioner was indicated as Superintendent though he had never been appointed to this post by the competent authority.
Even the designation of the post of Head Clerk was never changed to that of Superintendent, and even the approval of the Government to the grant of scale of pay of Superintendent was secured by misrepresenting facts when the petitioner himself was performing the duties of Office Superintendent in Municipal Committee, Faridkot.
A number of complaints were received against the petitioner from various quarters alleging that he was functioning as self styled Superintendent without any order of the competent authority.
The matter was investigated and after going through the Municipal record, the Executive Officer of the Municipal Committee informed that the facts given in the complaint were correct as also that the petitioner was never appointed as Superintendent.
In fact, the service book of the petitioner was tampered with.
Wherein from 141965 to 1.4.1969 against all entries wherein he was shown as Head Clerk/Assistant in Column Number 1, the words "Supdt.
to office Superintendent" were incorporated with a different.
This tampering with, was intended to show the petitioner as Superintendent because in the Pay Committee's Report, the post of Head Clerk was not equated to that of Superintendent.
However, Head Clerk working in Municipal Committee was equated with the post of Assistant.
On the basis of these fictitious entries, the petitioner succeeded in getting a reference made from the Municipal Committee to the Government showing himself as Superintendent for allowing him the scale of pay of the post of Superintendent and Government vide memo dated 2341970 accorded sanction to allow the scale of pay of Superintendent to him and on this basis, he stressed his claim to the post of Superintendent.
The sanction was thus obtained in fraudulent manner by misrepresenting the facts.
In fact, the petitioner, it is maintained, was promoted as Head Clerk vide resolution No. 184/5 dated 111965 and was confirmed on 2821966.
The approval of the Government was accorded to that effect vide its memo dated 1681966.
He was never promoted to the post of Superintendent by the competent authority which was Government in this case.
5.
After going through the pleadings of the parties and hearing Mr. Arihant Jain learned Assistant Advocate General Punjab, I find that this petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
It is clearly made out from the pleadings and the various documents produced on record that the petitioner manipulated record in his own favour by tampering the relevant entries in the service record.
If on his misrepresentation, he started getting pay of Superintendent, on detecting the mistake the respondents were well within their right to set the records right.
In view of the fact that the petitioner was never promoted to the post of Superintendent and had in fact manipulated the service record, I do not think that in the present case any hearing was necessary.
That apart, in view of the peculiar facts of the case petitioner cannot be permitted to have premium on fraud indulged by him.
He deserves no discretion in writ jurisdiction of this court.
This petition is thus dismissed with costs.
Petition dismissed.