RS Mongia, J (Oral) - In response to an advertisement for certain posts of Junior Engineers in the State of Haryana, the petitioners who are three in number, applied for the same and the Haryana Public Service Commission selected them and their names were recommended by the Commission to the department for issuing appointment letters.
Consequently, the petitioners were appointed as Junior Engineers vide appointment letters dated 1331969, 6.5.1969 and 27.5.1969 respectively.
These letters have been appended as Annexures R-6 to R-8 to the writ petition.
They submitted their joining reports on 30.4.1969, 14.5.1969 and 7.6.1969 respectively.
It may be observed here that prior to their regular appointment through Haryana Public Service Commission, the petitioners were initially appointed purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time the qualified candidates were made available by the Commission.
They were appointed on ad hoc basis on 651967, 651967 and 25.6.1967 respectively.
The petitioners through this writ petition are claiming that their ad hoc service from 1967 to 1969 should be counted for the purpose of seniority.
2.
In response to the notice of motion issued to the respondents, they have filed reply.
3.
The service conditions of the petitioners are governed by the statutory rules known as the Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Road Branch) Sectional Officers Engineering) Service (Class III) Rules 1964, hereinafter referred to as ` the Rules : A ` Member of the Service' has been defined in Rule 2 (1) of the Rules to mean an officer appointed substantively to a cadre post.
"Cadre Post" has been defined in Rule 2(c) of the Rules to mean a permanent post in the service.
"Service" has been defined in Rule 2 (m) to mean the Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Road Branch) Sectional Officers (Engineering ) Service, Class III and the Strength of Service is provided in Rule 3 to mean such number of posts of Sectional Officers as are specified in Appendix `A' of the Rules.
Rule 7 of the Rules provides that direct recruitment shall be made through the selection of candidates by the Board of Technical Education (now the Haryana Public Service Commission).
The appointing authority is the Chief Engineer.
Rule 11 deals with seniority.
The relevant portion is quoted below :-  "Seniority :- (1) Except as provided in sub-rule (2), the seniority of the members of the Service appointed after the commencement of these rules shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment in the service irrespective of their date of joining : Provided that where the period of probation of an official has been extended, the order of appointment shall be deemed to have been issued on a date determined by adding to the original date the extended period of probation."
4.
The case put forth by the petitioners in the writ petition is that after additional ad-hoc appointment they were regularised by the respondents after getting approval from the Public Service Commission and therefore their ad hoc service prior to the regularisation should be counted towards seniority.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioners has cited Direct Recruit Class - II Engineering Officers Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607, wherein it was laid down that even if the initial appointment is not made by the following procedure laid down by the rules the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly .
The regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service be counted."
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents, pointed out that initial appointment of the petitioners was purely on ad hoc basis made by the Superintending Engineer for a period of six months till such time the qualified candidates were available by the commission.
It was pointed out that the petitioners applied in response to an advertisement and selected by the Commission thereafter fresh appointment letters were issued.
It was not a case of regularisation, but fresh appointment.
Initial appointment under Rules as it was made as a stop gap arrangement by the Superintending Engineer, under the Rules the appointment has been made by the Chief Engineer out of those who have been selected by the Commission.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that seniority is to be determined on the date of incumbent is appointed as Junior Engineer in the service in accordance with the Rules quoted above.
It was also pointed out by the learned counsel that the seniority lists of the Junior Engineers including the petitioners was issued in January, 1975, January, 1977, August 1981 and April 1988, but no objections were filed by the petitioners regarding their seniority and it is too late in the day for the petitioners now to challenge the seniority and claim benefit of ad-hoc service towards seniority.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is no merit in the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The initial appointment of the petitioners was ad-hoc and made as a stopgap arrangement and the appointment had been made by the Superintending Engineer which was not under the Rules.
In the authority The Direct Recruit Class - II Engineering Officers Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others,(supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners, it was observed by the Supreme Court that "once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad-hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority."
As observed above, the petitioners appointment prior to 1969 was not under Rules and was in fact on wholly stop-gap and ad hoc arrangement .
Such services, as per the supreme Court judgment in The Direct Recruit Class -II Engineering Officers Association's case (supra), cannot be counted towards seniority.
The petitioners became the Members of the service on the basis of appointment letters issued in the year 1969 and the service for the purpose of seniority is to be reckoned from that date.
A part from what has been observed above, the writ petition suffers from laches also as pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents.
More than one seniority lists have been issued since 1975, but the petitioners did not choose to file objections or challenge the same.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in the present writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
However, there shall be no orders to costs.