Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Punjab Government decided to give pension to such freedom fighters as were living in Punjab and had been granted pension by the Central Government on its recommendation.
The petitioner's claim having been rejected on the ground that he did not fulfil the qualifications laid down by the Government, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A few facts relevant for the decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that after the partition of the country, he moved to and settled in Jalandhar in 1947.
He built a House No. 488-L, Market Road, Model Town, Jalandhar by raising loan from the Rehabilitation Department of the Government of Punjab.
He was working with the All India Radio and remained posted at Jalandhar for a considerable length of time.
In the course of his employment, he remained posted at different places.
He retired in the grade of Station Director, All India Radio on January 31, 1981.
While working at the Directorate General, All India Ratio, New Delhi, the petitioner was granted pension under the Freedom Fighters Scheme by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Delhi Administration.
3.
In the year 1982, the State of Punjab announced that it will give additional pension to the freedom fighters who were getting pension from the Central Government.
A copy of the order circulated by the Government in this behalf has been produced as Annexure P-4.
The petitioner avers that he applied for the grant of this pension.
After the lapse of a long time, he was called upon to furnish proof regarding his having shifted to Jalandhar after the partition of the country, vide letter dated October 27, 1986.
The petitioner furnished the requisite proof.
He even filed an affidavit indicating that he had built a house at Jalandhar.
He submitted a representation to the Governor Vide letter dated January 28, 1988, the petitioner was informed that the matter was under consideration.
He also furnished a certificate from the then Advocate-General, Punjab and domicile certificate from the Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar.
In spite of these facts, the petitioner was informed, vide letter dated May 23, 1988 `that State Government is granting a pension of Rs. 150/- per month to each of those freedom fighters who originally belong to Punjab State and are presently living in Punjab."
Since the petitioner was living in Chandigarh, it was said that he was not entitled to the grant of the said pension.
He represented against this order but did not get any reply.
The petitioner avers that a number of persons who are similarly situated and are residing at Chandigarh have been granted pension by the State of Punjab.
On these premises, the action of the State Government in declining to grant pension to the petitioner has been challenged through this petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
It has been inter alia averred that financial assistance cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
The jurisdiction of this Court cannot be invoked for claiming a concession.
It has been further averred that the petitioner is living at Chandigarh though he had initially settled at Jalandhar after partition.
It is thus maintained that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of pension and that the action of the respondent is legal and valid.
5.
I have heard Mr. GS Grewal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mrs. Charu Tuli, Assistant Advocate-General, Punjab, appearing for the respondent.
6.
Mr. Grewal has contended that the action of the respondent is wholly arbitrary and discriminatory.
On the other hand, Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the respondent has contended that the petitioner does not fulfil the condition of eligibility laid down by the respondent and was, therefore, not entitled to the grant of pension.
7.
It is apt to refer to the circular dated August 17, 1982 issued by the Government of Punjab.
It was inter alia stated as under :-  "I have been directed to write on the subject noted above that it has been decided by the Govt. to grant pension under the Punjab Govt. Pension Scheme, 1982 w.e.f.
1482 @ Rs. 100/- pm to those freedom fighters who are the inhabitants of and living in Punjab and who are getting pensions from the Govt. of India on the recommendations of the Punjab Govt. but are not getting any pension from the Punjab Govt."  Thereafter, vide letter dated April 21, 1988, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure R-11 with the written statement filed by the respondent, if was observed that the Government had made an amendment in the Scheme to the following effect :-  "The Punjab Government have now decided to give pensions, under the Punjab Government Swatantrata Sangram Pension Scheme, 1982 to those Sikh/other migrants, who have settled in Punjab due to any reasons and are getting pension from the Govt. of India irrespective of the fact that the Punjab Government had not recommended their cases to the Govt. of India."
8.
A perusal of the above shows that under the Punjab Government Swatantrata Sangram Pension Scheme, 1982, pension was admissible to all the Sikh/other migrants "who have settled in Punjab due to any reasons and are getting pension from the Government of India ------."
The petitioner is a Sikh.
He had migrated to India after the partition of the country in September 1947.
He had admittedly built a house at Jalandhar.
In the replication filed by the petitioner, it has been categorically averred by the petitioner that while working with the All India Radio, he remained posted at Jalandhar for about 12 years.
This fact has not been controverted by the respondent.
It was on account of his posting at different places that he had to leave Jalandhar.
He has also been granted pension by the Central Government.
It is on these admitted facts that the petitioner's eligibility for the grant of pension has to be considered.
9.
The circular of the Government as amended requires that in order to be eligible for the grant of pension under the 1982 Scheme, the person concern should be :-  (i) a Sikh/other migrant who has settled in Punjab; and  (ii) is getting pension from the Government of India.
The petitioner, in view of the factual position as noticed above, is a Sikh and had clearly settled in Punjab after partition of the Country.
If on account of the exigencies of service or in order to make his both ends meet, the petitioner moved to other places from Jalandhar, it cannot be said that he had not settled in Punjab.
He is also getting pension from the Government of India.
Accordingly, he fulfills both the conditions stipulated in the order of the Government of Punjab.
10.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the respondent, however, contends that the petitioner is living at Chandigarh and is, consequently, ineligible for the grant of pension under the Scheme of the State Government.
I am unable to accept this contention.
11.
Even though, in the original circular, it had been laid down that the pension was admissible to "those freedom fighters who are the inhabitants of and living in Punjab ----- ", the rigor of the condition has been completely diluted by the amendment wherein it is provided that the person should have settled in Punjab.
It is the admitted position that after partition, the petitioner had shifted to Jalandhar and built a house there.
This is a clear evidence of the fact that he had settled in Punjab.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the petitioner was eligible for that grant of pension under the Scheme of the State Government.
12.
The amount of pension granted by the Central Government as also by the State Government is very meagre.
It is impossible for any person to make both ends meet with this amount of pension.
If the person concerned has to stay out of the territorial limits of Punjab and has had shift to Chandigarh, the benefit of pension cannot be denied.
13.
Even otherwise, the Scheme was promulgated with the object of helping those who made sacrifices during the freedom struggle.
The provisions of this Scheme should be liberally construed.
This is also what appears to have been done by the Government itself.
The petitioner has given instances of 19 persons in paragraphs 21 and 22 of the petition to show that persons who were living at various places in the country including Patna, Jaipur, Calcutta etc. and Chandigarh have been granted pension by the State Government.
The defence on behalf of the respondent in respect of 12 out of these 19 instances is that the pension had been granted under the 1952 Scheme.
In other cases, highly tenuous pleas have been raised.
For instance, in respect of Mr. Harbhajan Singh Cheema, who had retired as a Gazetted officer from the Punjab Government, it has been mentioned that he was granted pension "being a resident of Punjab, though he was living in Chandigarh by virtue of his employment in Punjab Civil Secretariat."
The petitioner's case is in no way different.
If a person like Mr. Harbhajan Singh Cheema could be granted pension even though he was living in Chandigarh, there appears to be no justification for declining the same relief to the petitioner.
14.
One cannot also lose sight to the fact that the Sub-Divisional Officer, Jalandhar had certified that the petitioner "was bona fide resident of H.No.
588-L, Market Road, Model Town, Jalandhar."
Even the State Government while rejecting the petitioner's claim, had in its communication dated May 23, 1988, addressed to the Chief Commissioner, UT Administration, Chandigarh inter alia observed that since the petitioner was living in Chandigarh "UT Administration, Chandigarh may sanction pension to such like Freedom fighters ------------"  15.
Above all, the meager amount of pension sanctioned by the State is virtually no price for the sacrifices made by the freedom fighters of this country.
The petitioner has already been harassed quite a lot.
The State Government took (1982 to 1988) to decided his case.
It is time that his misery should end.
Delay would only add insult to the injury that he has already suffered.
16.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed.
It is held that the petitioner is eligible for the grant of pension under the 1982 Scheme.
The order of the State Government rejecting the petitioner's claim for pension is quashed.
The respondent is directed to compute the arrears of pension admissible to the petitioner.
These shall be paid to him within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the event of the respondent failing to make the payment within the period of three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of the amount with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date of actual payment till the date of actual payment.
The petition will also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.