Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated March 21, 1989, by which he was ordered to be retired on attaining the age of 55 years.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner avers that he was working against the post of Superintendent in Rural Artisan Training Centre, Sohna, when he was placed under suspension, vide order dated January 14, 1974.
Ultimately, the petitioner was tried in 15 cases and vide order dated September 18, 1984, the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Hansi acquitted the petitioner in all the cases.
He was still not reinstated.
The petitioner represented for the payment of subsistence allowance, etc.
The needful was not done.
Consequently, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 8811 of 1987, which was admitted and is still pending in this court.
During the pendency of this petition, the government passed an order dated March 21, 1989, by which the petitioner was given a notice that he shall retire from service on the expiry of three months from the date of the receipt of the notice.
This order has been challenged by the petitioner inter alia on the grounds of being arbitrary, penal and violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The writ petition had come up for motion hearing on April 12, 1989.
The court had directed the issue of notice of motion to the respondents.
The case then came up for hearing on May 17, 1989, when the learned Assistant Advocate-General, appearing for the State, prayed for time to file the written statement.
The request was granted and the case was adjourned to June 6, 1989.
No written statement was filed.
The writ petition was admitted and ordered to be set down for hearing on August 18, 1989.
Somehow, it appears that the petition was not taken up for hearing.
The petitioner then filed CM Application No. 5825 of 1991 praying for the release of all the retiral benefits.
Notice of this Misc. application was given to the Advocate-General, Haryana.
It was directed that the writ petition be listed for hearing along with the application for final disposal.
Still no reply was filed.
The vide order dated November 30, 1992 passed in CM Application No. 1 of 1992, it was directed that the case be listed for hearing on January 4, 1993.
The case was accordingly listed on that date.
Mr. Arun Nehra, Additional Advocate-General Haryana, had appeared and made a request for a short adjournment to enable the respondents to file a written statement.
The case was accordingly adjourned to January 18, 1993.
Still no written statement was filed.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents, states that in spite of a letter dated January 13, 1993, and three messages having been given to the Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana, Chandigarh by the office of the respondents no one has come on behalf of the respondents even with the personal file of the petitioner.
In this situation, there is no alternative except to assume that the facts stated in the writ petition are correct.
4.
The petitioner has categorically averred that he was under suspension since 1974 when the impugned order was issued.
It has been further stated that no adverse remarks have been communicated to him during the last ten years of his service.
On these premises, it is contended that the impugned order is in fact penal and is calculated to withhold the legitimate dues of the petitioner.
5.
Having perused the pleadings of the petitioner and heard Mr. RP Bali, learned counsel for the petitioner, I find that the petitioner was still under suspension when the impugned order was passed.
Retirement of a person while he is under suspension is not per se innocuous.
It is well known that during the period of suspension a person does not get full emoluments.
The petitioner's grievance is that he was not even paid the subsistence allowance.
It is also averred that the benefit of the revision of pay scale was also not given to him.
If order of suspension had been revoked and the period of suspension had been properly regularised in accordance with the rules and thereafter an order of compulsory retirement had been passed after consideration of the service record of the petitioner, the action would perhaps have been within the provision of the rules.
However, the order of premature retirement while the employee is still under suspension carries a definite stigma as also the penal consequence of loss of certain benefits like arrears of salary etc.
In such a situation, an order of retirement could have been passed only after complying with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution and the provision of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
Nothing of the sort having been done, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
6.
Accordingly, the impugned order is quashed.
The respondents are further directed to release all the consequential benefits that ensue.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
The needful shall be done by the respondents within three months, from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case the payment is not made within the aforesaid period, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest on the amount found due at the rate of 12% per annum.
7.
A post script.
It is directed that a copy of this order be sent to the Chief Secretary.
It is a fit case where responsibility for not taking adequate steps regarding the filing of the written statement etc. should be fixed.
Failure to defend the case properly results in avoidable loss to the State exchequer.
Somebody should have sympathy even for the tax payers' money.
The person found responsible should be made to suffer adequately for the loss that may be caused to the State.
Order accordingly.