Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By the present judgment we propose to dispose of LPA Nos. 948 and 959 of 1991 and CWP No. 18485 of 1991.
The facts have been taken from the former case.
1.
The appellant, Chaman Lal Sadana, while working as a Manager in the Industries Department, Punjab, was appointed in a similar capacity in the services of the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation (for short the `Corporation') as a concession with effect from 30th June, 1984 after the post that he was holding in the Government had been abolished.
The appellant thereafter on 14th September, 1989 sought voluntary retirement from the Corporation but the request for voluntary retirement was treated as a resignation instead and an order dated 23rd January, 1990 was made to that effect.
The aforesaid order Annexure P-7 to the petition was impugned by the appellant by way of a writ petition.
In addition to a challenge to the validity of Annexure P-7 the appellant also claimed the benefit of the payment of pension, gratuity and other retiral benefits which were available to his class of employees and for that purpose sought continuity of service under the Government and the Corporation.
The learned single Judge found that the order Annexure P-7 insofar as it treated the request for retirement as one of resignation was bad in law and was liable to be quashed, but on the question of the award of other retiral benefits to the appellant and particularly the claim to continuity of service, the writ petition was dismissed.
Aggrieved by the order of the learned single Judge granting him only partial relief, the appellant filed the present Letters Patent Appeal, whereas the Corporation aggrieved by the grant of even the limited relief filed LPA No. 959 of 1991 CWP No. 18485 of 1991 was also filed by similarly situated employees of the Corporation seeking the benefit of continuity of service.
2.
It has been urged by Mr. Sadana, learned counsel for the appellant, that his client was entitled to count his service under the Government from the year 1965 to 30th June, 1984 alongwith the service put in under the Corporation for the purpose of the computation of his pension and other retiral benefits.
In support of this assertion, he has relied on Rule 53 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II (for short the `Rules') to contend that a permanent government employee who was permanently absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or Company, wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the Government, was entitled to receive such retirement benefits which were due to him from the date of absorption or on the date of his voluntary retirement, whichever was later.
He has asserted that this concession was also made applicable to a temporary government employee such as the appellant by virtue of Annexure P-1 dated 6th July, 1989.
He has also urged, in addition, that in similar circumstances the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gurmail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1991 (3) Services Cases Today 608 while dealing with the case of employees similarly situated of the Punjab State Tubewells Corporation had granted them continuity of service alongwith attendant benefits.
3.
The stand of the appellant has been controverted by the counsel for the opposite parties.
It has been asserted that Rule 53. of the Rules did not create a right to payment or computation of pension nor did it provide that service put in under the Government and the Corporation should count as one for the purpose of computing the retiral benefits.
It has also been urged that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Gurmail Singh's case (supra) was distinguishable on facts inasmuch as in that matter the services of the employees who were admittedly workmen had been retrenched without following the procedure under the Industrial Disputes Act and no contract of service had been entered into between them at the time when they were retrenched from the Punjab Government service and they had been absorbed in the Tubewell Corporation only after the judgments of the Courts in their favour.
In elaboration, it has been urged that at the time of absorption of the appellant in the services of the Corporation, had been clearly made to understand that he was being given a fresh appointment on certain specific conditions.
Reference has been made by Mr. AL Bahl, learned counsel for the Corporation in the present case, to Annexures R-1 to R-4 filed with the reply.
Annexure R-1 conveys the sanction of the President of India to the transfer of the various Leather Centres (in one of which the appellant was also working) to the Corporation.
Annexure R-2 is an office order issued by the Director of Industries Punjab wherein it has been specifically mentioned that the post held by the appellant alongwith other posts had been abolished and the incumbent thereon were being discharged, but would be deemed to have been taken on the rolls of the Corporation with effect from 1st July, 1984, and their services would be governed by the service Bye-laws of the concerned Corporation.
It was also made specifically clear that the pay and inter se seniority of the absorbed employees as on 30th June, 1984, would be protected.
Annexure R-3 is the letter of appointment issued to the appellant in which it was made clear that his absorption was, in fact, a fresh appointment requiring completion of probation if any period of one year, which could be extended by an other year, if necessary.
Annexure R-4 is a communication addressed by the Corporation to the appellant wherein it was directed that in case he did not send his final and unconditional acceptance to all the terms and conditions of the appointment offered vide Annexure R-3, his services were liable to be dispensed with.
It has been conceded before us that no formal acceptance was sent by the appellant but, in our opinion, as he continued to work on the terms and conditions set out for a very long time, it impliedly meant that he had accepted the terms of his appointment as a fresh appointee.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that there is no merit in the appeal.
We have considered the first argument of Mr. Sardana that Rule 53 of the Rules read alongwith letter Annexure P-1, referred to above, creates a right to continuity of service and payment of pension to the appellant on that basis.
Rule 53 of the Rules is quoted below :  53(1) When a Government employee is transferred from pensionable Government service to a non-pensionable establishment, he cannot be granted any pension or gratuity admissible to him for the qualifying portion of his service until he actually retires from the non-pensionable establishment to which he is transferred.
(2) A permanent Government employee who may be permitted to be permanently absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by Government or in or under a body controlled or financed by Government or Municipality, Panchayat Samiti or Zila Parishad, shall if such absorption is declared by Government to be in the public interest, be deemed to have retired from Government service from the date of such absorption and shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits which he may have elected or deemed to have elected, and from the date of such absorption or the date of his voluntary retirement, whichever is later.
Each such Government employee is required to exercise an option within six months of his absorption for either of the alternative indicated."
5.
A mere reading of Rule 53 does not support the case of the appellant.
It will be seen that all that this rule provides is that on absorption in the services of the Corporation a former Government employee would be entitled to get pensionary benefits that had accrued to him for his services under the Government, but the payment thereof was to be postponed to the date of absorption or the date of voluntary retirement, whichever was later.
In other words, this rule only fixes the time for the grant of retirement benefits to those already entitled, but does not by itself create any right to any retiral benefits.
6.
The reliance of the appellant on Gurmail Singh's case (supra) is also to no avail.
We agree with the learned counsel for the respondents that Gurmail Singh's case was decided on its own peculiar facts, more particularly, keeping in view the circumstances that the services of the workmen in those cases by the Corporation had been wrongly terminated and they had not entered into any fresh contract with the Corporations.
In the present case, the appellant had with his wide eyes open vide Annexures R-1 to R-4 accepted a fresh appointment and he now cannot turn around and say that he was not bound by his contract to service.
7.
In the connected LPA the relief granted to Chaman Lal Sadana appellant has not been opposed by the counsel for the Corporation.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeals as also the writ petition are dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.