KP Bhandari, J - The plaintiff-respondent is a teacher who was in the service of the State of Haryana.
She has put in fairly long service although on the date of termination of her services she was still treated to be ad hoc.
This is a very hard case.
The respondent was suffering from heart disease and was undergoing treatment in a government hospital at New Delhi.
She forwarded applications for the sanction of the leave.
The leave applications were not rejected and no orders were conveyed.
Education department thought that ad hoc employee is not entitled to medical leave.
Reference was being made from one department to another.
Her services were terminated on the ground that she was absent from duty.
2.
The plaintiff-respondent filed a suit challenging her order of termination of service on the ground that the said order was passed by way of punishment and was passed without affording her opportunity of being heard so the order of termination was in violation of the mandatory provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution.
It was also challenged that the order is violative of principles of natural justice.
It is also the stand of the plaintiff-respondent that she was entitled to regularisation of her service as her case was covered by the government instructions.
It is also asserted in the plaint that the termination order is arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious.
The Subordinate Judge 1st Class, Faridabad, tried the suit.
The suit was, however, dismissed.
Plaintiff-respondent went in appeal before the Additional District Judge, Faridabad who did not set aside the order of termination.
He, however, passed a decree in favour of the plaintiff- respondent that she should be re-employed.
3.
Aggrieved against the order of the Additional District Judge, Faridabad, the State has come in appeal.
In appeal notice of motion was issued to the respondent and the respondent has filed cross objections claiming that her suit was wrongly dismissed and she is entitled to the full relief claimed in the plaint.
4.
Records of the case were called and the counsel for the parties were heard in detail.
Admittedly, in this case the services of plaintiff-respondent were terminated on the ground of absence from duty.
In fact, the respondent was not absent from duty.
She was undergoing treatment in a government hospital, New Delhi.
She submitted her leave applications but no orders were passed on the leave applications.
It has been authoritatively laid down by the Supreme Court in Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1966 SC 492, that if the services of government servant are terminated on the ground that he had absented without sanctioned leave such termination of service is by way of punishment and such an order cannot be passed without complying with the mandatory provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Admittedly, the plaintiff-respondent was not given any opportunity of being heard in this case.
The trial Court was in error in dismissing the suit by ignoring the mandatory provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the scope of the government instructions.
6.
The learned Additional District Judge in appeal also did not appreciate that the case was squarely covered by the mandatory provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution and the order of termination was passed by way of punishment on the ground of absence from duty.
Her services could not be terminated without affording any opportunity of being heard.
7.
It is also significant to mention that the leave applications submitted by the plaintiff-respondent were not declined and no such order was ever conveyed to her.
It was obligatory on the part of the appellant-State to afford the respondent an opportunity of being heard before passing the termination order according to the principles of natural justice.
The, principles of natural justice have been flagrantly violated and services of the plaintiff-respondent have been terminated without giving an opportunity of being heard.
8.
The persons who were junior to the plaintiff-respondent in service have been regularised.
The respondent who was undergoing treatment for the cardiac trouble has been terminated from the service on the ground that she was an ad hoc teacher.
The persons who were junior to the respondent and have less length of service than the respondent have been regularised.
The case of the plaintiff-respondent falls within the scope of the government instructions relating to regularisation of services.
The plaintiff-respondent was entitled to be regularised in service as she fulfilled the conditions laid down in the instructions.
Prima facie the order of termination of service is wholly illegal, arbitrary, unreasonable, capricious and is hit by the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
For this reason also, the order of termination is liable to be struck down.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, the cross objections are accepted with costs throughout and judgment and decree passed by the courts below are set aside.
The suit of the plaintiff respondent is decreed thereby holding that the order of termination of service is wholly illegal, ultra vires, null and void and unconstitutional.
The respondent always continues to be in the service of the State.
She is entitled to all the arrears of pay and allowances along with 12 per cent interest.
Services of plaintiff-respondent shall also stand regularised.
The State-appellant is directed to reinstate the respondent immediately and release the back wages with interest within three months from today.
The State appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.