Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the impugned order dated 531987, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, vide which the petitioner was to retire from service prematurely after the expiry of three months' notice.
2.
The challenge to the impugned notice is on the grounds that the petitioner had a clean and outstanding record throughout and there was no material with the respondents to retire him prematurely from service.
The impugned order casts a stigma on the petitioner as it has been passed as a measure of punishment.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned order was passed in an arbitrary manner, As such, the same is liable to be quashed.
3.
The respondent-State has filed a detailed written statement in which it is stated that a Govt. employee whose service record is found unsatisfactory cannot be retained in service after attaining the age of 55 years.
It is further stated that the petitioner was charge-sheeted during 1984 for not giving Dhal Bash to a Lambardar and remaining absent from duty.
It is also stated that the petitioner did not furnish his explanation.
4.
I have given consideration to the arguments advanced at the Bar by the learned Counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
The respondents had also produced the ACRs of the petitioner, the scanning of which reveals as under :-  1968-69 Not hardworking and inefficient.
1970-71 A thoroughly useless Patwari, dishonest, disinterested in work and declines to reform himself.
1972-75 ACRs not available.
1978-79 He requires hard work for promotion.
1980-81 Not effective worker.
The perusal of the abovesaid entries in the ACRs reveals that the petitioner was not only an inefficient worker but also dishonest.
A full Bench of this Court in LPA No. 11 of 1992 decided on November 2, 1992 has laid down certain principles, the relevant being (iii) is that if there are some unfavourable remarks pertaining to such government servant after the crossing of the efficiency bar, his continuance in service, after the qualifying period or promotion, as the case may be past events may be looked into to assess his present conduct.
In principle No. (v) it was observed by the Bench that the entire record of service of the Government servant concerned with greater emphasis and importance being given to his record during the later years, must be taken into consideration while deciding the matter pertaining to his retention in service or premature retirement after the requisite qualifying service.
5.
It is not the case of the petitioner that he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar or was given promotion to a higher post even after the adverse entries.
As mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, the petitioner was retired from service prematurely in public interest.
I have reached the conclusion that there was sufficient material for retiring the petitioner prematurely.
From the perusal of the impugned order, Annexure P-1, it is revealed that the same does not cast any stigma on the petitioner.
The Courts have already time and again held that premature retirement from service is not a punishment.
In view of the principles laid down by this Court in LPA No. 11 of 1992 referred to above, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
No order as to costs.