Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Technologist in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (hereinafter referred to as 'the PGI') was directed to look after the work of Civil Division in addition to his own duties vide order dated December 14, 1991.
Simultaneously, the post of Hospital Engineer was advertised for being filled up by direct recruitment.
Claiming that the petitioner has a right to be appointed to the post of Hospital Engineer (Civil) on regular basis and that the advertisement as also the Rule governing the recruitment to the post are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the petitioner has approached this court through the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Sectional Officer on July 16, 1973.
He was promoted to the post of Technologist Grade-I on May 24, 1980.
This post is stated to be in the rank of an Assistant Engineer.
On a demand having been made by the Engineers Association, the Government of India constituted a Committee to review the functioning etc. of the Engineering Department of the PGI It is averred that the committee submitted its report according to which it was recommended that an employee should have a rise once in every 10 years if his performance is found to be satisfactory.
It was further recommended that "persons already" working in the Organisation should have reasonable chances of promotion if they are qualified and competent.
"The petitioner avers that in spite of these recommendations made by the Committee while framing the rules for recruitment to the post of Hospital Engineer, the claims of the persons already working were completely ignored and it was provided that the post shall be filled up by direct recruitment or by deputation from Central/State Government.
It is further averred that even an age limit of 40 years was prescribed as a result of which various persons working in the Institute were rendered ineligible.
In spite of the efforts to have these rules reviewed nothing has been done.
3.
While this matter was pending on December 14, 1991, the petitioner was called upon to look after the work of Civil Division in addition to his own duties.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.5.
Shortly thereafter, on December 26, 1991 two persons working in the Punjab State Electricity Board joined in the PGI as Hospital Engineers.
Against the post of Hospital Engineer (Civil), the institute was proceeding to appoint respondent No. 2.
Before he could actually join the petitioner approached this court through the present petition.
Almost simultaneously, two posts of Hospital Engineers, one for Civil and one for Planning were advertised by the PGI A copy of the advertisement has been produced as Annexure P.7.
The academic and other qualifications have been prescribed.
Both the posts have been reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes and upper age limit of 40 years "but relaxable by 5 years for Scheduled Caste candidates" has also been prescribed.
4.
In the background of this factual position, the petitioner has a two- fold grievance.
Firstly, he submits that the action of the PGI in not filling up the post of Hospital Engineer by promotion from amongst persons working in the Institute itself is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
On these premises, the petitioner claims that he has a right to be regularised on the post already held by him.
The further grievance made is that the provision in the rules providing that the post had to be filled up either by direct recruitment or by deputation amounts to a denial of equality of opportunity.
The petitioner further submits that even if it is assumed that the appointment by direct recruitment is a reasonable method the action of the respondents is still violative of Article 16 inasmuch as both the posts have been exclusively reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and persons already working in the Institute have been rendered ineligible by prescription of an age limit of 40 years accordingly a prayer for the issue of an appropriate writ, order or direction quashing the provision of the rule the advertisement and for regularising the services of the petitioner has been made.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position is not seriously disputed.
It has been inter alia averred that there are five posts of Hospital Engineers in the Institute.
In order to attract the most suitable persons, the posts are advertised.
This action is in conformity with the rules governing the recruitment to the post.
It has also been averred that the petitioner had been given only the current duty charge of the post.
He has no right to continue as a Hospital Engineer.
On these premises the claim as made out in the petition is sought to be contested.
6.
I have heard Mr. KK Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. DS Nehra, for the respondents.
Mr. Jagia contends that every employee has a right to get at least two promotions in his career.
In spite of the recommendations of the Lakshmiah Committee appointed by the Central Government in this behalf, a rule has been framed for filling up the posts exclusively by direct recruitment or deputation.
Learned counsel submits that the rule is ultra vires of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
He further submits that even the reservation of the two posts advertised by the PGI for members of Scheduled Castes amounts to 100% reservation which cannot be sustained.
Further the learned counsel submits that the prescription of an age limit of 40 years has no rational relationship with the object of selecting the best candidates especially when the person appointed to the post to continue in service upto the age of 58 years.
On these premises, the learned counsel submits that the petitioner who has a good record of service is entitled to be regularised on the post held by him.
Mr. Nehra appearing for the respondents controverts the claim of the petitioner.
7.
It is no doubt correct that reasonable opportunities for further promotion are necessary to provide incentive for hard worker.
It is also true that in the absence of prospects of promotion, a process of " degeneration and stagnation" can set in.
However, in the context of the facts of the present case, it does not appear that the petitioner has had no chance of advancement in his career.
Admittedly, the petitioner had joined the service of the Institute on July 16, 1973 as a Sectional Officer and he was promoted to the post of Technologist Grade-I which is equal to that of Assistant Engineer on May 24, 1980.
It cannot as such be said that no avenue of promotion was provided to the petitioner.
Further in the context of the facts of the present case, it also does not appear that the provision in the rule that the post of Hospital Engineer shall be filled up by direct recruitment or by deputation from the Central/State Government is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution Even if the posts are to be filled up by direct recruitment, persons already serving in the Institute can compete.
Avenue of advancement is thus available.
Every person who fulfils the prescribed qualifications is entitled to compete.
Therefore, the challenge to the provision in the recruitment rules insofar as the mode of appointment is concerned is not sustainable.
8.
Every employer especially a State and its instrumentalities are entitled to select the best persons for employment.
If they prescribe the method of direct recruitment for filling up a responsible position of Hospital Engineer, it cannot be said that those already in the service of the Institute are being denied an opportunity of advancement.
Equally the method of deputation can be resorted to for availing the services of a good or outstanding person serving under the state or the Central Government.
Consequently, the challenge insofar as it relates to the mode of appointment cannot be sustained.
9.
Equally lacking in merit is the petitioner's claim for regularisation.
By order dated December 14, 1991, the petitioner was only called upon to look after the work of Civil Division in addition to his own duties.
This was not a regular appointment made to the post of Hospital Engineer (Civil).
It confers no indefeasible right on the petitioner to hold the post.
In the very nature of things it was an interim arrangement.
If for appointment of a suitable person this arrangement is sought to be reversed by the PGI, no infirmity can be found in its action.
10.
This brings me to the consideration of next submission of Mr. Jagia that the reservation of two posts for members of Scheduled Castes and the prescription of an age limit of 40 years in the rule as well as the advertisement is violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
11.
It is no doubt correct that as has been pointed out in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that there are a total of five posts in the rank of Hospital Engineer.
These are in fields of Civil Planning, Construction, Electrical and Air-conditioning and Bio-Medical Mr. Nehra, appearing for the respondent-PGI, further points out that the post of Hospital Engineer (Construction) was created temporarily in order to look after the construction work in the PGI and is not a regular post.
Accordingly, it appears that there are a total of four posts.
However, each one of these posts is separately sanctioned.
Even in the written statement it has been categorically stated that there is one post of Hospital Engineer (Civil).
Similarly, there is another post of.
Hospital Engineer (Electrical and Air-conditioning).
It has not been shown that the qualifications for these posts are identical or that a person appointed to one post can be transferred to another.
On consideration of the designation assigned to each one of these posts, it appears reasonable to conclude that the nature of duties of each of these posts are vitally different.
To illustrate, a Hospital Engineer (Civil) would normally look after the work of construction and maintenance of buildings while a Hospital Engineer (Bio-Medical) would be employed to look after the installation and maintenance of the medical equipment in the Hospital.
The qualifications for these two posts cannot be the same.
It is in the background of this factual position that the validity of the action of the respondent in reserving the posts of Hospital Engineer (Civil) or Hospital Engineer (Planning) for members of Scheduled Castes has to be considered.
12.
Keeping in view the fact that each of the four posts has been separately mentioned and also the fact that person appointed on one post cannot be transferred to another, it does not appear permissible for the Institute to reserve the two posts advertised by it in the cadre of Hospital Engineer (Civil) and (Planning) this amounts to 100% reservation.
Not only that the post of Hospital Engineer (Civil) against which the petitioner is working at the moment is a solitary post in the cadre but it is a solitary vacancy also in the year.
Reservation in such a situation to the extent provision in the advertisement in reserving both the posts for members of Scheduled Castes cannot be sustained.
13.
Even the prescription of an age limit of 40 years appears to be unreasonable.
It is no doubt correct that an employer can prescribe a reasonable age limit to that a person is available for service for a reasonable period.
However, keeping in view the fact that persons who have already put in long years of service, like the petitioner who has served the Institute from the year 1973 to 1992, i.e. for about 19 years and may have crossed the age limit of 40 years, would be rendered totally ineligible the action does not appear to be fair.
In such a situation, it would be reasonable to hold that the persons who are already in the service of the respondent-Institute should be granted the benefit of relaxation in such a way that they are not deprived of the chance to compete for the post.
Accordingly, it is held that the provision in the Rule as also the advertisement prescribing an age limit of 40 years at least in respect of those already working in the Institute is unreasonable and persons already in the service of the Institute should be allowed to compete for the post.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, the advertisement (Annexure P.7) and the provision in the rule to the extent of prescribing an age limit of 40 years is set aside.
The respondents are directed to fill up the post of Hospital Engineer (Civil) after re-advertising it.
Keeping in view the fact that the Motion Bench had vide order dated January 13, 1992 stayed the reversion of the petitioner and that this order was not vacated even at the time of the admission of the writ petition, it appears reasonable that the petitioner should be allowed to continue to hold the additional charge of the post till it is filled up by direct recruitment on regular basis.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
However, in the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition disposed of.