MR Agnihotri & JL Gupta, JJ.
- The petitioner, an Assistant Grade-I(D) in the Food Corporation of India, was placed under suspension vide order dated January 30, 1985. the suspension order was revoked on September 30, 1989.
However, the increments which fell due during the years 1986 to 1989 were not released to the petitioner.
His representation and a notice through counsel having elicited no response from the respondents, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It has been urged that the action of the respondents in not releasing the increments is wholly without jurisdiction, discriminatory and illegal.
2.
In response to the notice of motion, a written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents through the Senior Regional Manager, Punjab Region, Food Corporation of India, Chandigarh.
It has been averred that the claim made by the petitioner is computable in terms of money and therefore a writ petition having been filed in the year 1992 is highly belated.
On merits it has been averred that the employees of the Corporation are not entitled to the grant of annual increments "if such employees are on earned leave/half-pay leave until he joins his duty.
Therefore, the employee who is under suspension is not entitled to annual increment as he is paid subsistence allowance equal to half pay leave drawn by him at the time of suspension.
"On these premises, the action in not releasing the increments to the petitioner is sought to be supported.
3.
We have heard Mr. RP Kansal, earned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Hemant Gupta, Advocate for the respondents.
4.
An employer has an undoubted right to suspend an employee in accordance with the rules or regulations governing the conditions of service.
In case of the employees of the Food Corporation of India, Regulations have been framed under section 45 of the Food Corporation of India Act, 1964.
Regulation 66 permits the appointing authority or any other authority duly empowered authority or any other authority duly empowered in this behalf to place an employee under suspension when an enquiry is contemplated or is pending.
Suspension can also be ordered in certain other cases specified in the Regulation.
However, this suspension is only of an interim nature.
It is not penal.
It does not ipso facto deprive the employee of his right to the grant of increment etc. Stoppage of increments is by itself a penalty which can be imposed only after following the requisite procedure and in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
5.
In the present case, the petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated January 30, 1985.
This order was revoked on September 30, 1989.
No order for stoppage of increments even is stated to have been passed.
It has not even been shown that a charge-sheet has been issued or an enquiry is pending against the petitioner.
In such a situation, there appears to be no warrant or authority to support the action of the respondents.
No Rule, Regulation or instruction has been brought to our notice by the respondents to justify the action.
6.
The only defence taken on behalf of the respondents is that a person is not granted increments when he is on earned leave or half-pay leave.
If the rules so provide, an employee may not be entitled to the grant of increments during the period he is on earned leave or half-pay leave.
However, an employee is not on leave during the period of suspension.
Consequently, the fact that an employee is not entitled to increments during the period of leave is no ground for the refusal to grant increments during the period of suspension.
7.
As such, we are constrained to hold that the action of the respondents is wholly without jurisdiction and authority of law.
8.
It also deserves notice that in paragraph 7 of the writ petition, the petitioner has enumerated the names of 11 persons to show that increments had been granted to all other persons who were placed under suspension alongwith him vide order dated January 30, 1985.
This averment has been unreservedly admitted.
No explanation whatsoever has been offered for this invidious discrimination against the petitioner.
In such a situation, the action is also violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It is patently arbitrary.
9.
As for the preliminary objections raised on behalf of the respondents, it may be mentioned that the petitioners has sought an appropriate writ order or direction to the respondents for the release of his increments.
It is not a pure claim of money.
Consequently, the objections that the such the writ petition is not maintainable, cannot be sustained.
10.
Equally lacking in merit is the objection regarding delay.
The petitioner had remained under suspension till September 30, 1989.
Thereafter he had submitted a representation.
He had even served a legal notice.
An averment in this behalf has been categorically made in para 5 of the petition.
This averment has not been denied.
That being the position, the petitioner can not be accused of any inordinate delay in approaching this Court.
In fact, the respondents have failed to take action even when the mistake was pointed out to them by the petitioner.
We, therefore, reject the plea of delay raised on behalf of the respondents.
11.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the increments due to the petitioner from the year 1986 to 1989.
After releasing the increments, the petitioner's pay shall be refixed and the arrears of salary shall be paid to him at the earliest.
In any case, the respondents shall do the needful within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
In case of failure to make the payment of arrears within three months, the petitioner shall also be entitled to the payment of interest on the amounts found due for the various years at the rate of 12 per annum from the date of accrual till date of actual payment.
The petitioner will also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.