KP Bhandari, J - Respondent was serving as a Driver with the Punjab Roadways, Hoshiarpur Depot.
He was awarded punishment of stoppage of one annual increment by the General Manager of the Depot on 2011982.
Before passing the impugned order as a show-cause notice was issued to the respondent.
2.
The respondent has filed a suit to challenge the aforesaid order dated 2011982 passed by the General Manager on various grounds.
The suit was decreed by the Senor Subordinate Judge, Hoshiarpur on 2.4.1990.
The State filed an appeal against the judgment and decree dated 2.4.1990 passed by the Senior Subordinate Judge, Hoshiarpur, which came up for hearing before the Additional District Judge, Hoshiarpur.
3.
The only point argued in the second appeal by the learned State Counsel is that in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Syed Qamarali, 1967 S.L.R.
228 the claim for arrears of pay and allowance should have been limited to three years prior to the institution of the suit.
4.
Notice of motion was issued in this case.
Shri RS Randhawa, Advocate, appeared for the respondent and has submitted at the hearing of the appeal that he has instructions from Sadhu Singh, respondent, that he will not claim any back wages for the period exceeding three years preceding the date of filing the suit.
He, however, submitted that the entire period of service of respondent be counted towards pension, promotion, seniority and other allied benefits.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the learned trial Court has rightly come to the conclusion that the impugned order stopping the increment is illegal, ultra vires and null and void.
This finding has been affirmed in appeal by the Additional District Judge.
6.
If the order of punishment awarded is void being in contravention of the mandatory provisions of law or the principles of natural justice it is not necessary to get the order set aside.
The government servant can claim his back wages ignoring such orders for the period which is within limitation.
Pay of a government servant is a recurring right and the right to claim pay accrues every month.
A government servant has a right to draw the pay till the age of superannuation.
If the order is void, the government servant can always claim three years back wages which are due on the date of the institution of the suit.
Of course, two months notice period under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 will have to be added.
7.
In view of the above, this appeal is partly accepted with no order as to costs.
The respondent will be entitled to claim three years back wages which were due on the date of the suit.
In addition he will be entitled to two months wages in view of the requirement of Section 80 of the C.P.C.
It is, however, clarified that the respondent would be entitled to back wages for the period subsequent to the date of the filing of the suit which have become due during the pendency of the case.
However, the entire period of service of the respondent will count towards fixation of pay, seniority, promotion and other allied matters.