RS Mongia, J - (Sic) Course became vacant in the College as the candidate selected against the defence quota seat did not join.
On 7th December, 1990, the Principal of the Faridkot College informed Principal, Medical College, Patiala, who was the Chairman of the Selection Committee, regarding seats which were vacant in the MBBS course.
It was mentioned that apart from other seats in different categories, one seat in the defence quota remained unfilled.
One Vivek Sekhri who was also in waiting list of the General category was offered that seat.
He, however, informed the College on 14th March, 1991 that he was not interested to get admission in the College (Annexure P-1 with the writ petition).
2.
The Principal of the College after more than one month of the receipt of the letter from Shri Vivek Sekhri, wrote to the petitioner on 19th April, 1991 that she was being offered the seat in the MBBS Ist Professional course for the session 1991, subject to medical fitness, verification of all original certificates and approval of the University.
A copy of this letter has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
The petitioner left her studies in the BDS course where she was earlier admitted and joined Medical College, Faridkot on 23rd April, 1991.
From the record, I find that thereafter a letter was written by the Principal of the College to the University on 17th December, 1991, for getting approval regarding the late admission of the petitioner.
The University informed the Principal of the College vide latter dated 24th December, 1991 (Annexure R-4 with the written statement of the College) that the case of granting approval to the late admission of the petitioner in Ist Professional MBBS class could only be considered in case the student submitted an affidavit duly attested by the Magistrate, Ist Class, to the effect that she would appear in the Ist Professional MBBS examination only after completing 1-1/2 years period of studies/75% lectures and attendance as per ordinance of the University.
The petitioner filed the requisite affidavit on 30th December, 1991 to the Principal of the College and the same was remitted to the University by the College on 3rd January, 1992.
On 14th January, 1992 (Annexure R-6 with the written statement of the College), the University wrote to the Principal of the College that approval had been accorded to the late admission of the petitioner, subject to the further approval by the Academic Council and under the condition that she would appear in the annual examination of the Ist Professional MBBS only after completing her requisite 1-1/2 years' studies and after attending 75% of the lectures in theory and practicals.
3.
The Ordinance of the University relating to the eligibility for appearing in the Ist Professional MBBS examination may be noticed :-  "(1) of having attended not less than 75% of the full course of lectures delivered and practicals held separately in each of the subjects of the examination; provided that deficiency in the number of lectures, and in clinical and practicals may be condoned by the Principal as decided by the Academic Council.
(2) of having undergone for not less than 1-1/2 academic years, the subjects of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry."
The examination of the Ist Professional MBBS course was to commence on 15th July, 1992.
By that time, the petitioner had attended the requisite 75% of the lectures after her admission on 23rd April, 1991.
She also attended extra classes arranged during the vacation to complete the requisite number of lectures.
Up to 15th July, 1992, the petitioner would have completed 14 months and 23 days of studies in the MBBS Ist Professional course which she had joined on 23rd April, 1991.
She was, however, not permitted to appear in the examination, which was to be held on 15th July, 1992, which led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
The Motion Bench while issuing Notice of Motion on 13th July, 1992, gave interim direction permitting the petitioner to appear in the Ist Professional MBBS examination which was to commence on 15th July, 1992.
4.
It was averred by the petitioner in the writ petition that in many cases like that of Sarvshri Vikas Dhir and Sanjeev Kumar etc., who had not completed 1-1/2 years' studies under the Ordinance, the student had been allowed to appear in the Ist Professional MBBS examination, which was to commence on 15th July, 1992, by relaxation of that condition.
The petitioner alleged discrimination.
5.
In reply, the respondents have taken a Preliminary Objection that there is suppression of material facts in the writ petition, inasmuch as it had not been disclosed that the University had approved the late admission of the petitioner after an affidavit had been filed by her that she would appear in the Ist Professional MBBS examination only after completing 1-1/2 years' studies.
According to the respondents, the doctrine of `equitable estoppel' would be attracted against the petitioner in the present case.
On merits, it was contended that the Ordinance pertaining to the requirement of 1-1/2 years' studies regarding the eligibility for appearing in the Ist Professional MBBS examination is mandatory and further for the entire course of MBBS, 4-1/2 years' studies have to be completed by taking the date of admission as 23rd April, 1991 in the case of the petitioner.
In reply to the averment regarding discrimination, it was stated by the respondents, that on 5th January, 1991, the Academic Council of the University had taken a policy decision that the requirement of 1-1/2 years' studies in the Ist Professional course as required under the Ordinance can be reduced to 15 months.
Since, in the case of those persons mentioned by the petitioner, they had completed 15 months or more studies, a relaxation was given in their favour to exempt them from the rigour of the Ordinance regarding 1-1/2 years' of studies.
Since the period of studies of the petitioner was 7 days short of 15 months, no relaxation could be given in her favour.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the University gave relaxation to various students after the petitioner had filed the affidavit.
All students under the Ordinance are required to undergo 1-1/2 years' studies.
Since after the filing of the affidavit by the petitioner, the University had relaxed the condition of the Ordinance requiring 1-1/2 years' studies, the learned counsel submitted that the affidavit had into insignificance as the University itself was not adhering to the condition of 1-1/2 years of studies.
It was under these circumstances, according of the learned counsel, that this fact was not mentioned in the writ petition, as the same was not very relevant for deciding the issue.
The same was the argument regarding the equitable estoppel, which was sought to be applied against the petitioner by the respondents.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that it would have been much better if this fact regarding submission of affidavit had been mentioned by the petitioner in the writ petition.
However, it cannot be said that by non-mentioning of the fact, any advantage was obtained by the petitioner or that it would have made any difference on the merits of the case.
This is because of the fact that after the petitioner had filed the affidavit, the University relaxed the condition of 1-1/2 years' studies required under the Ordinance in case of some of the students.
The whole grievance of the petitioner in this petition is of discrimination, as to why those students who were required to undergo 1-1/2 years' studies under the Ordinance and the petitioner who was required to undergo the course also of 1-1/2 years' duration, for which she had given an affidavit, were being treated differently.
Consequently, I overrule the objection of the respondents.
8.
It was further argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the period of 1-1/2 years' studies mentioned in the Ordinance is not mandatory, inasmuch as the Academic Council of the University itself decided on 5th January, 1991 that it may be of 15 months in a given case.
If the requirement under the Ordinance was mandatory, the Academic Council could not have reduced that period.
What seems to be mandatory is the attendance of 75% of lectures in theory and practicals.
This was completed by the petitioner and there is no dispute on this fact.
The petitioner was only short of 7 days of 15 months of studies as compared to those candidates in whose favour relaxation was granted.
It would be seen in the present case, that the petitioner was studying in the BDS Course and it is not the case that the petitioner was whiling away time doing nothing.
Some of the initial course of BDS and MBBS is common.
Apart from that, I find that the last date for admission in the MBBS course was 31st October, 1990 and the Principal of the College informed about the vacancy of seat only on 7th December, 1990 and even after one Vivek Sikri to whom the seat had been offered, had informed the College on 14th March, 1991, that he was not interested to get admission, the College authorities took their own time and informed the petitioner only on 19th April, 1991 that she was in offered the seat.
The petitioner lost no time and joined the MBBS course on 23rd April, 1991.
Had the Principal taken steps expeditiously to fill in the vacant seat, this problem would not have arisen at all.
The petitioner is not to be blamed at all.
The University Authorities have not considered all the above facts as to whether petitioner was entitled to appear in the examination, though short by 7 days of 15 months' study period.
Consequently it is held that on the facts and circumstances of this case, the petitioner could not be denied the right to appear in the Ist Professional M.B.B.S, examination on 15th July, 1992.
9.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner was entitled to appear in the Ist Professional of MBBS examination held by the University on 15th July, 1992, and she would be treated at par with the other students in whose cases the condition of 1-1/2 years' studies was relaxed.
By virtue of the interim direction of this Court the petitioner had already appeared in the MBBS Ist Professional examination which commenced on 15th July, 1992.
The University is directed to declare the result of the petitioner.
Further as per the order of this Court dated 23rd September, 1992 in Civil Misc.
Application No. 1 of 1992 in the present writ petition, the petitioner would be deemed to be a regular student of the 2nd Professional of MBBS Course, if she is declared successful in the Ist Professional of MBBS examination.
I make no order as to costs.