GC Garg, J - The dispute raised in this writ petition is, whether the petitioner is entitled to the Middle Management Grade Scale-II (for short, Scale-II), with effect from January 1, 1983.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk-Cum-Cashier on June 1, 1974 in the Oriental Bank of Commerce and promoted as Special Assistant on March 2, 1979.
He was ultimately promoted as Manager vide letter dated April 3, 1990, Annexure P-4 and posted as such at Sarai Naga Branch (District Faridkot).
The Bank in which the petitioner was working was, admittedly, nationalised w.e.f.
April 15, 1980.
He was informed vide letter dated October 4, 1982, Annexure P-13 that he has been allowed an annual graded increment of Rs. 50/- w.e.f.
June 1, 1982 were fixed at basic salary of Rs. 950/- (Grade `C').
The Board of Directors of the respondent-bank, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, in exercise of its powers conferred by Section 19 read with sub-Section (2) of Section 12 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 made the Regulations called as Oriental Bank of Commerce (Officers) Service Regulations, 1982 (for short `the Regulations') which became effective from January 1, 1983.
The case of the petitioner is that his services are governed by the new Regulations and in view of the promotion policy, as notified in the Establishment Circular No. 37/7.
dated January 24, 1980, he is entitled to Middle Management Grade `B' now known as Middle Management Grade, Scale-II i.e. Rs. 950-1920 and he had been wrongly fitted in Junior Management Grade, Scale-II while re-categorising him under the new Regulations, in the scale Rs. 700-1800, with effect from January 1, 1983.
The claim of the petitioner in nut-shell is that he ought to have been granted Scale-II (Rs. 950-1920) instead of Junior Management, Grade, Scale-I (Rs. 700-1800), with effect from January 1, 1983, as he had been working as Manager before January 1, 1983 on the basic salary of Rs. 950/- per month.
The petitioner has claimed this relief by challenging Clause (iii) of the Establishment Circular No. 37/7 on the grounds of it being discriminatory and hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In order to understand the controversy, it is necessary to notice at this stage the provisions of clause (iii) of Establishment Circular No. 37/7 which reads as under :  "(iii) The Managers working at Metropolitan/Urban/Semi-Urban centres whose basic salary on remitment is Rs. 950/- or more will be placed in revised Grade `B'.
Further the Managers with basic salary of less than Rs. 950/- working in Metropolitan/Urban/Semi-urban centres will be placed in Grade `B' as soon as their basic salary with the grant of increment in future is Rs. 950/-.
The Mangers of rural branches and officers below the rank of Managers will be placed in Grade `C'.
However, the Managers of rural branches with annual average total deposits and advances over Rs. one crore with deposits of Rs. 50 lacs will be placed in Grade `B' subject to their salary condition indicated above."
The petitioner approached this Court through this petition after his representations were rejected by order dated September 27, 1989, Annexure P- 22.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner on the premises of the above facts vehemently contended that the petitioner was entitled to Middle Management Grade-B, now known as Scale-II (Rs. 950-1920), with effect from January 1, 1983 as he had been drawing the basic salary of Rs. 50/- before this date and he had been wrongly fitted in Junior Management Grade Scale-I (Rs. 700-1800).
His representations against his wrong sitment in the aforesaid scale had been rejected without any basis.
Referring to the provisions of clause (iii) of the Establishment Circular No. 37/7 noticed above, the learned counsel contended that the action of the respondent-bank in denying him the Middle Management Grade, Scale-II was discriminatory, arbitrary, irrational and clearly hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
He also pointed out that one Shri BD Gupta, an officer junior to the petitioner but posted in a Branch located in city, and drawing the same basic salary as the petitioner, had been fitted in Scale-II whereas the petitioner was fitted in Junior Management Grade Scale-I only on the ground that he, at the relevant time, was working in a rural branch which had annual average total deposits and advances less than one crore with deposits of Rs. 50 lacs.
5.
A reference to the statement of Mr. HS Ransi, Chief Manager, Oriental Bank of Commerce, Regional Office, Chandigarh recorded in this Court on December 19, 1991, clearly goes to show that the petitioner was promoted as officer earlier than Mr. Bhagwan Dass Gupta.
He was also promoted as a Manager before Mr. Bhagwan Dass Gupta.
It is again categorically stated by the said officer that the officers of the Bank are transferred according to the exigencies of service.
The respondents were granted an opportunity to cross-examine this witness, but he was not cross-examined.
Thus, it clearly goes to show that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is correct to the extent that BD Gupta, an officer junior to the petitioner and who happened to be posted in the Urban/semi-Urban centres, was fitted in Scale-II, with effect from January 1, 1983 whereas the petitioner who was also drawing the basic salary of Rs. 950/- but happened to be posted in a rural Branch of the respondent-bank on account of exigencies of service, was not fitted in Scale-II on January 1, 1983 and was fitted in Junior Management Grade Scale-I under the new regulations.
6.
Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel for the respondents sought to justify this action of the respondent-bank on the ground that prior to nationalisation of Banks, the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India a were not applicable and the purpose of clause (iii) of Establishment Circular 37/7 was to promote banking in the villages and the petitioner having failed to achieve the target as required by clause (iii) of the aforesaid circular, he was rightly fitted in Junior Management Grade Scale-I It could not be disputed that owing to exigencies of service, the petitioner could have been posted in Urban/semi-Urban centres whereas a person senior to him could be posted in rural branches of the Bank.
An employee obviously has no option against his posting and it is the sole prerogative of the employer to post its employees at any branch of the Bank depending upon the administrative exigencies.
A reference to clause (iii) of the Establishment Circular 37/7 would further show that a Manager working in an Urban/semi-Urban Centre may or may not have given average total deposits and advances over Rs. one crore, but he is entitled to be fitted in Scale-II whereas a similarly situated officer working in a rural Branch of the Bank would not be fitted in that Scale.
Therefore, by mere fortuitous circumstance, namely, an officer having posting in a rural branch or Urban Branch irrespective of seniority would be deprived of Scale-II.
The grant of Scale-II would thus, solely depend upon the posting given to a particular officer by the management of the Bank.
Again it could not be disputed that the posts of Managers were inter changeable and carried identical pay scales.
Could thus, a Manager who happened to be posted at the relevant time in a rural Branch be discriminated by not fitting him in Scale- II.
There is no rational in so providing in clause (iii) of Establishment Circular 37/7.
If the criterion as laid down in clause (iii) ibid in the matter of fitting a person in a particular Scale is correct, it has to be held as irrational and discriminatory being hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
A senior officer working in the same Grade could not be fitted in the lower Grade of pay than his junior working in the same Grade, with effect from January 1, 1983.
As already held that the petitioner was senior to Shri BD Gupta and was fitted in Junior Management Grade-I (Rs. 700-1800) whereas BD Gupta was fitted in Scale-II (Rs. 950-1920).
This action of the respondents in fitting the petitioner in Junior Management Grade, Scale-I, with effect from January 1, 1983 thus, cannot but be termed as discriminatory, arbitrary and illegal.
The contention that the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution are not attracted, has no force.
The Bank was nationalised w.e.f.
April 15, 1980 and, therefore, its actions are subject to Article 14 of the Constitution at least after that date.
7.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the respondents contended that fitment of the petitioner was done on March 23, 1983, Annexure R-1 and he raised no objection against his fitment.
Thus, at this stage, no relief be granted to the petitioner.
There can be no manner of doubt that the petitioner did not make any representation against his fitment in the Junior Management Grade Scale-I to the respondent-Bank till 1987, but Annexures P-14 and P-15 would go to show that he had been taking up the matter with the Employees Union of the Bank.
This, however, cannot be taken to mean that the petitioner had made representations to the respondent-bank and the same continued to be pending.
Be that as it may, it could not be disputed that the petitioner did not make representation for a period of over four years and again did not make any grouse when his representation made in the year 1987 was rejected in that very year.
He only challenged the action of the respondents by filing the present writ petition when his other representation made on September 12, 1989 was rejected by order dated September 27, 1989, Annexure P-22.
A question thus arises, whether the petitioner should be denied the relief to which he is otherwise entitled to, only on the ground of delay and laches.
The present writ petition had been filed more than three years back and is pending since then.
In the circumstances, it would not be appropriate to decline the substantive relief to the petitioner on this score alone, though in this situation, the equities can be settled between the parties by declining the relief of arrears of pay that might accrue to the petitioner from January 1, 1983 till November 30, 1992 ie till the disposal of the writ petition.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondents also sought to contend that the policy laid down by the Bank may not be gone into as it is solely for the respondents to frame its own policy.
According to the learned counsel, the Establishment Circular 37/7 and clause (iii) thereof is nothing but a policy of the Bank.
I see no merit in the contention.
The respondent-bank is a nationalised Bank and, therefore, it has to frame its policies not in irrational but a rational manner.
It cannot by framing a policy, deny to its officers what they are entitled to and grant to others what they are not entitled to though they are similarly situated.
9.
Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel for the respondents tried to contend that the fitment in various Grades is granted by the respondent-bank having regard to the business procured by a particular officer.
He, however, failed to point out anything on the record in support of his contention.
Nothing of the sort has been pleaded in the written statement.
The posting and transfers is not a matter where an employee has any say and once that is so, it cannot be said that fitment of an employee in a particular Grade is dependent on the business procured by him.
It may be a relevant factor for considering him for promotion but it certainly cannot be a factor for putting an officer in different pay scales though at the relevant time working in the same pay scales.
Again a reference to clause (iii) of the aforesaid circular would show that no limit for the business to be procured has been fixed in the case of Managers working in the Urban/semi-Urban Centres whereas it is so fixed in the case of Managers working in the rural branches of the Bank.
I see no reason to deny a Manager working in a rural branch and drawing a basic salary of Rs. 950/- before January 1, 1988, Scale-II only on the ground that he had not procured annual average total deposits and advances over Rs. one crore with deposits of Rs. 50 lacs.
The petitioner has been denied the benefit solely on the ground that he was working in the rural branch at Sarai Naga at the relevant time where the business was not to the extent indicated in clause (iii) of the aforesaid circular.
10.
Having regard to the aforesaid discussion and the conclusions arrived at by me, it is held that the petitioner was entitled to be fitted in the Middle Management Grade-B now known as Middle Management Grade, Scale-II (Rs. 950-1920), with effect from January 1, 1983 and he had been wrongly fitted in the Junior Management Grade Scale-I (Rs. 700-1806).
The respondents are, therefore, directed to fit the petitioner in Scale-II, with effect from January, 1, 1993.
Annexure P-22 is consequently quashed being not only arbitrary but discriminatory as well.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits but he will not be entitled to any arrears that might accrue to him on account of his fitment in Scale-II, relating to the period from January 1, 1983 to November 30, 1992.
The relief of arrears has been declined keeping in view the observations made above.
The writ petition is, thus, allowed in the terms indicated above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Writ Petition allowed.