Subhashan Reddy, J - GO Ms. No. 167, Edn-B Department, dated 9384 mentions the criteria for promotion to the post of Headmaster which is a Class-I category.
The criteria for promotion preference-wise is from School Assistant Grade I (which is not applicable here as in the Institution of 4th respondent, there are no posts of School Assistants Grade II and post-graduate Assistants come only later to that.
We are not concerned with 4th and 5th preference categories.
Even though as challenge is made to the various of GO Ms No. 167, Edn-B, dated 9384, on the ground that it is an infraction of Articles 14 and 16 of the Indian Constitution, I do not feel that consideration in that aspect is necessary in this case as a mere look at the above GO Ms does not contemplate an additional qualification as a dis- qualification for promotion to the post of Headmaster.
2.
Sri Gangiah Naidu representing Sri S Satyanarayana Prasad, learned Counsel for the petitioner, contends that it is strange that even though the qualification of School Assistant Grate II is BAB.Ed., and as the petitioner was holding the said qualification of BAB.Ed., and was appointed as School Assistant Grade II, his further acquiring an additional qualification of MA stood as a disadvantage to him as he is being considered as post-graduate assistant which comes under third preference category.
But the GO itself does.
not state that MAB.Ed.
is a dis-qualification.
Even in the counter filed by the respondents, it is not pleaded that an additional qualification should be a dis-qualification for promotion.
Mr. Sudershan Reddy, learned Government Pleader is correct in his submission that GO Ms No. 167, Edn.
B., dated 9384, do not make an additional qualification as a dis-qualification.
I accede to his submission.
In my considered view what GO Ms No. 167 Edn.
B Department, dated 9384, lays down is, while the teachers with a qualification of B.Ed.
are to be placed in second preference category, the third preference category only takes in such of those teachers who, though have post-graduate qualification but do not possess BE degree.
It is true that GO Ms 167 is very vague and no criteria is laid down for placing the teachers under a particular preference category.
But the same should not be read as laying down an additional qualification as a dis-qualification.
The principles of interpretation of statute including that of subordinate legislation contemplate of harmonious construction in cases of this nature where nothing is spelt by the authority making subordinate legislation.
The validity of GO Ms No. 167 would have fallen for consideration if GO Ms No. 167 had specifically stated that MA B.Ed.
was a dis-qualification as compared to BA B.Ed.
If such an absurdity is there, this court would struck down the said subordinate Legislation without any hesitation.
But, in my considered view the Government did not intend to place the post-graduates coupled with B.Ed.
qualification under third preference category and it had intended to put all B.Ed.
qualified under preference-II Category and not under preference III category.
In view of this interpretation, the question of considering the virus of GO Ms No. 167 does not arise as it has to be read that Category II preference comprising of school Assistants Grade II takes in not only BA.B.Ed.
but also MAB.Ed., and consequently holding the post of School Assistant Grade II but only interrupted on being posted as post-graduate Assistant for a period of four years continue to be under Category II preference, namely, School Assistant Grade II and thus the petitioner was fully eligible to be promoted to the post of Headmaster and the dis-approval of the second respondent is illegal and arbitrary.
I have to say that all the respondents, R2, R1 and R3, have grossly mis-interpreted MS No. 167, dated 9384, and if the said mis-interpretation is approved by this Court, it will lead to absurdity.
The correct interpretation of this said GO Ms No. 167 is that, while Category II comprising of School Assistants Grade II includes not only BA B.Ed., but also MAB.Ed., as in the case of the petitioner, category III comprises of post-graduates but without B.Ed.
qualification.
This should be the correct interpretation.
In the circumstances, it is declared that the petitioner is validly appointed as Headmaster in a regular vacancy in the 4th respondent-school with effect from 4.7.87 and he is entitled for all the attendant benefits reckoning his seniority in the post of headmaster with effect from 4.7.87 onwards.
3.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.