Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was initially recruited as a Clerk in the services of the respondent-State in the year 1947 and after securing successive promotions was promoted as Head Assistant on 11.4.1967.
In May 1975 when the petitioner was working as a Head Assistant, an order Annexure P-1 to the petition was made by the respondents placing him under suspension on the allegations of gross negligence and misconduct on his part.
On the representation filed by him, he was reinstated after a week without prejudice to the enquiry that was to be initiated against him.
On 3171975, a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner presaging action under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the `Rules').
He submitted a reply to the charge-sheet and the same having been found to be un satisfactory, an enquiry was conducted against him by one Shri M.R.
Bhagat, Administrative Officer of the Department.
It has been averred that the enquiry officer exonerated the petitioner of the charges, but nevertheless the punishing authority dis-agreeing with his report, issued a show cause notice Annexure P-7 to the petition, calling upon the petitioner to show cause as to why one increment be not stopped with cumulative effect.
The petitioner submitted a reply to this notice as well and further requested that a copy of the enquiry report be made available to him, though this request was not acceded to and the respondents passed the order Annexure P-12 whereby the penalty of Stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was ordered against the petitioner.
It has also been averred that while the enquiry proceedings against the petitioner were pending, respondent Nos. 3 and 4, who had been junior to the petitioner, were provisionally promoted as Superintendents vide order dated 4.11.1976, Annexure P-9 to the petition.
The petitioner represented against these promotions but without deciding the representation, respondent Nos. 5 to 8 who were junior to the petitioner, were also promoted to the rank of Superintendents.
The petitioner has pleaded that he has not been able to get the promotion order of the latter set off respondents but nevertheless has challenged their promotion as well by way of the present writ petition.
It appears that the petitioner yet again wrote to the Department claiming his promotion from the date that his juniors were promoted but too no avail and ultimately by order dated 12111979, Annexure P-23 to the petition, the representation was rejected.
The petitioner has specifically impugned orders Annexures P-12 and P-23.
It is apparent from a reading of clause (iv) of Para 18 of the writ petition that the petitioner has also challenged the promotion of the private respondents who were junior to him.
2.
Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, has made two arguments : Firstly, the copy of the enquiry report which had exonerated him had not been made available despite a request in that behalf and, Secondly, that no reason had been recorded by the punishing authority differing with the conclusions drawn by the enquiry officer.
Elaborating his arguments, Mr. Gupta has urged, that in reply to the facts stated in the petition pertaining to the second argument, the respondents in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the reply have stated thus :  "6.
The enquiry officer conducted the enquiry which was not a detailed and a justified one.
The enquiry was required to be conducted on the basis of the fact found against the petitioner i.e. he was caught by the surprise raiding party as keeping old cases with him with mala fide motives.
As such, the replying respondent did not agree to it.
Taking a lenient view, having due regard for the length of the service of the petitioner, the proposed major punishment was shifted to minor punishment.
7.
Virtually, the raid against the petitioner was conducted under the directions of Punjab government by deputing a Special Officer i.e.
Under Secretary Health Mrs. SK Gill she caught the petitioner with certain documents lying pending for a long time.
He was responsible for disposal of those papers for which the petitioner could not escape punishment.
"Keeping in view the report of the Inquiry Officer and the basic charges levelled against the petitioner the replying respondent was fully and legally justified and competent authority to consider the petitioner's fault for mitigated punishment."
3.
The stand of the respondent therefore is that the Punishing Authority thought it fit to differ with the report of the enquiry officer as that officer had not gone into the matter in detail and had gone wrong on facts.
It has also been additionally urged by Mr. Verinder Pal Singh, learned Assistant Advocate-General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the respondent-State, that at the time when the impugned order was made, the stoppage of increment with cumulative effect was a minor punishment and, as such, no enquiry was required to be held and in that eventuality even if the enquiry was held to be bad, even then the punishment could have been imposed.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find that this petition deserves to succeed.
The consequence of the non-supply of an enquiry report to a delinquent official is a matter under the active consideration of the Hon'ble Supreme Court arising out of Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
111.
In view of this fact, I deem it improper to express any opinion on this aspect of the matter.
However, the present matter can be disposed of on the basis of the second arguments raised by Mr. Gupta.
It will be seen from the reply of the respondents that has been quoted above that the Punishing Authority apparently did differ with the opinion recorded by the enquiry officer.
It is also clear that difference arose because the Punishing Authority felt that the enquiry held was "not a detailed and justified one".
In this situation, it was open to the Punishing Authority to take recourse to Rule 9 of the Rules in order to arrive at a just conclusion.
Rule 9 of the Rules reads as under :  "Action on the enquiry report - (1) The Punishing Authority if it is not itself the authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, remit the case to the inquiring authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry according to the provisions of Rule 8 as far as may be.
(2) The punishing authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for each disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose.
(3) xx xx xx xx."
5.
A reading of Rule 9 above clearly indicates that if the punishing authority felt that a further enquiry was necessary as the initial enquiry was not a detailed one, he was required to remit the case to the enquiry officer for that purpose.
Rule 9(2) ibid provides that in case the punishing authority differed with the report of the enquiry officer he was to record specific reasons disagreeing with each charge and must also record its own findings.
It is therefore apparent that either of the two eventualities were open to the punishing authority and these were to be strictly with.
In the facts of the present case it apparent that if the punishing authority felt, as stated in the reply, that the enquiry had not been properly conducted, the matter should have been remitted for further enquiry or in the alternative the punishing authority ought to have recorded reasons for disagreeing with the report of the enquiry officer.
Neither of these two alternative procedures has been followed.
The order Annexure P-12 is therefore in my view unsustainable.
6.
Mr. Verinder Pal Singh's additional argument that at the relevant time stoppage of increment with cumulative effect was a minor punishment and, as such, no enquiry was necessary is also of no avail, as admittedly the Hon'ble Supreme Court has finally held it to be a major penalty.
7.
Mr. Gupta's final argument is that the petitioner was liable to be promoted as Superintendent from the date when respondents 3 to 8 who are admittedly junior to him, had been promoted.
I am afraid that this argument cannot be acceded to in its entirely.
It has been asserted in the reply that promotion from the post of Head Assistant to Superintendent is by selection and, as such, no person can claim promotion as a matter of right.
It has also been asserted in para 15 of the reply that the case of the petitioner for promotion as Superintendent was considered from time to time, but he was found unfit on the basis of the service record as well as on the basis of the pending enquiry which culminated in the punishment impugned in this petition.
It is, therefore, apparent that one of the factors taken into account in not promoting the petitioner was the pendency of the enquiry and the subsequent penalty.
It is, therefore, clear that the petitioner's claim that the penalty having now been set aside by this judgment, his case should be considered afresh in the same manner that the case of respondent Nos. 3 to 8 has been done, is justified.
8.
In view of what has been stated above, the present petition is allowed; Annexure P-12 alone is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondent-State to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Superintendent from the date that his juniors were promoted.
This consideration will be made in the same manner as has been done in the case of those respondents within a period of three months from today and all consequential benefits that flow from this judgment will be given to the petitioner within a period of six months thereafter.
No costs.