Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was working as a Head Constable and has since retired from service prays for issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release his gratuity and full pension as also regularise the period of his suspension from November 23, 1987 to August 28, 1989.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as Head Constable in the Haryana Police.
On account of his involvement in a case under Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code, the petitioner was placed under suspension on November 23 1987.
While the case was still pending, he was reinstated on August 28, 1989.
Ultimately, the petitioner was retired from service in January 1991.
It is averred that the petitioner was paid only subsistence allowance for the period of suspension; that the increments that fell due on October 1, 1987 and thereafter, have not been released and that in spite of the fact that a considerable length of time has elapsed, the gratuity due to the petitioner has not been released.
It has also been averred that the petitioner has been paid pension at rate of Rs. 961/- PM while he is actually entitled to an amount of Rs. 1150/- PM The petitioner avers that the requisite relief has not been granted in spite of representation.
He has no alternative except to approach this Court through the present petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The actual position is not in dispute.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had been initially paid the subsistence allowance at the rate of 50 per cent of his pay which was subsequently raised to 75 per cent w.e.f.
March 21, 1989.
The petitioner was reinstated vide order dated August 28, 1989 wef.
August 25, 1989 without prejudice to the outcome of the criminal case pending against him.
It has been further averred that no increment was released to the petitioner after October 1, 1986 because the period of suspension from November 23, 1986 to August 28, 1989 had not been regularised.
It has been further averred that the petitioner is not entitled to get gratuity till the pending case is decided.
Reference has also been made to the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated December 15, 1982.
A copy of the instructions has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
In these instructions, it has been inter alia provided that "in respect of a Government employee referred to in rule 22 ....... the Audit Officer shall authorise the provisional pension equal to the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service upto the date of retirement of the Government employee, or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement upto the date immediately proceeding the date on which he was placed under suspension."
It has been further provided that "no gratuity shall be paid to the Government employee until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon."
On these premises, the respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner.
3.
I have heared the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the record.
4.
Admittedly, the case under section 325 of the Indian Penal Code has been pending against the petitioner since the year 1977.
It has taken a fairly long time.
Can the gratuity of an employee be withheld for an indefinite period only because some judicial proceedings have been initiated against him ?
5.
Rule 22 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II (as applicable in Haryana) contemplates the withholding or withdrawal of pension in a case where the person concerned is an accused of serious crime or grave misconducts.
Rule 215 as amended by Haryana Government Gazette Notification dated the June 8, 1987 provides as under -  "9.15(1) (a) in respect of a Government employee referred to in Rule 22 of these rules, the Audit Officer shall authorise the provisional pension equal to the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service upto the date of retirement of the Government employee, or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement, upto the date immediately preceding the date on which he was placed under suspension.
(b) The provisional pension shall be authorised by the Audit Officer during the period commencing from the date of retirement up to and including the date on which, after the concluding of departmental or judicial proceedings final orders are passed by the competent authority.
(c) No gratuity shall be paid to the Government employee until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon.
(2) Payment of provisional pension made under sub-rule (1) shall be adjusted against final retirement benefits sanctioned to such Government employee upon conclusion of such proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or for a specified period."
In view of the above provisions, it is only in respect of the employee referred to in rule 22 that the provisional pension equal to the maximum pension "which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service upto the date of retirement or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement, up to the date immediately preceding the date on which he was placed under suspension" has to be paid.
Still further, the rule contemplates in Clause (c) that the gratuity shall not be paid until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon.
A perusal of the factual position in this case shows that the petitioner is involved in a criminal case under Section 325 IPC.
The alleged offence does not involve any moral turpitude.
The petitioner has not been accused of a serious crime.
Consequently, the essential condition of holding that he is not entitled to the payment of gratuity, is not satisfied.
The action of the respondents in withholding the payment of gratuity is, therefore, unsustainable.
Furthermore, a perusal of Rule 915 as reproduced above shows that gratuity is withheld primarily to enable the Government to make final adjustment of dues.
Nothing of the kind is involved in the present case.
The petitioner is not accused of having caused loss to anyone which amount may be recoverable from him.
As such, no ground for withholding of gratuity is made out.
6.
As for the payment of pension, a perusal of provisions of the rule shows that provisional pension "equal to the maximum pension" has to be paid to the employee.
This has admittedly not been done.
The respondents aver that the petitioner has been paid pension at the rate of Rs. 961/-.
According to the petitioner, he is entitled to the pension at the rate of Rs. 1150/- per month.
Nothing has been pointed out in the written statement to justify the payment of less than the maximum pension which would have been admissible to the petitioner.
The respondents have to consider and decide the matter regarding the payment of pension afresh.
7.
So far as the claim of the petitioner with regard to the release of increments and the regularisation of the period of suspension, is concerned these have in the very nature of things to await the final decision of the criminal case.
It is only thereafter that the appropriate authority shall be in a position to take the final decision.
8.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to consider and decide the petitioner's case with regard to pension in accordance with Rule 915 expeditiously and in any case within 15 days from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
They are further directed to release his gratuity within the aforesaid time.
The final decision with regard to the period of suspension, release of increments and payment of arrears on account thereof shall be taken within three months after the decision of the criminal case by the Court.
9.
With these directions, the writ petition is disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.