Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein was enrolled as a Sepoy on July 20, 1963.
On May 16, 1977 after he had put in more than 13 years of service, the petitioner was discharged from the service.
On March 19, 1984, the petitioner was re-employed in the Defence Security Corps.
On March 12, 1987, he was discharged.
He claims pension on the ground that he had rendered a total service of more than 16 years and 9 months.
The representations to the department and other authorities having borne no fruit, it appears that the petitioner represented to the Prime Minister.
Orders on this representation were passed on July 15, 1988.
The petitioner's request for family pension was declined with the following observations :-  "You were discharged from your former service as `Services no longer required.'
Your re-enrolment in DSC was therefore irregular and accordingly you were discharged therefrom as a case of irregular re-enrolment.
As such your service with DSC is not a qualifying service for pension purposes.
Since your qualifying service is less than 15 years, you are eligible (ineligible) for service pension."
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was discharged from service "due to contracting plural marriage."
It has been further stated that petitioner's re-enrolment was irregular and consequently he was discharge from the Defence Security Corps vide order March 12,1987.
I have heard Mr. HS Gill for the petitioner and Mr. HS Giani for the respondents.
2.
Mr. Gill appearing for the petitioner contends that in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 132 of the Pension Regulations, every person who has rendered 15 years of service is entitled to the grant of pension.
The petitioner having rendered more than 16 years service, the counsel contends that the petitioner's right to the grant of pension has been illegally declined by the authorities.
He further points out that even the Apex Court in the case of Maj. GS Sodhi v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 537: 1992 JT-IV-337 has granted pension to an officer who had been removed from service after having been found to be guilty by the Court Martial.
The claim of the petitioner, according to the learned counsel, is on a much higher pedestal.
Mr. Giani appearing for the respondents only contends that the re-enrolment of the petitioner was irregular and therefore, the benefit of the service rendered by him from March 19,1984 to March 12,1987 cannot be granted to him.
3.
Regulation 132 provides as under :-  "MINIMUM QUALIFYING SERVICE FOR PENSION :  132.
Unless otherwise provided for the minimum qualifying colour service for earning a service pension is 15 years."
In view of the above provision, it is apparent that a person who has rendered a minimum qualifying colour service for 15 years is entitled to the grant of pension.
No other provision showing that the period of service rendered by a Sepoy on re-enrolment can be excluded only on the ground that the enrolment was found to be irregular has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent.
In the absence of the provision to the effect that a period of service actually rendered by an employ can be excluded while computing the total service.
I am unable to accept the contention raised on behalf of the respondents.
Apparently, the petitioner has rendered more than 16 years of service.
He has not only discharged duties of the post but has also been paid the salary therefor.
In this situation, in the absence of a specific provision, I find no warrant for excluding the period of service rendered by the petitioner from March 19, 1984 to March 12, 1987.
That being so, the petitioner's case is squarely covered by the provision of Regulation 132.
He has rendered more than 16 years of service and is, therefore, entitled to the grant of pension.
4.
Mr. Giani points out that at the time of the petitioner's discharge, he was paid gratuity.
The learned counsel states that the amount of gratuity paid to the petitioner has to be adjusted in view of the provisions of regulation 126, Condition 1.
That may be so.
In case, the respondents are entitled to adjusted the gratuity, they would be at liberty to do so.
5.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner's pension shall be computed on the basis that he had rendered a total service of more than 16 years and 9 months.
The pension shall be due to him with effect from March 13, 1987.
The arrears of pension shall be worked out.
While finalising the amount due to the petitioner, the amount of gratuity, if any, required to be adjusted, shall be adjusted.
The balance, if any, due to the petitioner shall be paid to him.
Thereafter, the pension shall be regularly paid to the petitioner in accordance with the regulations.
The needful in this behalf shall be done by the respondents within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.