Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner a handicapped person, who is suffering from post-polio paralysis, was appointed as a Draftsman on the recommendation of the Chief Architect and with the approval of the State Government vide order dated December 19, 1990.
A copy of this order of appointment has been produced record as Annexure P4.
The Technical Employees Association felt aggrieved and represented against this appointment.
In pursuance to this representation, the department was taking steps to terminate the services of the petitioner.
Apprehending termination, he had approached this Court through the Civil Writ No. 4544 of 1991.
Vide order dated May 27, 1991, this writ petition was allowed.
Department was directed to decide the matter by passing a speaking order and after giving a hearing to the petitioner.
The necessary order has been passed by the department on July 22, 1991.
A copy of this order has been produced on record as Annexure P.7.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It is averred that the order is wholly arbitrary and passed on misinterpretation of the Government's own notification.
2.
A perusal of the order shows that it has been passed on the following three grounds :-  "i) That according to Punjab Government, Financial Department Notification No. 2/37/90-FPI/8450, dated 20/25th September, 1990 and clarification received on the same from the Government vide their Memo No. 2/159/86-4 (IIB) BR-III/27 dated 2131991, now only a Junior Draftsman can be made a Draftsman by promotion (i.e. no direct appointment/entry is permissible to the post of a Draftsman).
The pay scales and other provisions given in the above cited notification have already been implemented and necessary amendments in the service Rules are being made.
ii) The appointment of Sh. Harinder Pal Singh was made on 19121990 i.e. after the issuance of above mentioned Finance Department Notification No. 2/37/90-FPI/8450 dated 20/25th September, 1990.
Therefore, his contention that there was a provision for direct appointment in the Service Rules and that he possessed the requisite qualifications, is not valid.
The appointment, of Shri Harinder Pal Singh made after the issuance of Finance Department notification referred to above, deserves to be cancelled.
iii) Moreover, Shri Harinder Pal Singh was appointed under the priority scheme for handicapped persons and the requisite quota of 3% for such appointments had already been exhausted at the time of his appointment."
3.
The above grounds have been reiterated in the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents as well as respondents Nos. 3 to 13, who were impleaded vide order dated December 9, 1991.
4.
Are the above mentioned reasons valid and legally tenable ?
Firstly, relying on the notification dated September 25, 1990, it has been observed that the post of Draftsman can be filled up only by promotion and not by direct recruitment.
A copy of this notification has been produced as Annexure P.5.
with the writ petition.
This notification has been issued in pursuance of the provisions of Clause (h) of Rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Service (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988.
It does not embody a rule laying down the conditions of service or the mode of recruitment to the post.
It has not been issued under the provisions of Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
It has been issued with the object of laying down the pay scales and inter-alia a remark has been made that "a junior Draftsman shall be eligible for promotion as Draftsman in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200 after a minimum period of twelve years of service as such..." This notification cannot be held to be laying down the method of recruitment to the post of Draftsman.
It relates primarily to the fixation of pay.
5.
It is well known that recruitment and conditions of service can be regulated either by legislation passed by the appropriate legislature or by framing rules under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Till such time as the rules are framed, executive instructions can be issued by the rule making authority and the recruitment to the service can be governed by those executive instructions.
In the present case, it is admitted by counsel for both the sides that no statutory rules have been framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India determining the method of recruitment and the conditions of service of persons relating to the post of Draftsman.
The respondents have not even produce any executive order showing that a particular method of recruitment has been laid down.
In such a situation, it would be open to the appointing authority to fill up the post of Draftsman by any method including direct recruitment, promotion or transfer.
If at a given point of time, the appropriate authority on consideration of the claim of the petitioner found him suitable for direct recruitment to the post of Draftsman and recommended his case to the Government for appointment, it cannot be said that its action was illegal or violative of any rule.
It was only after the receipt of the approval from the Government that the petitioner was appointed.
No rule or instructions issued by any competent authority is shown to have been violated in the process.
6.
The reason given by the authority that no direct recruitment is permissible in view of the notification date September 25, 1990 (Annexure P.5), is wholly erroneous.
This notification can at best be said to have laid down a condition of eligibility for promotion of a junior Draftsman to the post of a Draftsman.
It does not anywhere lay down that the post a Draftsman shall not be filled up by direct recruitment, transfer or deputation.
It merely says that a junior Draftsman shall be eligible for promotion as Draftsman after a minimum period of 12 years of service as such.
Thus, I am unable to hold that the appointment of the petitioner was in any way violative of the provisions contained in the notification.
7.
It has also been observed by the Chief Architect that "the pay scales and other provisions given in the above cited notification have already been implemented and necessary amendments in the service Rules are being made."
It may be that the pay scales etc. have already been granted.
However, there are admittedly no statutory rules.
As such, the question of any amendment in the service Rules did not arise.
In any event, even if it is assumed that there are Rules, the said rules would have continued to remain in force till such time as the amendments were actually made.
8.
The view taken by the authority so far as the first ground is concerned is clearly erroneous and cannot be sustained.
9.
Secondly, it has been observed that the appointment of Harinder Pal singh was made on December 19, 1990 ie after the issuance of the notification dated September 25, 1990.
On this premises, the petitioner's contention that he possessed the requisite qualifications has been held to be invalid.
It appears that the Chief Architect has failed to appreciate the contention.
The actual submission made on behalf of the petitioner was that he fulfilled the qualifications for the post.
He has said so even in the writ petition.
This position has not been controverted.
It has not been denied that the petitioner fulfills the qualifications for appointment to the post of Draftsman so far as the observation that direct recruitment could not have been made is concerned, it has already been rejected and need not be considered any further.
10.
Thirdly, it has been observed that the petitioner was appointed under the priority scheme for handicapped persons and the requisite quota 3% for such appointments had already been exhausted at the time of his appointment.
11.
So far as this ground is concerned, it deserves notice that in the writ petition it has been categorically averred that the Government had taken a policy decision vide letter dated April 24, 1986 to prepare a priority list for various categories of persons for employment in the State service.
This policy was calculated to rehabilitate the disabled persons.
It was in pursuance to this policy that the petitioner had applied for the post.
Initially, vide letter dated August 31, 1989, respondent No. 2 had informed the petitioner that he did not fulfil the condition of one year's experience as Tracer.
The petitioner had clarified the position vide his letter dated October 9, 1989.
On receipt of this reply, respondent No. 2 had recommended the petitioner's case to the State Government for appointment.
The recommodation of respondent No. 2 was accepted by the State Government and thereafter the petitioner was appointed vide letter dated December 19, 1990.
Specific averments to the above effect have been made in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the writ petition.
These averments, namely the averments to the effect that the petitioner's case has been recommended by respondent No. 2 and that this recommendation had been accepted by respondent No. 1 have not been controverted in the reply filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
12.
There is another aspect of the matter.
If it were the case of the respondents that the appointment of the petitioner was in excess of the prescribed quota of 3% it was incumbent upon them to give him a show cause notice in that behalf, so as to comply with the principles of the principles of natural justice.
If such a notice had been issued, he could have shown the actual position.
No such notice appears to have been issued by the respondent to the petitioner.
13.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that all human beings have not been created equally by God.
Right to work, to education and to public assistance in case of sickness or disablement is one of the goals visualised under Article 41 of the Constitution of India.
Even the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter dated April 24, 1986, provided for preparing a priority list of the disabled and handicapped, and reservation of 3% has been made for this purpose.
If helping the handicapped is one of the avowed objectives of the Constitution and is a part of the State Policy, a person who has been given a job should be allowed to continue to hold it, unless he is found absolutely inadequate for the post.
Such is not the position in the present case.
There is no complaint against the petitioner's performance of his duties.
In such a situation, it appears unjust to throw him out of Accordingly, this petition is allowed.
The order at Annexure P.7 is quashed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.