RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioners were inducted as Vaidyas prior to 1111966 in the Punjab Ayurvedic Department in the State of Punjab.
In the year 1957, the State of Punjab had issued a Notification recognising certain Institutions/Universities, which were giving particular decrees/diplomas for the purpose of recruitment as Vaidyas.
The said Notification is reproduced as under :-  AYURVEDIC DEPARTMENT PUNJAB  List of Ayurvedic Institutions and Colleges recognised by the Ayurvedic Department, Punjab.
Sr. No. Name of Institutions, Degree conferred by the University  1.
All India Ayurvedic Vidya Peeth (University) Delhi., Ayurvedacharya  2.
Hindu University, Banaras Ayurvedacharya A.M.S.
3.
Gurukul Kangri University, Hardwar, Ayurvedalankar  4.
Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Vidayapeeth (Allahabad), Ayurved Rattan  5.
RA Podar Ayurvedic College, Bombay.
GAMS Ayurvedacharya  6.
Govt. College of Indigenous Medicine, Madras, GCDM  7.
Govt. Indian Medical School, Madras, LIM, A.LIM  8.
Govt. Ayurvedic Vibhag Vidyalaya, Patiala, Ayurvedacharya MAMS  9.
SD College, (Lohar) Delhi, Ayurvedacharya MAMS  10.
Gandhi Ajmal Ayurvedic and Unani Tibia College, Delhi, Ayurvedacharya Dhanwantri  11.
Maharaja Ayurvedic College, Jaipur (Rajasthan), Bhichagacharya Dhanwantri  12.
DAV College, Jullundur, Vaidya Vachaspati  13.
Lality Hari Ayurvedic College, Patiala, Ayurvedacharya BIMS  14.
New Govt. Ayurvedic College, Patiala, Ayurvedacharya GAMS  15.
Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Poona, BIMS  The above mentioned recognised Institutions/Universities are declared for recruitment of Vaidyas as laid down in Punjab Government Policy contained in their memorandum No. 3HBIII-57715083 dated 26/2771957."
2.
Petitioner Nos. 1, 4, 9 & 11 had degrees from the Institution mentioned at item No. 1; petitioner No2 had a degree from the Institution mentioned at Item No3; petitioner Nos. 6 & 10 had degrees from the Institution mentioned at item No.10; petitioner No.8 had a degree from the Institution mentioned at item No9; petitioner No7 had a degree from the Institution mentioned at item No12 whereas petitioner Nos. 3 & 5 had degrees from the Institution mentioned at item No. 13.
3.
After the reorganisation of the State of Punjab on 1111966, all the petitioners were allocated to the State of Haryana in the Department of Ayurveda, State of Haryana issued a letter dated 3rd July, 1981 (Copy Annexure P/3) revising the pay scales of certain categories of its employees and as far as Vaidyas were concerned, their pay scales were revised from Rs. 350-600 to Rs. 700-1250 W.e.f.
1.4.1979 and were further revised to 700-1400 w.e.f.
121981.
It was further provided that two advance increments would be given to those Vaidyas who held degree of B.A.M.S./GAMS The petitioners failed to get the benefit of two advance increments, filed the present writ petition.
4.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the Notification of the Punjab Govt. dated 2771957 (already reproduced above) recognised certain degrees/diplomas including GAMS for the purpose of recruitment as Vaidyas and once all these were considered equivalent for the purpose of induction as Vaidyas, the State of Haryana was not justified in discriminating the petitioners by not granting them the two advance increments, which were given to those Vaidyas, who held degree of B.A.M.S/GAMS This according to the learned counsel is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
According to him, once two degrees are held equivalent for the purpose of induction into service, then for the purpose of grant of any other incentive like grant of advance increments etc., all Vaidyas should have been treated equal subject to their holding any one of the degree/diploma mentioned in the Notification dated 277.
1957.
In support of this contention, he relied on a Single Bench Judgment of this Court rendered in Dr. Braham Dutt v. The State of Haryana, 1991(3) S.C.T.
125 in C.W.P.
No. 3202 of 1987 decided on 2241991.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that it is now well settled that higher pay scale or advance increments can be given to an employee, who has got better or higher qualifications as compared to other in the same rank.
According to the learned counsel, State Government considers the degree of B.A.M.S./G.A.M.S higher in status than the one held by the petitioners.
6.
There cannot be any dispute on the proposition that the State Government can on a set of given circumstances give higher pay scale or advance increments to an employee who has got higher qualification as compared to the others in the same rank.
However, what was to be seen in the present case is that can it be said that B.A.M.S./GAMS is a higher qualification than the one held by the petitioners.
In Dr. Braham Dutt's case (supra) relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners, the learned Single Judge was considering a similar matter of this very department.
In accordance with the Punjab Ayurvedic Department Class-III Service Rules, 1963, as applicable to the State of Haryana, as amended upto date, the qualifications for recruitment to the post of Vaidya have been mentioned as under :-  "Vaidya, a diploma or degree in Ayurveda of any of the institutions mentioned in Annexure I to these rules."
In Annexure I to the Rules many degrees are mentioned which include B.A.M.S/GAMS The petitioner in that case who was holding a degree of BIMS was denied the grant of two advance increments on the ground that he did not hold the degree of B.A.M.S/GAMS Learned Single Judge held that since under Annexure I to the Rules, BIMS degree was equivalent to B.A.M.S/GAMS for the purpose of recruitment as Vaidyas, the petitioner could not be discriminated against for the grant of two advance increments, only because in the letter granting advance increments, a degree of BIMS was not mentioned.
This was so held on the ground that both the degrees of BIMS and GAMS were considered equivalent for the purpose of induction into service as Vaidyas.
7.
If the above ratio of the Learned Single Judge is applied to the facts of the case, in the Notification dated 2771957 (reproduced above), which notifies certain degrees from various institutions as qualifications for the purpose of induction into service, are not only to be treated equivalent for the purpose of induction into service but also equal for the purpose of grant of advance increments.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, I hold that the petitioners are entitled to the grant of two advance increments as given to those Vaidyas who hold degrees of B.A.M.S/GAMS  9.
I may deal with another point raised by the counsel for the petitioners regarding the laying down of qualification for the post of District Ayurvedic Officer.
For the first time posts of District Ayurvedic Officer were created in the State of Haryana for the recruitment of which Rules were made in 1989.
The qualifications which were laid down for the purpose of recruitment are as under :  "A degree (with five years regular course) in Ayurvedic/Unani System of medicine from any University or Institution recognised by the Government."
No legitimate grievance can be made by the petitioner to the qualifications which have been laid down for the posts which were created for the first time after their induction in service.
If they hold these qualification, they can certainly be considered for recruitment.
Simply because the degree/diploma which the petitioners are holding is no more recognised by Haryana Government cannot be the ground to challenge the laying down of the qualification for the posts which were validly created by the Government.
For the creation of a new post, it is upto the Government to lays down any qualifications, which it considers appropriate.
It is in the wisdom of the State Government to lay down as to what degrees are good enough for the purpose of filling a particular post.
Consequently, I see no merit in this point of the learned counsel.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is partly allowed to the extent that the petitioners would be entitled to the grant of two advance increments in pursuance of letter dated 371981 of the State Government.
Let the arrears of pay on the basis of two advance increments be calculated and paid within six months from the receipt of copy of judgment of this court.
I make no order as to costs.